97 

Our efforts to engage these aircrafts with our machine guns did not prove 
effective. 
As the Indians did not make any progress on Hilli-Ghoraghat track, they tried to 
move on a parallel track further north.  On this track a company of 8 Baluch, 
commanded by Major Ashraf was deployed in a small village called Badhuria. As 
fighting intensified, Brigade Commander, Brig Tajammal ordered a company from 
13 FF deployed towards south in Patnitola area, to reinforce Badhuria positions. 
The company had to pass through Panjbibi, where they halted for a short while. 
The company commander Major Sabir Kamal Meyer had just returned from leave 
in Spain, having married the daughter of our Ambassador, Major General (retired) 
Bilgirami. After honeymoon in paradise like environments of Spain, he obviously 
felt the conditions on the battle field most depressing. A suave and stylish officer, 
he left a very good impression. On 8 December, tragic news of his Shahadat was 
most saddening. He himself fired a recoilless rifle round to hit a tank but received 
a volley of tank fire from Indian tank squadron opposite his position. His JCO 
Subedar Sher Afzal, positioned next to him also embraced ‘Shahadat’ in the 
process and the weapon destroyed.  
When the Indians got stuck on this route also due to fierce resistance at Badhuria, 
they tried yet another track further north. It was on this track that I had been 
tasked by Brigadier Hassan in August to take up position in case of the Indian 
attack. However because of change of command and my company getting 
deployed elsewhere as explained, this track was left unoccupied. Brigadier 
Tajammal, when told that the Indian armour was moving astride the track north 
of 4 FF positions, responded that it was not through his area of responsibility that 
the Indians were moving. He was wrong in that because his predecessor had 
assigned my company to cover that area. The Indians kept moving on that 
approach unopposed and finally emerged at Pirganj (different town from one 
mentioned earlier) on road Rangpur-Bogra. As the Indians were adjusting their 
positions, by dusk a convoy of jeeps carrying Major General Nazar Hussain Shah, 
(GOC 16 Div) Brigadier Tajammal (Commander 205 Bde) and others travelling 
from Rangpur to Bogra, arrived at Pirganj. The surprise encounter startled both 
parties. The GOC, a bulky man had some difficulty in dismounting from the jeep