95 

including Major Muhammad Akram who was awarded Nishan-e-Haider 
posthumously for his gallant fight. Source of strength and inspiration to his 
command, Major Akram was a mature and brave man unruffled in the tumult of 
fighting. I had met him on my arrival in their area when his company was 
deployed at the Hilli railway station. Later his company was shifted a little north 
and Major Julian Peter’s company placed at Hilli. During the intense fighting 
Major Akram tried to approach an Indian tank with a 40mm anti tank rocket 
launcher but before he could hit the tank, he was spotted and engaged. He 
embraced ‘Shahadat’, the ultimate sacrifice one can offer in line of duty.  
My composite platoon comprising five recoilless rifle detachments, two machine 
gun and four light machine gun detachments was deployed to strengthen 4 FF 
defensive positions which contributed enormously in fighting their battle with 
remarkable resilience. The platoon was commanded by Subedar Aziz Khan, a 
mature and courageous JCO. During the fighting I received a message from the 
Brigade that Havildar Haq Nawaz of my Company, a detachment commander of 
one of the recoilless rifles had embraced ‘Shahadat’ (martyrdom) after he had 
destroyed one enemy tank. As the fighting was going on, I took a jeep and drove 
from Panjbibi to Hilli railway station post taking a circuitous route to avoid enemy 
fire but still received a volley of artillery fire which luckily landed a few yards away 
from my moving jeep. At Hilli post I met Major Julian Peter, (later Major General) 
the company commander, Subedar Aziz Khan and the men of my company 
deployed there. I saw three enemy tanks destroyed in front of that position. One 
of these had been destroyed by Havildar Haq Nawaz and another by Sepoy Shah 
Mehmood of my company from a well sited position. After spending some time 
with them I returned to my post at Panjbibi. 
When the War was formally declared by Pakistan on 3 December, a message was 
received from the Brigade that Pakistan Army had captured Jammu by afternoon 
of 3rd December. We forgot about our own travails and everyone was filled with 
great joy to hear such good news. Alas; the joy was short lived as the news was 
false resulting in greater disappointment.  Earlier, since the months of August we 
had heard rumours that people in GHQ considered these three Divisions in East 
Pakistan as written off. At that time we took this as a joke but it proved true. The