121 

 After action in Dacca, two Infantry Divisions less their heavier elements like 
the armour regiments, artillery and some other integral elements were 
flown from West Pakistan to undertake further operations. Basically 
infantry units of these two Divisions were flown in to reinforce depleted 
East Pakistan garrison. The total came to roughly about twenty thousand 
persons. On arrival of fresh troops, these were organised into columns and 
despatched in different directions to clear areas up to the borders.  
 The initial phase of operation starting from Dacca to reach the borders on 
different directions was completed by fourth week of April 1971. In this 
phase, all the columns starting from Dacca were opposed by well sited 
ambushes at successive positions. This pattern suggested Indian 
involvement in planning and presence of some of their men physically 
supporting the rebels comprising units of East Bengal Regiment (EBR) and 
the men from the para military East Pakistan Rifles (EPR). 
 The pace of movement of troops moving outwards from Dacca was 
severely restricted due to blowing up of bridges and culverts on numerous 
streams on the routes. Vehicles were not available to expedite movement 
nor could be used due to the obstacles thus created. It was marching on 
foot right up to the borders which took time.This phase ended by last week 
of April 1971 with few pockets left that were cleared later. 
 During the period between January and April 1971 when there was no State 
control in the province, atrocities and massacre of non Bengali population 
was committed by criminal gangs at massive scale in different parts of the 
country. Hundreds of thousands of people were brutally killed, the women 
molested before being killed. 
 Allegations of this kind of mass murder and molestation of women were 
soon levelled against the Army which is the greatest falsehood; the main 
point of vicious propaganda campaign by Indians during the conflict. As 
would be evident from the narrative, the worst case of causing civilians 
death by Army was at the start of Army action in Dacca. After that the Army