240 

The differences and conflicts between the countries of the region will get resolved 
if an effective mechanism of drawing mutual benefits through trade and 
commerce can be put in place. Basically US presence in the region is also to 
eliminate resistance in creating trade and energy corridors for the capitalist world 
that control US policies. Their interests demand peace in the region. As we can 
recollect, had Taliban government in Kabul agreed to the terms of UNOCAL, 
representing global energy cartel, US physical occupation of the country could 
have been avoided. Taliban representatives,who were invited and entertained in 
the US, failed to understand impact of their refusal, inviting war to soften up 
Afghanistan for implementing plans without opposition. Key element at this stage 
is to have an effective government in Afghanistan that can ensure peace to 
facilitate trade routes through the country. 
Pakistan was made to play major role in creating ‘New World Order’, paying very 
heavy price in the process. The global powers manipulating world events first 
arrested Pakistan’s unprecedented progress in early years by getting the country 
into war with India, using their most effective operative, Mr Z A Bhutto and his 
associates. While this conflict helped India to manage internal dissentions and 
unrest, Pakistan got dismembered. Strategically located New Pakistan was then 
used to dismantle USSR and the alternative system of economy. While General Zia 
was installed to facilitate Global Capitalist interests in dismantling Soviet Empire, 
General Musharraf was brought in to consolidate those gains by occupying 
Afghanistan and the Middle East. Pakistan became a battleground and continues 
to remain so till now. War, the mother of all big businesses was unleashed in the 
region for material gains. Example of just one item, OIL prices before the war and 
later will suffice to explain the point. Who made colossal gains from war and 
turmoil in the region?  
The managers of global capitalist system owning banks, oil companies, armament 
industries and all big businesses in the world have used US power to their purpose 
for over a hundred years having effective control over US policies and decisions. 
With expanding influence all over the world, they will be no more dependent 
exclusively on the US power in coming times. Till recent years the Capitalist 
system had limited access to a good part of the world aligned with