209 

towards the abyss, India got timely support from Pakistan to prevent a leadership 
crisis that could have developed after about seventeen years rule of India by 
Jawahar Lal Nehru. External threat helped India to manage internal discords. 
The man who initiated this conflict ultimately succeeded in grabbing power in 
1971 after another war with India and dismemberment of Pakistan of 1947. His 
plans to rule for long were disrupted due to his own follies although his daughter 
and son-in-law did rule new Pakistan at different intervals putting the people in 
greater difficulties due to their unbounded corruption and misrule.  
Pakistan’s Role in Strengthening India as a State 
India is a geographical term and was never a country as aptly described by Mr. 
Winston Churchill in one of his speeches in 1931 in these words, “India is a 
geographical term. It is no more a country than the Equator”. The largest empire 
created by the legendary Asoka did not extend south of the Ganges valley, the 
‘cow belt’. His efforts to venture south ended at the battle of Kalinga in present 
day Orissa State where seeing the scale of killings he renounced further conquest 
and converted to Buddhism. Later on great ruling dynasties including the 
formidable Mughals ruled only part of the sub continent. Emperor Aurangzeb, 
sixth in line of the Mughal dynasty, after whom Mughal rule started collapsing, 
died fighting in his quest to conquer South India. 
The British created a semblance of unity after they consolidated their hold on the 
Indian sub continent, but their system of control was ingenious and benevolent. 
The sub continent was part of their global empire ruled from London. When the 
British left India in 1947, apart from the areas directly under British control, there 
were five hundred and sixty two states of varying sizes comprising one third of the 
total area and one fourth of the population of the sub continent. These were 
ruled by hereditary rulers, independent in all respects except that they could not 
establish diplomatic relations with other countries. Also there were vast tribal 
areas spread all over the subcontinent enjoying autonomy. The sub continent was 
never one country. It was collection of ‘Rajwaras’ (small states) in frequent 
conflicts with each other prone to be subdued and dominated by external 
powers.  Muslim invaders from west established their rule over a good part of