231 

Mr. Saddam was now instigated to invade Kuwait. His action provided the US, 
then ruled by elder Bush to bring in US forces to occupy Arabian Peninsula. He 
however could not win his second term in office. After a gap of eight years of Bill 
Clinton’s presidency, George W Bush became president of the US resuming the 
programme that his father had left unfinished. 
Af-Pak Theatre 
After 9/11, the US occupation of Afghanistan supported by contingents from the 
NATO forces caused tremendous hardships for Pakistan. General Musharraf, who 
had usurped power by removing Prime Minister Mr. Nawaz Sharif, easily gave in 
to US demands. The US got all the support in using Pakistan’s territory, its roads, 
air bases and air corridors for their occupation of land locked Afghanistan. The so 
called US war against terrorism, which actually has different objectives took 
Pakistan into its fold.  
Although no one from Pakistan was accused of involvement in the 9/11 incident, 
Pakistan came under attack by the US using drones and organisations like Tehrik - 
e - Taliban Pakistan (TTP) supported from US occupied Afghanistan. Using the 
derogatory term Af-Pak, Pakistan was bracketed with Afghanistan as a theatre of 
war. Pakistan had earlier supported the US against USSR occupation of 
Afghanistan suffering considerable losses in the process. The general public in 
Pakistan did not nurture any anti US feelings till Pakistan came under attack from 
the US drones and terrorist organisations mushrooming after the US occupied 
Afghanistan. 
Pakistan has so far suffered nearly sixty thousand civilian persons killed in bomb 
blasts and over six thousands soldiers killed by the terrorists operating from their 
bases in our tribal areas, Balochistan and from Afghanistan. The numbers of 
injured persons with permanent disabilities is much more. The economic losses to 
our nation are incalculable. 
The terrorists, called Tehrik e Taliban Pakistan (TTP) actually ‘Terrorists Targeting 
Pakistan’ are being provided organizational, logistic and financial support mostly 
by the Indians who established numerous consulates for this purpose in 
Afghanistan near our borders after US occupation of the country. At one stage