110 

retirement was made Secretary General of Pakistan People’s Party as reward for 
his services to Bhutto.  
The number of armed forces personnel could also be easily worked out from 
Order of Battle of formations and units in East Pakistan as on 3 December 1971 
(annexed with this narrative-Annex C). It is ironic that Pakistani media did not 
bring out facts even after so many years of the tragic events. The stalwarts 
associated with the media, writing scathing columns against the Army were 
blinded by their prejudice, not bothering to give a reality check. Details of 
formations and units could have been taken from numerous Indian publications 
available soon after the war to calculate correct figures and give accurate picture 
about the number of armed forces personnel incarcerated in India. Pakistani 
academia also made failed to find facts. 
While India took just two weeks to pick up these prisoners from different parts of 
East Pakistan and placed them in vast expanse of their cantonments located in 
‘Cow belt’ provinces, their widely publicized repatriation,after keeping them in 
India for a prolonged period, was spread over eight months (September 1973 to 
April 1974). This was by design to give an impression that apparently a very large 
force that failed in combating insurgency and lost the war was made prisoners by 
India. This falsehood of giving exaggerated numbers made prisoners continues to 
stick to this day.  
Our column started from Naogaon on Indian military trucks on 01 Jan 1972 and 
reached Malda, a District Headquarters in West Bengal the same evening. Here 
we found that other units in our sector were also coming in to a temporary camp 
before boarding trains for different destinations in India. Our train was formed 
and before moving, the Indian officer in charge pleaded with us not to attempt 
escapes en route. His main argument was that we were in transit for going to 
Pakistan and any such attempt would be futile. He promised not to close shutters 
of train compartments and not causing us any discomfort. Most of us believed the 
Indians because it seemed so logical. The war having ended, apparently there was 
no need to keep the prisoners in India. Move to Pakistan through India by trains 
also seemed most practical. It was after about three months when we realised 
that we were in for a long time.