109 

Prisoner of War 
22 Marhatta accompanied by Brigadier Bhatti, the Indian Brigade Commander, 
came to Naogaon on 21 Dec 1971. They conducted themselves with utmost 
propriety, giving due respect to our officers and men. After staying in Naogaon till 
1st Jan 1972, we were made to move on military trucks to Malda in West Bengal. 
The Indian unit bid us farewell in a very respectable manner. On exchanging notes 
with officers coming from different places into the prisoner camp, the attitude of 
Indians was generally found to be similar at other places. 
Indians took about fifteen days to shift prisoners from different parts of East 
Pakistan, placing them in various cantonments of their three provinces, i.e. Bihar, 
Uttar Pradesh and Madhia Pradesh, by 15 Jan 1972. Taking into account the 
number of forces fielded and considerable attrition in about ten months of 
fighting, the total number of armed forces persons (Army, Navy, and Air Force) 
who surrendered in East Pakistan was about thirty four thousands. In addition to 
that there were about eight to ten thousand other people in different categories 
like Scouts, Police, Mujahids and some civilians with us. A local force, raised to 
replace East Pakistan Rifles; the East Pakistan Civil Armed Forces (EPCAF), 
comprised of locals mainly non Bengalis who rejoined their families as war ended. 
Among civilians, there were only a small number of senior bureaucrats, as junior 
lot was mostly locals. As far as civilian families are concerned there were hardly 
any because they had shifted earlier during the turmoil. Total number of people 
of all categories including some civiliansincarcerated India was about forty five 
thousands and not what has been propagated so far. Although exact number of 
armed forces personnel was available in the Strength Returns sent to GHQ from 
HQ Eastern Command but it was never used to challenge the false figures 
propagated to malign the Army. 
The confusion about the number of prisoners will continue to prevail because Mr 
Z A Bhutto appointed Lieutenant General Gul Hasan as Army Chief who helped 
Bhutto in getting into power. After about three months he was replaced by 
General Tikka Khan. This General had been removed from command for 
mishandling operation in Dacca on 25 March 1971. He remained blackmailed of 
being handed over to Bengalis demanding him for war crimes trial and after