188 

a narrow path between the mountain and Gilgit River where an invading Sikh 
force of about twelve hundred men under Bhup Singh was ambushed by the Ruler 
of Gilgit in mid nineteenth century. According to local lore only two persons 
escaped by jumping into the Gilgit River and reached Bunji, the last post of the 
State of Kashmir. 
The team of officers at the Centre, about twenty two in all from different infantry 
regimental groups jelled well as a team. Luckily I was assisted by Lieutenant 
Colonel Bajwa, living in the Mess without family, who out of twenty four hours 
would hardly spend about six hours in his room. He was always up and available 
to everyone. We could organize big functions smoothly; our main strength in this 
was the ingenuity and resourcefulness of Captain Ghulam Muhammad Awan. He 
had exceptional abilities in administrative planning, attention to detail and ability 
to motivate people to work long hours cheerfully, producing admirable results. I 
have mentioned about the visits of the two Army Chiefs that went very well due 
to meticulous work by such officers.  
The annual Commanding Officers (COs) conferences were major events when the 
ex-servicemen would also be invited to join the gathering. Another event which 
evokes pleasant memories was Installation Ceremony of Colonel of the Battalion 
of 27 Punjab at Gilgit. This unit which I had commanded earlier was located at 
Gilgit, then being commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Waqar Ahmad Raja. The unit 
decided to hold installation ceremony of their new Colonel of the Battalion, 
Lieutenant General (retired) Muhammad Aslam Shah at Gilgit. I being an ex CO 
sought permission from FCNA to invite unit’s guests to the Centre for an evening. 
The programme included a game of Golf, dinner and a cultural show displaying 
folk dances of different valleys of Northern Areas. The permission was granted 
with some reservations about move of the VIPs during night. Lieutenant General 
Naseer Akhtar, Comd 5 Corps was also amongst the guests, being Colonel of the 
Punjab Regiment at that time. It was one of the most pleasant evenings where all 
participants enjoyed every moment of their short stay. The graceful regional 
dances performed by handsome men, attired in traditional dresses, moving to the 
exquisite local tunes were a treat to see. Folk dance practice among soldiers of 
NLI was a daily routine. After having completed the day’s work, men would be