268 

Is Pakistan a Federation? 
Today, those who harp on terming Pakistan as  ‘federation’ comprising ‘federating 
units’ need to revisit our not very distant history. ‘Federation’ defines a country 
consisting of individual ‘states’ that have control over their own affairs but form 
part of a central government that is left with a few subjects in its jurisdiction like 
external affairs, currency and defence. Pakistan was not formed by any 
'federating units’ if we refer back to the conditions in 1947 as explained above. 
Pakistan came into being through ‘The Indian Independence Act 1947’ that 
partitioned British India into the two new independent "dominions" of India and 
Pakistan. The main clause of the act is; 
"Division of British India into the two new and fully sovereign dominions of India 
and Pakistan, with effect from 15 August 1947" 
Large scale migration of population took place on both sides; original inhabitants 
of the land migrating on the basis of religion. That does not happen in forming 
‘federations’.  
Pakistan has to be a unitary State with central legislative and devolved powers at 
different tiers of the administrative units like provinces, districts, tehsils and union 
councils. Repeated use of term 'federation' by many people over the last few 
years is ominous development. This makes it easier for our enemies to further 
fragment Pakistan if a provincial assembly is bribed to pass a resolution to secede 
from Pakistan. To forestall such possibility there is need to make basic change in 
our constitution to resolve the issue. 
1973 Constitution 
After 1971 war when we lost East Pakistan, a new constitution was adopted in 
1973. This constitution was adopted more because of pressure of prevailing 
environment resulting from breakup of the country rather than merit of the 
document itself.  The assembly that passed this constitution had no mandate to 
do so. The members of that assembly had been elected for the National Assembly 
of Pakistan who refused to attend Assembly proceedings, forcing a crisis which 
led to breakup of Pakistan. After that break up, a constituent assembly should 
have been elected through fresh elections to frame constitution for the new