195 

On the day of passing out parade we were first invited to ‘Governor House’, 
residence of the Commandant in Academy premises. At the Commandant’s house 
after having tea and small chat with chief guest for the occasion and few selected 
guests, that included our High Commissioner, invited because of a Pakistani cadet 
was getting the coveted awards, we were conducted to our seats on the parade 
ground. The parade was quite a lengthy affair, main difference from our parade 
being that chief guest took lot of time reviewing the parade which included his 
talking to some cadets. When called for the award, Omar gracefully walked up to 
the chief guest who had a brief chat with him before handing over the prestigious 
sword. Our feelings of elation and happiness at that moment are beyond words to 
describe. 
After the parade and award ceremony we were conducted inside their main 
building for lunch. Sitting opposite the Grand Duchess of Luxemburg on the dining 
table with our Ambassador on my left and the Chief Guests’ wife Lady Sam Cowan 
on my right, I was wondering on how from the dusty environs of Kufri, I had 
landed up in that company. I was in a state of euphoria and I still savour the 
feelings of that memorable day. The Commandant Major General Peter Trousdell 
was profuse in his praise for Omar. So was his Company Commander who was 
very keen to meet us to convey his feelings. It was a matter of great delight and 
pride for us; with Allah’s blessings our son made that possible with his dedication 
and hard work.  
After dispersal from the Academy in the afternoon on 9 August, we were taken to 
Birmingham by Mr. Afzal, a cadet at the Academy. His family hailing from Gujar 
Khan was settled in UK. We stayed with his family for about three days and then 
returned to London for taking our flight back along with Omar. At London, Iftikhar 
Abbasi and his mother Mrs. Surayya Abbasi were our hosts. Iftikhar took us 
around London showing important landmarks of the great city. Earlier Dr. Noman 
and Hamza had taken me to visit some places, including Edgware Road where I 
enjoyed large puffs of ‘Shisha’ for the first time. 
As we landed at Islamabad Airport early morning, a pleasant surprise awaited us. 
Major General Pervez Akmal had arranged an elaborate reception in VIP lounge of 
the Airport where whole family had gathered.