245 

force, the Federal Security Force (FSF) putting people of dubious character in 
forming this force that was used to harass his opponents. He created conditions 
where the Army’s one star generals came to a stage of refusing to obey orders 
given by Army High Command. In Lahore three Brigadiers refused to use troops 
under their command in dealing with agitation triggered by rigging in elections by 
Bhutto’s Party.  
In the Armed forces he upgraded posts of Naval and Air Force Chiefs to four star 
ranks equal to that of the Army, ignoring the fact that ranks in the armed forces 
are based on the force they command. The Navy, with about twenty thousand 
personnel was rightly being commanded by a two star Admiral and the Air Force 
with about forty thousand strength commanded by a three star Air Marshal. The 
Army comprising about three hundred thousand persons then was commanded 
by a four star General.  A new post, Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee was 
created along with its headquarters, the post required to be rotated between the 
three services in turn. This was basically to downgrade importance of Army 
Chief’s position. It is to the credit of services chiefs during all these years that the 
armed forces are working in harmony despite efforts to cause dissentions in 
creating an unnecessary organisational structure.  
After about seven years misrule of Mr. Z A Bhutto, General Zia ul Haq assumed 
power in Pakistan. In hindsight it becomes evident that Zia ul Haq was brought in 
by global capitalist interests to confront the Russians in Afghanistan and block 
expansion of  Iranian revolution, both events happening in 1979, about one and 
half year after the man chosen to deal with the outfall was put in place.  Pakistan 
provided critical support to Afghans in their fight against Russian occupation of 
their country. As a result Pakistan had to face multiple threats, series of 
devastative explosions resulting in large scale deaths and destruction. Pakistan 
had also to support a very large number of Afghan refugees, at one time 
estimated to be over five millions, aggravating the country’s economic, law and 
order, drugs and illegal weapons problems which have become endemic, defying 
control even after passage of over three decades. Zia initiated financial 
malpractices. Like bribing legislators by placing large funds at their disposal in the 
name of development projects which was not their job, he placed unaccountable