223 

The Present Setup 
A family actively involved in mega businesses working with international partners 
and also ruling a country is lethal combination against resources of that country 
and its people. As result of general elections held in May 2013, Mr. Mian 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif has formed government at the Centre replacing 
Pakistan People’s Party and its Allie’s Government. Sharif family is actively 
involved in business in Pakistan as well in other countries. Their method to run 
the government is also on the pattern of dynastic rule. No country in today’s 
world claiming some kind of democratic credentials will be ruled by a man as 
head of the national government, his brother as head of a province large enough 
to contain more than half of the country’s population, and a daughter’s father- in- 
law as finance minister. To top it all, other important portfolios have been given 
to a particular clan from Lahore and surroundings. Even the dictators in Pakistan 
could not match such arrangement. 
About Nawaz Sharif, my observations although from short encounters in late 
nineteen eighties remain unchanged; rather get reinforced due to his conduct 
during later years. On 6 September 1985, when he had taken over as Chief 
Minister of Punjab few months back, he was to lay floral wreath at the monument 
of Major Aziz Bhatti, Shaheed, Nishan- e- Haider at BRB Canal east of Lahore. I 
was to host him on that short military function. Before his arrival, a car load of his 
cronies arrived. From their conversation in exchanging notes I could make out 
that each of them had made a few Crore rupees in some deals in those few 
months of their being close to the new Chief Minister. (Crore rupees was a very 
big amount in those days). Nawaz Sharif arrived and was straightaway conducted 
to lay wreath, a short ceremony, over in about fifteen minute’s time.  Those 
cronies got closer to him when he was leaving. He was barely audible while 
talking to them, giving impression of an insecure person, unsure about himself 
and his position.  On another occasion he was brought along to Lahore Garrison 
Golf Club by the President, General M Zia ul Haq who took him around the course 
trying to teach him golf. My unit, 27 Punjab was responsible to develop the newly 
laid golf course, and I, as Secretary of the Club was to remain closer to them. I was 
amazed at the patience of General Zia ul Haq who made Nawaz Sharif hit the balls