145 

Reverting Back to Khakis 
Quetta 
I reached Quetta by second week of December 1976 and reported to 9 Punjab 
where I remained for a few days before joining the course starting 16 December 
1976. This course is the first filter separating officers who have to progress in their 
careers or otherwise. First is the entrance examination held every year to select a 
specified number of officers from the 8-12 years’ service bracket. Those who go 
through the course are graded in different shades which are taken as a yardstick 
for their further postings to career or non career appointments affecting their 
further progress in the army. I did the course without exerting much despite 
frequent advice of some of my peers. At the end I was posted to the best 
operational appointment for a Major in the Army, Brigade Major of an infantry 
brigade. Overall it was a good time well spent in enjoying the facilities which the 
College provided. Families also remained engaged in different activities and the 
weekly cinema screening some good films. Giving evening motorcycle ride to little 
Yaman, my son, was another pleasurable activity which I would enjoy even at the 
cost of studies which otherwise I wanted an excuse to avoid. 
Sialkot 
After completing the staff course at Command and Staff College Quetta, I joined 
104 Brigade at Sialkot as Brigade Major (BM) in January 1978. The Brigade was 
being commanded by Brigadier Javed Majid, an Armoured Corps officer (20 
Lancers). When postings were announced in the main hall of the college by 
Military Secretary Branch representative, I was told by some of my peers that I 
was in for a big trouble. They informed me that Brigadier Javed Majid had put 
four officers, Platoon Commanders at PMA, on adverse report when he was a 
Battalion Commander at the Academy, a very unusual happening. That he was 
very demanding, arrogant and a harsh person. On joining the Brigade at Sialkot I 
told the Commander about my lack of experience in staff duties having remained 
away from normal routine since 1971. Contrary to what I was told, he was very 
patient to guide me initially about the ongoing work, after which I made sure that 
he does not find any cause of concern or complaint. Other two staff officers of the