288 

great prestige in the world. Ours was a tolerant and liberal society, high on 
the scale of peace, satisfaction and happiness in life. 
 As President Ayub Khan wanted global capitalists to remain ‘FRIENDS’ and 
‘NOT become MASTERS’, (his autobiography is titled FRIENDS, NOT 
MASTERS) devilish plans were unfurled to remove him. Mr Z A Bhutto, the 
most effective operative of global powers was launched to remove Ayub 
Khan’s government by getting the country into armed conflict with five 
time’s larger India in 1965. Ambitious to rule a country irrespective of its 
size, Bhutto in league with Sheikh Mujib got the country dismembered with 
help from India under overall direction of GCE. General Yahya Khan, in 
perpetual inebriated state as President facilitated Bhutto’s mission. Cut to 
size for easier manipulation, the country was used for next phase of the 
global game.  
 In their quest to impose capitalist system of economy in the entire world, 
the GCE dismantled Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) by getting 
them involved in Afghanistan. As a preparatory move Z A Bhutto was 
disposed of through General Zia ul Haq.  Pakistan’s tribal region was used as 
launching pad for resistance against USSR. Mullah Zia ul Haq served them 
well to create a ‘Jihadi’ force collecting adventurous young men of different 
nationalities. 
 After successful completion of their mission, the GCE abandoned 
Afghanistan. After a decade they came back with US and NATO forces into 
their ‘Af-Pak’ theatre of operations when Afghans under Mullah Omar 
became impediment in their plans to lay oil and gas pipelines through 
Afghanistan. Controlled demolition of Twin Towers in New York on 
September 11, 2001 was made an excuse to occupy the region. In the same 
thrust, Iraq was invaded shortly afterwards to get control of its oil 
resources using false accusation that the country had weapons of mass 
destruction. 
 Before  physical occupation of Afghanistan, General Musharraf, a ‘liberal’ 
was brought in power to dismantle Jihadi networks created under Zia ul 
Haq regime, some of whom had got settled in our tribal areas. As a side kick 
General Musharraf was ‘inspired’ to launch Kargil Operation without the