135 

power lines.  When his position was detected and a party comprising four officers 
led by a Lieutenant Colonel of the Pakistan Army approached him to persuade 
him to come out of the cave, an explosion resulted in instant death of those 
officers.  Akbar Bugti also got killed. A man who had enjoyed a prestigious 
position in Pakistan in various capacities should not have succumbed to 
machinations of such terrorist groups sponsored by foreign powers working 
against the interests of the State. May be his old age blurred his judgment. In any 
case it was a most tragic event. I vividly recollect memories of having conducted 
him on a tour of Cooli Camp in Quetta Cantonment. One afternoon, when I was 
Colonel Staff of 41 Division, I got a message that the Governor, Mr. Akbar Bugti 
wanted to visit Cooli Camp to see the barrack where he had been detained during 
Ayub Khan’s rule. I met his party at Seven Streams (Pani Taqseem) roundabout, a 
famous landmark in the cantonment and conducted him to the area. Although 
Cooli camp was still largely in the same dilapidated shape, he could not exactly 
locate the barrack where he remained in confinement. He departed after having a 
cup of tea in the Divisional Officers Mess located on Staff College Road. His voice 
was surprisingly meek compared to his large frame. He had other peculiarities 
which I noticed at different occasions, for example while sitting at a large dinner 
table in Quetta Club, instead of sharing prescribed menu, he got his own food 
served to him comprising Dall and Chapattis with lot of green chilies as his salad. 
At another occasion, while listening to Farida Khanum the famous Ghazal Singer 
of the time, at Serena Hotel Quetta, he sat good part of the night without getting 
up even once although he was consuming a lot of water from a jug placed before 
him. People like me, much younger to him, could not continue sitting unmoved 
like him.  He was a remarkable man who regrettably lost his bearings in old age, 
and his tragic end was indeed sad news. 
Coming back to events of 1974, sitting in wilderness at Sangsila I began to have 
very disturbing thoughts. Although the unrest, for which Army had been deployed 
in Baluchistan at that time, was confined to two very small pockets, the Marri 
tribal area and some area around Wadh/ Khuzdar, the impression given 
throughout Pakistan and the world was that province of Balochistan, almost forty 
five percent land mass of Pakistan, was in revolt against the State of Pakistan. 
Because of my recent catastrophic experience in erstwhile East Pakistan, I knew