45 

Call to Arms 
After completing training at the Pakistan Military Academy as part of 2nd War 
Course in June 1966, I joined 34th Battalion of the Punjab Regiment then part of 
the 9 Infantry Division located at Kharian Cantonment. The unit had been raised 
on 29 December 1965 at the Punjab Regimental Centre, Mardan and moved to 
Jamrud Fort near Peshawar under the newly raised 9 Division. After a few months 
the Division was ordered to move to Kharian Cantonment, built with US aid in mid 
fifties. On reaching Kharian I found that the unit was deployed on ceasefire line, 
later termed ‘Line of Control (LOC)’ after the 1971 war. Only a small rear party 
was left at Kharian. I joined the Battalion Headquarters located at a small place 
named ‘Padhaar’ in Bhimber Sector. The unit was then being commanded by 
Lieutenant Colonel Muhammad Abdul Rashid, who had taken command on 
promotion. I was first posted to ‘D’ Company located in area Dewa - Batala. Here 
apart from enjoying the ripe mangos falling from the massive old trees, I listened 
to interesting accounts from Subedar Abdul Rahman about his journey as part of 
6 Jammu and Kashmir Battalion of State Forces from Jammu to Bunjicrossing over 
Burzil Pass and his company commander Captain Hassan Khan’s role in liberation 
of Gilgit and Northern Areas. Subedar Abdul Rahman, a wrestler from Bhimber 
area was then a Lance Naik in Hassan’s Company.  
I was soon moved to a post named ‘Ban Chihraan’ in ‘C’ Company opposite ‘Lalial’ 
post occupied by the Indians. These were well known land marks referred to in 
the context of fighting during recently concluded 1965 war. My company 
commander here, Major Riaz Hussain Javed was a tall, loud and very energetic 
person, a good hockey player. He later died of heart attack while commanding a 
battalion of Azad Kashmir Regiment at Kharian. Other company commanders 
included Majors Razzaq, Raja Asghar, and Captain Shaukat Butt. Captain M Saeed 
Azam Khan, a Janjua from the famous village Mator near Rawalpindi who was the 
first officer to join the unit on its raising, was holding key appointment of Adjutant 
of the unit. Saeed Azam with whom I had long association afterwards was a saint 
like person with a subtle sense of humour, never joining dubious activities and 
had the grace to tolerate others follies without rancor. Major Nisar Muhammad 
Khan, the second in command had also joined the unit at Padhaar. The unit