52 

introduced in 1964, a novelty not available at the household level. The life 
therefore was mostly spent outdoors in healthy activities. 
Cinema was main source of entertainment in those days.  There were a number of 
cinemas providing entertainment for the whole families. There were different 
charges for various classes of seats within the cinema halls; front seats being the 
cheapest and galleries at the back costlier. The charges of tickets varied from half 
a rupee to about three rupees at the maximum. Whole families could watch 
movies together because there was no vulgarity in the films like present times. 
Some cinemas screened English films only. In Rawalpindi, Cirose (which is still not 
demolished) Plaza and Odeon screened English films. For watching Indian movies 
people would travel to Kabul when these got banned to be screened in Pakistan 
after 1965 war. Travelling from Kharian to Rawalpindi or Lahore on weekends was 
frequent because it was not expensive, the bus fare being about two and half 
rupees to both cities as Kharian is almost at equal distance from both major cities. 
My roommate Asif Ali Rizvi would make the choice of destination easy. According 
to him as we came out on the G T Road, parking our bicycles at the Petrol Station, 
the first bus in either direction was to be taken to reach Rawalpindi or Lahore. We 
would stay with our fellow officers in the Messes so there was no expense on 
lodging. Expenses on food and watching the films were not much burden on the 
pocket.  
For entertainment of troops, the units would invite singers including singing and 
dancing girls to perform in the open on special occasions like raising days or on 
some other excuse. Aziz Mian Qawwal had been recently introduced into the 
army units and was in great demand. He was once invited by our unit and gave 
mesmerizing performance during good part of the night in our unit lines 
entertaining the troops, one soldier going into trance oblivious of surroundings 
affected by Sufi poetry. On the eve of our departure to East Pakistan, the unit 
arranged a function inviting singer Bilqees Khanum along with a dancing girl from 
Lahore and another bunch of dancing girls from nearby Lalamusa. The soldiers 
would also sing and perform skits particularly targeting the seniors for their 
idiosyncrasies.