28 

particularly in the textile sector, trading, commerce and almost every field 
became a model for other third world countries. Two major water storage dams, 
one at Mangla on river Jhelum and another at Tarbela on river Indus were 
constructed after resolving water dispute with India through World Bank in 1960, 
providing cheap source of energy. A country, predicted by Indian leaders not to 
last for long had become a model of progress, development and stability for 
developing countries that got their independence from colonial rule after the 
Second World War.  
Pakistan, during Ayub Khan’s rule was a liberal, peaceful, tolerant and relatively 
prosperous society. Unemployment was almost zero. There were lot of 
employment opportunities in the expanding industries in Karachi, Hyderabad, 
Lahore, Lyallpur (now Faisalabad) and other cities. The peasants in rain fed areas 
would get seasonal employment in construction industry in the big cities between 
the period of sowing winter crops and their harvesting time. Everyone seemed 
happy and satisfied with life, having good opportunities of entertainment through 
frequent local festivals and sports events of all kinds. The province of West 
Pakistan (present day Pakistan) was governed from Lahore, the provincial capital 
by a Governor assisted by a small team of ministers. Malik Amir Muhammad 
Khan, Nawab of Kalabagh, the Governor was a man of sterling character and 
outstanding administrative acumen. He ensured peace in the province. East 
Pakistan was governed by General Azam Khan who enjoyed enormous respect 
because of his hard work in reaching out to the common man in his own 
inimitable style, making sincere efforts to solve people’s problems. It was the 
golden period of life for a common citizen of Pakistan. 
Two incidents will give glimpses of attitude of rulers towards the proprieties and 
abiding by rules of law. In a TV programme some years back a retired senior 
bureaucrat, late Syed Hashim Raza narrated that as Commissioner Karachi he was 
approached by the President House to allot some land in Karachi to a particular 
person. Since it was against rules, he refused to make the allotment. When the 
President visited Karachi, Syed Hashim Raza apprised him of the reason for his 
inability to comply with the demand. The President’s response was that if 
something was against the rules, it should not be done. Syed Hashim Raza