75 

The Indians, apart from taking young men for induction in Mukti Bahini were 
indulging in large scale molesting of captive women. Almost all the women of 
child bearing age whom I saw returning to the camp after declaration of war were 
pregnant. Pictures of women in such conditions were printed by the Times 
magazine and other publications which we saw in the POW camps attributing 
crimes to men of Pakistan Army. I had a Bengali young man working with me as 
volunteer who had moved with family to India in the initial days. He had two 
wives. Both had been detained by the Indians. 
At Hilli railway station the border was demarcated with the help of corrugated 
iron sheets placed vertically. The Bengali civilians were being kept in camp 
nearby. At night there would be wailing, shrieks and noise when the Indian troops 
would comb through the camp, a daily routine to get hold of girls to be taken to 
their bunkers for the night. Conversely the Indian propaganda campaign was 
supported by the world media to demonise Pakistan Army by attributing acts of 
molestation of Bengali women. 
Three under strength Divisions of Pakistan Army had been put into a very difficult 
situation of overcoming resistance and restoring normal living conditions. The 
officers commanding these units were well aware that this task could not be done 
by tolerating indiscipline resulting in committing crimes. It was understood that 
any such laxity would be most detrimental in keeping the discipline, so essential 
for success of the mission. During initial stage of the operation, four persons of 
my unit were punished by holding their court martial on charges of trespassing 
private premises. They were dismissed from service and sent to jail on receipt of 
complaints from the civilians. The prevailing environments of constant danger 
subdued carnal desires and passions. Still if someone could afford to indulge in 
such thought for some time, particularly in the rear areas, there were facilities 
available in almost every small and large town where sex workers in defined 
localities would cater to such needs. Given that these army units, operating 
without rest or relief for about ten months in most disadvantageous position 
could retain their cohesion and fighting spirit is ample proof of a disciplined force 
doing its best against great odds.