56 

It may be difficult to understand for our younger generation, living in the age of 
instant communications that we had no clue about situation in East Pakistan 
before we landed in Dacca. On reaching Karachi, before undertaking air journey 
we got the feelings that something was seriously wrong in that part of our 
country. This information was provided by the people coming back from East 
Pakistan on return flights from Dacca. It gave very harrowing details of atrocities 
being committed by Bengali criminal gangs on non Bengali population because 
the State had lost control and had stopped functioning in that part of the country. 
It was on reaching Dacca that we learnt about the grave situation and some 
details of Army action started on 25 March 1971 to restore State writ in East 
Pakistan.  
Initial Operations - April 1971 
After assembling and doing duties in Dacca for a couple of days, the unit was 
given the task to clear area up to Narsinghdi, a small town north east of Dacca. 
The unit was placed under 14 Division, losing its affiliation with the 9 Division.  
The unit concentrated across a stream by crossing over Demra ferry site in south 
east of the city on 10 April and started its move on the morning of 11th April. It 
was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Hafeez Ur Rahman, Alpha Company 
commanded by Major M Saeed Azam Khan, Bravo Company by Major Khurshid 
Ahmad Mallal, Charlie Company by Captain Nazir Ahmed (author) and Delta 
Company by Captain Nisar Hussain Bukhari. The move towards north started 
along Dacca- Narsinghdi- Bhairab Bazar road with Major Mallal’s company 
leading. We had mustered a few small civilian vehicles including a Volkswagen 
ambulance to make one platoon (about thirty plus strength) mobile. This mobile 
platoon commanded by Captain Mian Bux Baloch led the advance movement, rest 
of the troops following on foot along the road. We also had the support of four 
Artillery guns following behind us under command Major Khurram Jahandur. 
As soon as the leading platoon covered a distance of about three kilometers, it 
came into a well laid ambush from the both sides of the road through trees 
forming a horseshoe pattern.  Leading platoon took up position alongside the 
road to return fire. According to well practiced drill without losing time, the 
following platoon was given code word “Babbar Sher Alpha” by Major Mallal, the