107 

and later traversing vast areas of North Bengal during about eight months, we 
found that the general population was cooperative and not hostile towards 
Pakistan Army. They wanted peace. There was no popular insurgency as viciously 
propagated by India. The local population was supportive of the Army’s efforts to 
stop intrusion from India and denying shelter to terrorists launched from India. At 
Panjbibi I was responsible to cover a very vast area along the borders. As narrated 
earlier at one post covering a part of border area, responsibility was given to a 
small group comprising sixteen persons from local Bengali civilians, giving them 
old .303 rifles and ammunition. They, being independent and away from other 
posts, performed their task exceptionally well, not allowing any intrusion from 
that side.  
The protection provided by civilians to General Nazar, Brigadier Tajammal and 
party at Pirganj during thick of war, saving them from searching Indians, amply 
negates the false propaganda of portraying Bengali population against Pakistan 
Army. 
The epic Battle at Hilli is a saga of unparalleled valour by our soldiers who were 
faced to fight a much superior force. Each one of them acquitted himself 
remarkably well. I have mentioned about the spirit of my men who after fighting 
at Hilli rejoined me at Panjbibi. The two Indian tanks destroyed at initial stage of 
the battle at Hilli were by men of my Company deployed in 4 FF positions. From 
my position at Panjbibi, the southern flank of positions at Hilli were being 
protected and supported. Captains Afreen’s actions made the Indians to shift 
their effort away from Hilli towards Badhuria on the northern tracks. 
4 FF was initially reinforced by men of my Company, the ‘Charlie’ Company 34 
Punjab (R&S). Additional troops inducted into the battle in Hilli Sector were; one 
Company from 8 Blauch commanded by Major Ashraf and another Company from 
13 FF commanded by Major Sabir Kamal Mayer at Badhuria. The Brigade 
Commander, Brigadier Tajammal Hussain Malik remained present in the area with 
his Tactical HQ located with 4 FF. One Battery of 80 Field Regiment Artillery 
commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Anis was supporting the battle. Major (later 
Brigadier) Anwar Khattak, Battery Commander with 4 FF was ever available to the 
CO 4 FF Lieutenant Colonel Akhlaq Abbasi (later Brigadier). Both got injured in one