21 

teller came to the village and was accommodated in ‘Hujra’, a room within 
mosque premises. He stayed for quite a few days. At night after Isha prayers, he 
would start narrating his stories which were listened to with rapt attention 
because of their interesting content. ‘Hujra’ was part of the mosque used as a 
guest room for travelers staying for the night. At Maghrib prayers, the prayer 
leader would announce that there were so many guests that night for the food to 
be provided to them which would be done by different households. 
The children like adults were equally enthusiastic viewers and listeners to the 
entertainment programmes. Parents were not worried about the children, 
knowing that they were in a group and in the company of cousins and some elder, 
the overall environments being peaceful without any threat. If some dispute 
erupted the worst would be a fist fight or use of sticks. Firearms were 
nonexistent. There were only two licensed weapons, 12 gauge shot guns, in the 
village; one with my father and another one with Haji Noor Muhammad, the 
person I have mentioned earlier. There was no concept of keeping any unlicensed 
weapon. Police was much feared, a single Police constable appearing in the village 
would create a scare. 
‘Baithak’ a larger room in the house of some men, who had the charm to attract 
audience, was another institution that provided opportunity to communicate and 
share experiences.  My father’s ‘Baithak’ would come alive after Maghrib prayers, 
particularly during the long winter nights when men would gather to share the 
day’s proceedings and enjoy smoking tobacco, the ‘Chilam’ taking rounds,the 
smoke filled room with frequent bursts of laughter emanating from the company 
of people at peace with themselves. During summers, in the absence of 
electricity, roof tops were the venue for comparatively shorter meetings, the 
gentle breeze providing some relief after the day’s work.  
Apart from listening to singers who occasionally staged their performances in the 
area, another source of enjoying the music was through Gramophone, a novelty 
in the area.  My father enjoyed listening to music particularly in his later years 
having collected a large number of 78 rpm records. We, the children of our 
household became familiar with names like Kallan Khan, Muhhammad Ali Faridi, 
Muhammad Hussain Nagina Waley Qawwals and Ghazal singers like Zuhra Bai