19 

known as ‘Darokha’ with some steps to adjust its position. Lantern had also come 
into use and a few Patromax lamps, a novelty used for special occasions like 
weddings. The lamps would be used for a short duration because people routinely 
consumed evening meals just after Maghrib prayers and would go to sleep after 
Isha prayers. This enabled everyone to start the next day early.  
The first job of women of the household was to grind flour for the day on their 
‘Chakki’, a job done by the morning prayers time, prepare food and deliver to the 
men who started their work on the fields after morning prayers. Ploughing and 
working the fields was major task spread over most of the year. It was time 
consuming and laborious to prepare even a small field with the help of old 
instruments pulled by the animals. With introduction of tractors one cannot 
conceive the timeframe and effort involved in agricultural activity in those times.  
Whole families, brothers and cousins were lodged in rows of adjacent houses. 
There were few disputes among men but womenfolk would have many things 
against each other that they would take out in the absence of men. Some fertile 
minds would invent their own invective according to the situation. Crime was 
almost nonexistent. One murder in the village in my childhood was that of a 
person being thrown in an unused well by his wife with the help of her paramour. 
In another incident a party, a small ‘Lashkar’ armed with sticks and ‘Kulharis’ (axe) 
attacked the Mohalla of cobblers due to some dispute. In the ensuing battle two 
men, one from each side, were killed. Romantic liaisons were discreet and 
dangerous but village life was not lacking in these. 
Overall atmosphere was that of peace and contentment as the limited 
requirements of people were being met. The children were a happy lot as there 
was plenty of time to play in the fields outside village which would continue till 
late during moonlit nights of summer’s months. Marriages were mostly arranged 
in summers after harvesting wheat crop which generated income to be spent on 
such occasions. Marriage proceedings were quite lengthy, starting about two 
weeks before the actual date of marriage. The bridegroom’s friends and male 
cousins would get together in the evenings, their main activity singing songs 
where everyone was persuaded to sing. Without modern days microphones, 
singing taxed the vocal cords but some of the young men could sing very well.