311 

This was not understood or acceptable to highly patriotic and professionally 
outstanding officers such as Brigadier F B Ali or Group Captain A M Sikander who 
rightly blamed Yahya for the breakup of Pakistan. Several of these officers were 
tried by General Court Martial (GCM) for engineering a conspiracy against the 
State. ……… 
Mercifully, later the PAF did a better job of treating its repatriated POWs. It 
prematurely retired only once officer while most went on to continue their 
careers successfully. The Army POWs were, however shabbily treated, on grounds 
that they had been brain washed. (Italics mine) 
The Villains 
It is true that the seeds of hatred had been sown a long time ago. This hatred was 
nurtured over the years due to arrogant, callous, unjust, bigoted, short-sighted, 
and disdainful policies of the West Pakistani establishment and self-serving 
politicians. Seeds of such hatred were sown right in the beginning, when Urdu 
was declared the official language of Pakistan, ignoring the rich Bengali language 
and culture of the majority. In such a sorry milieu, it is not easy to vilify 
individuals, but the actions of three actors are far too obvious to be overlooked. 
I had little respect for Sheikh Mujib since I met him once in Los Angeles in 1957 at 
a dinner in his honour given by two Lahori brothers who were students in 
University of Southern California. I too was attending a course in USC. He was 
then an important politician holding the post of Secretary General of Awami 
League under Mr Suhrawardy. During dinner I was expecting him to speak on 
national issues facing Pakistan, politics, current and international affairs etc, but I 
was shocked to hear him talk mostly about women. Shaikh Mujib was neither an 
intellectual nor a man of principles; he was simply a loud-mouthed rabble rouser. 
Hard core policies and decisions were made by the hardliner Tajuddin sitting in 
Calcutta, with his coterie. In the sixties, Mujib was fully involved in Agartala 
Conspiracy. He was declared innocent on the urging of some of our well meaning 
leaders so that he could attend a round table conference chaired by Ayub Khan, 
as he tried desperately to hold on to power. This action by Ayub made Mujeeb an