32 

Mr. Nehru to suppress internal discord. After his death, it would have been 
difficult for his successor to maintain unity, had Pakistan not initiated armed 
conflict with many times larger neighbor that turned the tide of history. 
The 1965 Indo-Pakistan War, Causes and Consequences 
After a few months of Mr. Nehru’s death, military forces of Pakistan and India got 
involved in border skirmishes in Rann of Kuch, a marshy area in the south near 
Arabian Sea, both sides accusing each other of starting the clashes in early 1965. 
Cease fire was arranged by June 1965 due to efforts of the government of United 
Kingdom (UK) and it was decided to resolve the dispute through arbitration. After 
skirmishes in Rann of Kuch subsided, Pakistan infiltrated personnel of Azad 
Kashmir forces followed by a group of elite commandos; the Special Service 
Group of Pakistan Army into Indian occupied Kashmir. Since the public in Indian 
Occupied Kashmir was not privy to plans devised by initiators of this conflict, they 
did not provide required support to the infiltrators, who were soon detected, 
some of them caught, killed and the rest ex-filtrated. The Indians responded by 
artillery shelling and captured some posts on the ceasefire line in Kashmir 
including Haji Pir Pass, an important point that could facilitate Indians in making 
further advances to capture more areas of Azad Kashmir.  
On First September 1965, a brigade of Pakistan Army’s 7 Infantry Division, was 
launched across cease fire line in Chamb Sector of Indian Held Kashmir.  
Command of the operation was with Major General AkhtarHussain Malik, General 
Officer Commanding 12 Division based at Murree. 7 Infantry Division, 
commanded by Major General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan had been hastily 
brought from its concentration area in Balloki Headwork where it was located 
since Rann of Kuch crisis. The Brigade made rapid progress in capturing area up to 
Tawi River within twenty four hours. Another brigade from 7 Division was to go 
for next phase across Tawi to capture Akhnur and its bridge over Chinab River. 
Here, on 2 September the Army High Command decided to make Major General 
Yahya responsible for Chamb Sector. Yahya took his time to proceed further 
causing delay of almost two days thus losing momentum, giving the Indians time 
to induct more troops into the sector.