190 

problem and we did not get any vehicles against the deficiency. Considering that 
lot of senior officers had started visiting the Centre for whom arranging suitable 
vehicles was difficult, I relocated the Helipads near the monument/offices and 
planned events in such a way that the need to use vehicles was minimized.  
Another feature added was laying out a Golf Course, the first in Northern Areas. 
Before my arrival at the Centre, Lieutenant Colonel Bajwa, a keen golfer, had laid 
out a mini course of three holes to remain in practice. With experience of 
maintaining  Lahore Garrison Golf Course as its Secretary while commanding 27 
Punjab in 1985 -87, I developed a nine hole course, a massive work done by 
recruits of the Centre over a period of about six months. According to Bajwa, 
when Lord Curzon visited Gilgit as a member of the British Parliament much 
before becoming the famous Viceroy of India, he carried his golf kit to enjoy a few 
shots in exquisite surroundings of Gilgit area, the first man to do so.  
The Centre was sharing irrigation water from the nullah coming from mountain on 
our east with the villagers of Bunji. As water channel passed through the village, 
water theft by villagers was a continuous complaint. The problem was minimized 
by effective monitoring arrangements and constructing few large size reservoirs/ 
ponds through manual labour on self help basis for storing water for use 
according to needs.  
I had to undertake lot of travelling during these two and a half years. Whenever 
there was a need to come to Rawalpindi in connection with official duties, I never 
had the luxury of availing air travel facility because invariably the weather would 
not permit that. I had to take road journey a number of times on the KKH which at 
that time was not in a bad shape as it deteriorated later. The time taken from 
Bunji to Rawalpindi would be about twelve hours. I was told by the drivers that 
my predecessor, Colonel Ashraf once took about nine hours from Bunji to 
Rawalpindi when the road had just been completed and road conditions were at 
their best.  
I had started a project of converting some NLI properties in the area into tourist 
resorts. A few places were identified and some work started before I was posted 
out. The places were Naltar, where two barracks were made usable for living by 
the visiting families. At Passu a few existing rooms were converted into guest