31 

divisions as a number of secessionist movements were active in different parts of 
India.  In the words Sir Winston Churchill, the  great British leader; 
 “India is a geographical term. It is no more a united nation than the 
equator”.2 
Mr. Churchill, as young subaltern had served in India, seeing much of the 
subcontinent. He took part in operations as part of Malakand Field Force against 
tribes in the areas now part of Pakistan. His observation is fully supported by 
recorded history because the subcontinent was never ruled from one power 
center. Hindustan was a collection of ‘Rajwaras’ (small states) during thousands of 
years of its history. The sixth king of great Mughal dynasty died struggling to 
conquer South India. Much before that, the mythical king Ashoka became 
Buddhist, renouncing conquest southwards after seeing enormous killing in the 
battle of Kalinga in present day Indian state of Orissa. The semblance of unity 
under British rule is deceptive because when they left India in 1947, there were 
five hundred and sixty two states of varying sizes apart from directly ruled parts 
and vast independent tribal regions in all parts of India. The states were 
independent in all respects except that they could not establish diplomatic 
relations with other nations of the world.  It was Mr. JawaharLal Nehru’s stature 
and leadership that started transformation of a heterogeneous, divisive, multi 
religious, multi ethnic India to one united country. That Pakistan helped India in 
transforming her from a geographical term into a strong country by timely 
interventions (in 1965 and 1999) to overcome their internal crises at the cost of 
being dismembered itself is a painful chapter of history as being explained in the 
narrative. 
The skirmishes on India-China border initiated by the Indians in 1962 were used 
to manage and subdue internal dissentions. At that time the main political party 
in southern India, the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), representing 
Dravidians ethnic population was openly demanding separation from New Delhi. 
A number of separatist movements were waging armed struggle in the eastern 
parts of India. An external threat, contrived and blown out of proportions helped 

2Speech at Royal Albert Hall, 18March 1931.