229 

Developing hydro power by effective management of water resources that had 
multiple benefits like controlling floods, bringing more lands under irrigation 
system particularly deserts has great potential in providing cheap electricity. But 
this aspect was completely ignored politicizing projects like Kalabagh Dam that 
was easiest and cheapest to build and had been planned some decades earlier.  
Similarly utilising indigenous coal resources to produce energy was also 
completely disregarded. Domestic oil and gas exploration was stalled, some areas 
in Balochistan made unsafe for working of exploration companies. Substantial 
quantities of natural gas available in the existing fields were also not added into 
the system. All this was in the interest of international oil cartels and the 
government’s new plans for making agreements like the infamous Rental Power 
Projects, importing liquefied gas from abroad and other such ventures, making 
deals that provided hefty commissions easily stashed away in foreign banks.  
In the last days of Zardari government gas pipeline agreement with Iran was 
signed at much higher rates. India opted out of the project mainly because of 
higher price of gas being demanded. Unless these rates are reduced, our future 
domestic production of gas will also not balance the gas rates. It seems a repeat 
of the IPPs agreements signed by Peoples Party governments which they made 
some decades earlier. 
Enormous amounts of loans were taken from international financial institutions 
as well as domestic banking sector during these five years, more than 
accumulated amount taken during the past. There is nothing on ground to show 
where these huge funds have been spent. It appears that these are paper 
transactions to put Pakistan into permanent slavery. The country is spending 
almost half of its annual budget in paying interest to these institutions. Global 
Capitalist’s interference and bankruptcy of our political class is manifest in 
throwing up convicted persons to rule our country as stated earlier.