24 

receiver of my blows so he used his full force to do the job. For a short while there 
was complete blackout before my eyes. I took some time to recover from the 
shock. The teacher realising that Akbar had been extra efficient in obeying the 
command, got out of his chair with some difficulty and himself gave Akbar a few 
blows with his feeble hands. Akbar one day told me that the famous compendium 
of classic tales ‘Alif Laila’ in Urdu was available at their house. I showed my 
eagerness to borrow that for some days which I did and got engrossed into 
reading the fascinating tales. It took some months to recover from the images of 
fairies and princesses floating in imagination and thoughts on a raw mind. May be 
such early experiences make a person an incorrigible romantic in life. 
The distance between our village and the school at Saghar was about seven 
kilometers on a dusty track. It involved crossing of two perennial streams which 
would be flooded during rains. We the children from my village, substantial in 
number used to move in groups. Going to and coming back from school was fun, 
particularly while coming back when there was some spare time to indulge in 
pranks. Three years in Saghar School passed and after class eighth I moved to 
Talagang High School for matriculation, residing in boarding house on the edge of 
a seasonal stream on eastern end of the town. This stream with its white 
unpolluted sand was arena of a most entertaining game of ‘Kabbadi’ organised by 
the local organisation once every week. Players from other parts of the region 
would also be invited to participate in the game. Competing teams would come to 
the venue with beating of drums and lot of fanfare. It was most enjoyable to see 
the whole proceedings. Compounder Shafi was star player whose specialty was to 
jump over the opponent, putting one foot on the opponent’s shoulder. For this 
Shafi would make his opponent get into a position which facilitated his trick. Every 
player knew his technique but would get beaten by his dexterous moves. 
There were many other occasions to enjoy witnessing various kinds of sports like 
the bulls races, a pair of bulls pulling load of mud. These competitions were 
frequently held in different villages and promoted rearing of very good quality 
animals of ‘Dhani’ breed, famous for their beauty and agility. The animals reared 
by a family of Talagang, the Sabunia Maliks, known as such because of owning a 
local 'Desi Sabun' (soap) factory, continued to win first prize in the annual festival