55 

infantry battalionsby air to reinforce the troops in East Pakistan. Roughly about 
twenty thousand troops were airlifted to reinforce the small garrison trapped in 
East Pakistan. 
Our move started from Kharian by train up to Karachi and then onward by 
Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) to Dacca on a circuitous route passing over 
Ceylon (now Sri Lanka). The Indians had stopped our flights over India earlier by 
staging a drama of hijacking. A Fokker aircraft, nick named Ganga, was brought to 
Lahore by some Kashmiri persons resulting in banning of Pakistan’s flights over 
India thus increasing flight time from two hours to almost seven hours. Mr. Z A 
Bhutto was prompt in embracing the hijackers praising their action.  
It was a most remarkable achievement of our national carrier, the PIA, to move 
these troops in a very short time. The airline staff worked tirelessly far beyond 
their call of duty. We could genuinely take pride in their performance and 
achievement. Otherwise also the PIA was considered one of the best airlines in 
the world. Air Marshal Noor Khan, in his younger days when he was Air 
Commodore worked in his inimitable style to make our airline one of the top ones 
in the world. The motto adopted ‘great people to fly with’ truly reflected their 
status. Noor Khan was replaced by Air Martial Asghar Khan, another outstanding 
professional. The airline lost its position by induction of political workers which 
gradually eroded its efficiency to land it in its present state. Karachi, a city of lights 
in those days was hub of air travel east of Suez. Gulf region airports then did not 
exist.  
I along with my company landed at Dacca Tejgaon Airport by mid day on 6th April, 
the unit’s move being completed by 8th April 1971. In the company I had two 
more officers, Captain Muhammad Afreen and Lieutenant Muhammad Saeed 
Tariq (who embraced SHAHADAT on 13 December 1971 at Panjbibi, District 
Bogra). We were just carrying our personal weapons, their ammunition and a 
spare pair of uniforms in our backpacks. Our heavier equipment and weapons like 
vehicles, recoilless rifles etc were to move by sea from Karachi to Chittagong from 
where these were to be collected later. We could get hold of our equipment after 
the completion of first phase of operations by end May 1971.