13 

of years as can be seen in murals from the Indus Valley civilization preserved in 
frescos at ruins of Harrapa and Mohan Jo Darro. Introduction of 'tractor' has 
eliminated the need of old plough and its related gear which is becoming extinct 
and will fade away altogether from the agricultural scene.  
Wheat, the main crop was sown in early winters after the land had been prepared 
by ploughing at least twice and then its surface made plain with the help of a 
heavy wooden plank known as ‘majj’ pulled by the two animals. Sowing was done 
by adding a device known as ‘nal’ to plough and the seed released in the ‘nal’ by 
an experienced hand to avoid cluttering or leaving gaps. Gram and mustered were 
also sown during the same period. The crops took about six months to be ready 
for harvesting and depended totally on the rains for growth in our rain fed areas. 
Wheat crop was ready for harvesting in mid April, by 1st of Besakh in the Bikrami 
Calendar in the Punjab and Pothohar region. The festival of ‘Besakhi’, celebrated 
with zest particularly by the Sikh community was to start the harvesting process.  
The first step was to cut the crop. Armed with sickles the whole household would 
reach their fields early in the morning and start cutting plants, binding these into 
manageable sizes for easy handling. Anyone who lagged behind in cutting would 
invite the neighbors and relatives for help. This was called ‘Maang”. The food 
served to them would be very well prepared 'Dall Chana' with 'Tandoori Roti' 
during early part of the day. In the evening it would be 'Ghee' and 'Shakar' (brown 
sugar) consumed with the Tandoori Roti. This was standard practice from which 
no one deviated. The food otherwise was very simple. Wheat was staple diet 
supplemented by Millet (Bajra), Corn and Maize (Jowar) for some months in the 
winters. For afternoon snacks, particularly for children, seasonal grains like gram, 
corn, millet and maize were roasted by the local Bhatiara/Bathiari who started 
work after Zuhar prayers and closed by Maghrib prayers. Milk was not sold in the 
village. It was processed to make butter and ‘lassi’ a drink which was available 
free of cost to anyone who did not have animals of his own. Pulses, occasionally 
chicken and vegetable grown in the village by some families called ‘Maliars’ on 
small pieces of irrigated land around the wells were consumed mainly with the 
evening meal. Meat would be available only when someone’s animal became sick