126 

friendly tribes. In this scenario the extended line of communications of 
Indians reaching to contact our defences could be severely disrupted by the 
Bengali young men working with the Army as volunteers. Such a situation 
would have resulted in a totally different outcome. 
 Chittagong area could still be part of Pakistan if bulk of non Bengali 
population, now languishing in slums of Dacca for so long, was shifted to 
the area in the months of September to November 1971. With friendly 
tribes and common Bengali people not supporting break up of Pakistan, this 
was a viable option even if rest of East Pakistan had to become Bangladesh. 
But men at the helm of affairs even at Eastern Command lacked that vision. 
 On 16 December 1971 the message received on wireless nets by the units 
scattered all over the country, was that of ceasefire. The units were told to 
concentrate at specified locations. 
 As we concentrated at different locations after the 'ceasefire' we were told  
that since we will be in transit for move to Pakistan through India we were 
to hand over our weapons to Indian Army. It was after sometime in Indian 
camps that we realised that we were in for a long time. 
 The Indians treated us with utmost propriety till we landed inside India in 
their camps, a calculated step on their part to complete move without 
trouble. After reaching their camps, they were mean and ruthless, killing 
anyone trying to escape as it happened in Camp 25. 
 Mr. Bhutto along with his delegation stormed out of UN Security Council 
session instead of discussing a Polish Resolution which asked for ceasefire 
and transfer of power to elected representatives in East Pakistan. He had 
delayed his arrival in New York to attend crucial Security Council 
proceedings by two days when he stayed in CIA headquarters in 
Switzerland being 'indisposed'. He delayed his move to New York, waiting 
for progress of Indian troops closing in on undefended Dacca. 
 Polish Resolution would have averted surrender and its consequences but 
Bhutto was not sure of his position when orderly transfer of power to