213 

twenty five years i.e. after assassination of Rajiv Gandhi in 1989 a single Party, the 
Hindu fundamentalist Bhartaia Janata Party (BJP) has been brought into position 
of forming government at the Centre without need of seeking coalitions. In a year 
long election campaign involving unprecedentedly large amounts of money Mr 
Naredera Modi, projected as a strong leader has been brought to power in India 
by global capitalist to serve their interests.  Mr Modi, the longest serving Chief 
Minister of Gujrat State i.e. since 2001 till these elections, is responsible for 
genocide of Muslims in Gujrat’s capital Ahmadabad in 2002. Muslims in India and 
other minority religious groups are apprehensive of his Hindu extremist 
credentials, a cause of real concern. Recent incidents of communal tensions, ban 
on cow slaughter causing deaths of Muslims at the hands of Hindu mobs are 
ominous signs pointing towards more violence and unrest in a large nuclear 
armed country. 
It is evident that the Zionist driven Capitalism juggernaut to control the world is 
rolling on, the Indian tycoons now important players as partners of the Global 
Capitalists cabal.  Will India overcome its divisive fissures and progress as a strong 
united country or revert back to 1996 situation is the question that will be 
answered in coming years. 
Had there been no war in 1965 between India and Pakistan, there was strong 
possibility of India being fragmented into its natural divisions that have existed 
since thousands of years. That war initiated by some characters holding important 
positions in Pakistan was followed by events that led to break up of Pakistan in 
1971. Since confrontation with Pakistan has helped India to manage and 
overcome its internal problems it is imperative for Pakistan to adopt policies and 
take measure to ensure that India cannot use external threat card from Pakistan 
any more.  India’s propensity and practice to ‘invent’ events blaming Pakistan of 
terrorist attacks that gave it excuse for mobilising and moving forces on the 
borders more than once during the past must be vigorously exposed through 
forceful diplomatic efforts and effective media campaigns. 
India’s nuclear explosion on Pakistan’s borders in 1974 forced Pakistan to adopt 
nuclear weapons option turning South Asia into a high risk region, a serious threat 
to regional peace. Pakistan’s proposes to establish a Strategic Restraint Regime in