6 

Prologue 
No claim of erudition, literary merit or pretence of sagacity prompts me to write 
the following account. The stimulus in undertaking this demanding endeavour is 
to state some facts which would help negate false perceptions about the tragic 
events in erstwhile East Pakistan during that fateful year – 1971. Being one of 
about thirty four thousand armed forces personnel who spent over two years in 
Prisoners Of War (POW) camps in India, I have felt extreme frustration and 
helplessness on vicious lies about proceedings of that tumultuous period resulting 
in breakup of Pakistan, the largest Muslim country of the world. 
While the number of prisoners was exaggerated to a preposterous figure aimed at 
denigrating Pakistan Army, the atrocities attributed to men of the Army are the 
greatest falsehood propagated and pursued even after over forty years of that 
catastrophic event. Every year around 16 December the local press has been 
derisively writing about the disgrace of a military defeat, despite the fact that 
those men, who performed their task beyond the call of duty were abandoned 
with a purpose. The breakup of our country was caused by factors other than the 
result of military operations. It will become evident from events described in this 
narrative that the plan to dismember our country was hatched in West Pakistan 
by those people who did not see their chance of coming to or retaining power in a 
united Pakistan. They used military operation as catalyst to expedite 
implementation of their plan. They got ready support from outside forces with 
India in the lead, instigating, training and launching terrorist groups from their soil 
into East Pakistan, followed by outright invasion to wind up the plan.  
The theme to demonise the contingent of Pakistan Army trapped in East Pakistan 
is fully exposed by Dr Sarmila Bose in her book ‘DEAD RECKONING - Memories of 
the 1971 Bangladesh War’ published in 2011. A research scholar of impeccable 
credentials, her conclusions are result of detailed investigation of events by 
interviewing accusers of murders and atrocities, visiting sites of reported crimes 
to find details from people of those areas and questioning concerned officers of 
Pakistan Army. She has been travelling to Pakistan and Bangladesh in connection 
with her research spanning over a period of some years (2003 to 2006). She 
concludes that the claims of killings attributed to Pakistan Army during 1971 are