86 

Shah told him to convey directly to CO 34 Punjab to take up position on Karatoya 
River south of Birganj. As he was taking time to encode the message using slidex 
keys, the GOC was getting impatient. Since both of them belonged to same area, 
District Chakwal, General Nazar told Major Mirza in typical Chakwali dialect 
something like,  
‘Mirzia unj ta toon Bara efficient ban Na ain, hun wela aaya ae tan teri 
khoti khub gai ay'.11 
Abdul Haq Mirza was an enthusiastic man whose cheerfulness was infectious. He 
radiated vitality affecting all those around him. Alas, he, a man of great potential 
got wasted away retiring soon after repatriation in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel, 
a casualty of adverse circumstances. 
With commendable organisational acumen, unit broke contact with enemy to 
complete the move during night 3/4 December 1971. By morning of 4 December 
the unit was busy in preparing defensive positions astride bridge on River 
Karatoya south of Birganj. All its ammunition and essential stores had been taken 
out during the night due to meticulous work of our Quartermaster, Captain Shafiq 
Sarwar Malik, an officer of outstanding abilities. On reaching the new position 
south of Birganj it was realised that Thakurgaon thermal power station had not 
been disabled before withdrawal. Captain Zahid Nawaz Janjua was told to go back 
and disable the power station. Despite presence of the Indians in Thakurgaon, 
Captain Zahid with his party completed the assigned mission and rejoined unit 
when fighting at the new position was going on. 
The Indians started their move southwards from Thakurgaon and made contact 
with our small detachments placed successively astride the main road to delay 
their advance These detachments delayed the Indians for about two days before 
the Indians contacted our new position by 6 December. The Indians started their 
attacks while the unit was still working to develop the defensive positions. Next 
three days tested the mettle of 34 Punjabis in fighting from a hastily prepared 
position against a divisional size enemy force under Brigadier Kathpalia. The 

11Translation would be (You claim to be very efficient but in a time of crisis you seem to have bogged 
down in a quagmire).