255 

limit of human endurance stretched too far. Only Pakistanis could do it. This 
operation neutralized our adversaries’ attempt to denuclearize Pakistan for the 
present. Their efforts will continue, demanding constant vigil and counter 
measures to prevent it. 
After completion of operations in Malakand-Swat during summer months of 
2009, the Army carried out an operation in South Waziristan in September 2009 
that successfully eliminated most of the human bomb factories, reducing 
incidents of suicide attacks. The terrorists shifted to other places in to continue 
their operations for some years till another major operation was launched in 2014 
in North Waziristan, Khyber and some other areas.   
The Army deployed on the western borders is doing hard fighting against 
desperate terrorists with suicidal mind set entrenched in difficult mountainous 
terrain for so many years by now. These operations, if documented, will be 
valuable lessons in small unit actions and counter insurgency operations in worst 
possible environments. The spirit, audacity and skill in dealing with situations 
shown by the Pakistan’s security forces have thwarted diabolical plans of the 
global powers to denuclearise, pulverise and dismantle Pakistan. Their efforts 
however continue that demand appropriate counter measures, a continuous 
work. 
Ongoing Operations – ‘Operation Zarb e Azb’ 
On 16 December 2014 a group of terrorists entered Army Public School Peshawar 
and went on killing spree resulting in death of about one hundred and fifty 
children and the teaching staff.  It sent shock waves throughout the Pakistan 
jolting the political elite to action. As emergent measure, a compressive National 
Action Plan was formulated by the government in consultation with all major 
political parties’ leadership. The Army started its much stalled operation in North 
Waziristan and Khyber Agencies going into areas considered inaccessible since 
ages. Pakistan Air Force made signal contribution in targeting terrorist’s hideouts 
along Pak- Afghan border to help the Army in clearing and occupying the areas. 
The operation is still in progress aimed at elimination of terrorism menace from 
the country for good. Operations in Balochistan, urban areas of Karachi and rest