142 

graphic details of activity in some areas of Karachi that are declared ‘out of 
bounds’ for troops. 
Governance in the tribal areas was based on a very simple structure. Overall in 
charge of the Agency was the Political Agent (PA), an officer of the central 
government carefully selected for his experience, maturity and suitability, to 
manage the unruly tribes. He worked through tribal elders known as Maliks 
representing their sub tribes. The affairs were decided in meetings known as Jirga 
of these tribal Maliks presided over by the PA. He had his assistants to help in 
administration and the Levis Force, enrolled from local tribesmen, performed 
normal police functions. Scouts were a backup force for the PA to enforce his 
decisions when use of such force became indispensable. 
I served with the Scouts for a short period of about three months. Before joining 
them I had appeared in the Staff Course Entrance Examination. Its result was 
announced in late October or November and having qualified I was required to 
join the course at Quetta by mid December 1976. During this brief period my stay 
with SWS a significant event was the visit of Prime Minister Mr. Z A Bhutto to the 
Agency. He had started his tour of the tribal areas from the north, most 
inauspiciously. The Assistant Political Agent overseeing his 
reception 
arrangements at the helipad got killed in a bomb blast on the first day of his 
extended tour. In South Waziristan, coming from the north, he was first to land at 
Ladha, in the heart of Mehsudribe’s territory, have lunch there and then move to 
Wana for night stay. At both places he was to address selected group of people. 
As Second-in-Command of the SWS, I along with five platoons of Scouts was to 
provide security at Ladha. A couple of days before the event I moved to Ladha 
Fort located on the edge of a flat area. This small strongly built fort during British 
period overlooked a fertile valley below to the east and had a low ridge running 
west of the flat area. In mountainous terrains, such pieces of flat land are few. 
The fort was occupied by a small detachment of Scouts for its care and 
maintenance.  
On the morning of the appointed day lot of people started gathering on the ridge 
overlooking helipad area and the venue for lunch. Although political staff had 
conveyed that no one will carry weapons and only invited people will come to the