20 

Hafiz Sadiq, apart from reciting the Holy Quran, had melodious voice for songs 
and used to remain in great demand on these occasions. Folk dances by men on 
the sound of 'Dhol', the drum, were performed with enthusiasm and verve. 
Hussain Dholi (called Senu; many of us did not know his real name nor bothered 
to find out as distorting names was normal practice) was the only one from village 
who remained quite busy and his work was supplemented occasionally by getting 
more 'Dholis' from the neighbouring village Akwal when required, particularly on 
the occasions of bull races.  
Husain Dholi had also to provide his services to the women performing their 
dances. Otherwise men were not to be seen around the place where women 
would gather to perform 'Gharoli' a set of female folk dances, an important part 
of the marriage proceedings. Women would go to the village 'cultural center' in 
the afternoon, carrying a small size decorated earthen pitcher, a small 'Ghara' to 
perform 'Gharoli', their session ending before sunset. Although that small pitcher 
is extinct, the practice has been immortalized by our great singer Aabida Parveen 
in her popular song 'main yar the Gharoli bhardi' meaning that I dance for my 
friend. This 'cultural center' was an open space with a rainwater pond at one 
corner of it, located on eastern end of the village under massive 'Pipal' trees. 
During Eid days a 'Mela' would be organised at this place. Main entertainments 
during the Mela at this spot were competition to carry weights, swings for 
children and stalls of various eatables, mainly sweetmeats. Groups of acrobats 
would also visit occasionally to display their skills like walking on a rope and other 
likewise items. 
Occasionally some theatre groups called ‘Nutt’ would be invited to perform in the 
villages, a group from village Hamok in Khushab being very popular in the area in 
the fifties. They would stage traditional dramas based on the love stories like Heer 
Ranjha and Sohni Mahinwal etc. The show would be arranged in the fields during 
the nights, particularly around dried water storage ponds called ‘Banns’, because 
its layout facilitated the view of spectators. People from adjoining villages would 
also come over to enjoy the performance which would last till the time of Fajar 
prayers. In late fifties theatre groups of Alam Lohar and Inayat Bhatti started 
coming to Talagang to perform, their shows attracting lot of people. Once a story