281 

corruption and embezzlement of State funds to recover their money spent and a 
lot more. To solve this issue, the expenditure on modest election campaigns 
should be borne by the political parties through their funds and not the 
individuals contesting election. Main strength of campaign should be the 
manifesto/program of the party fielding the candidates. Guidelines by Election 
Commission should be provided to restrict the expenditure and a strict check to 
ensure implementation. The same criteria should apply to elections for the 
National parliament and provincial assemblies (till present provinces are replaced 
with smaller provinces that will not have assemblies).  
Community Development 
Community development (CD) is a broad term applied to a structured 
intervention that gives communities greater control over the conditions that 
affect their lives. Exhaustive literature is available on the practices, experiences 
and results of community development efforts all over the world since last about 
two hundred years.In Pakistan a successful model of community development is 
available in the form of Agha Khan Rural Support Programme (AKRSP) in Gilgit-
Baltistan area. Efforts by the Government to replicate that model have not 
succeeded mainly due to lack of commitment and other inadequacies. 
Without going into the details of this very vast subject, suggested methodology to 
implement community development projects is as follows: 
 Community development should be the main responsibility of the local 
governments to be planned and supervised at the union council level.  
 The development programmes should cover rural areas as urban areas are 
being adequately managed through the civic bodies. 
 Village is taken as unit for community development programme.  
 The programme should cover essential aspects of the community needs like 
sustainable livelihoods, health, education,water and sanitation etc. 
 A motivator/CD professional at each union council equipped with the 
background knowledge and leadership capacity is tasked to initiate the