124 

 Indian invasion came from three directions i.e. west, east and north. From 
south, the sea was completely dominated by Indians and the ports of East 
Pakistan effectively blockaded. General A A K Niazi, the commander of 
troops in East Pakistan acted on orders of GHQ to defend every inch of 
land, a most unrealistic directive. This directive did not allow him to deploy 
available troops to counter invasion which had become very clear when 
Indian troops had completed their concentrations on three sides of the 
borders by October 1971. 
 Disobeying orders is a dilemma at the time of crises. I have two examples 
which will elaborate the point. During war Chittagong was to be defended 
as fortress by withdrawing troops deployed in the sector in counter 
insurgency role. Special Service Group (SSG) troops deployed in Chittagong 
Hill Tracts area had a chance to cross over to Burma when they were 
ordered to come back to Chittagong for fortress defence. These highly 
trained troops are not meant to be used for static defences. In our POW 
Camp No 25, Major Mohammad Saeed (later DIG Police) a famous 
commando would repent on not availingthe chance of escaping to 
Burma.He blamed his fellow company commander Major Mohammad Iqbal 
(later Brigadier, Punjab Regt) on persuading him to obey the command.  
Conforming to norms of service, Lieutenant Colonel Hanif Malik, 
commanding the SSG troops followed orders given by Brigadier Atta Malik, 
getting his troops to fall back to Chittagong. Conversely Major Asif Ali Rizvi 
of my unit posted to EPCAF at Cox’s Bazar on the border with Burma 
crossed over to Burma when he felt isolated from Chittagong. He reached 
Pakistan and was awarded with gallantry award of Tamgha-e-Jurrat (TJ). 
Later, when POWs came back, Brigadier Atta made it a point that the 
officer be punished for disobeying orders to reach Chittagong and so Major 
Rizvi was deprived of the award. 
 In hindsight one can say that a man of General Niazi’s rank should have 
taken decisions according to the situation confronting him, particularly 
when nobody at GHQ was listening to him and his problems. Nevertheless 
the way he was singled out, demonized, punished and deprived of earned