287 

OUTLINE OF A NEW ORDER 
As brought out in the preceding chapters, Pakistan’s geo-strategic location and its 
intrinsic strength in manpower and resources brought it under focus of Global 
Capitalist Establishment.After the two World Wars in first half of twentieth 
century, the imperialist power’s control over different parts of the world has been 
replaced by a small group; call them ‘Zionists’ or any name who have turned the 
world into ‘global village’ exploiting global resources through their puppets placed 
to rule developing countries. I would refer to this group as Global Capitalist 
Establishment (GCE).  They control money supply through banks like US Federal 
Reserve, World Bank, International Monitory Fund, Asian Development Bank etc. 
Based in New York (Wall Street)-London (City District) they conduct their affairs 
through US and British Governments and their intelligence agencies. 
The Global Capitalists gained control over Pakistan’s decision making process, 
using it as pawn on chessboard of their global games. First bolstered to contain 
communist threat, then cut to size for easier management, used in dismantling 
USSR and then a battle ground in mopping up operations against ‘Jihadi’ 
networks, the country has been adversely affected in catering to global powers 
interests.   Because of external manipulations and serious internal imbalances 
aggravated by attitude of ruling classes the country continues to be a fragile State 
threatened by further fragmentation and dismemberment.  
Before suggesting a course of action to neutralise threats and recover from the 
spin, a brief recount of Pakistan’s journey from the perspective of a common 
citizen who was part of this voyage would be in order;  
 Although Pakistan had joined western camp in the post-World War II 
balance of power arrangements, the GCE could not develop desired clout 
with Prime Minister Liaqat Ali Khan who was murdered. Frequent change of 
rulers after him got Pakistan into joining formal pacts like SEATO in 1954 
and Baghdad Pact (re-designated as CENTO) in 1955 against perceived 
communist threat from China and USSR. 
 Overcoming initial hiccups, Pakistan made unprecedented overall progress 
in a few years under Ayub Khan’s rule. The country and its people enjoyed