254 

local elders, the ‘Maliks’ and established sanctuaries luring young boys to carry 
out suicide attacks in Pakistan.   
In 2009, a situation had developed when Islamabad was being threatened to be 
occupied by the so called Taliban according to our adversaries’ game plan against 
Pakistan.  Pakistan Army was tasked to dislodge Taliban terrorists who had 
entrenched themselves in the vast mountainous area of Malakand Division, had 
reached northern end of Tarbela Dam reservoir and were threatening Islamabad. 
Large numbers of religious seminaries in Islamabad were another source of 
supplying manpower to support Taliban in case they could reach the capital. 
Some of their sponsors were gleefully waiting to occupy Islamabad providing 
opportunity to global powers for action to denuclearize Pakistan. There were 
reports of foreign forces ready to undertake the mission, conveniently placed 
across the Gulf. Inside the country, particularly Islamabad and surroundings there 
was large scale presence of organizations like ‘Blackwater’; over four hundred 
houses in Islamabad hired to lodge these groups.  
The situation was grim, the task daunting and consequences of failure 
devastating. The terrorists had taken a few years to come into such threatening 
position. uninterrupted by the provincial government led by sympathizing Mullahs 
and Musharraf led central government who had abdicated their responsibilities; 
allowing some rascals to operate their own radio stations spitting venom and 
terrorizing the public in their occupied areas.  
Armed with clarity of purpose defined by the national parliament reflecting 
national will, the security forces took just about three months to dislodge the 
terrorists from vast mountainous areas by imaginative plans worked out by 
competent generals, executed by the officers and men with unmatched velour. 
No Army of present day world can equal the performance demonstrated by 
Pakistan armed forces that completed this operation in amazingly short time. 
Large scale casualties of young officers signify intensity of fighting, the success 
ensured by the young leaders leading from front. With known capability of 
airlifting one infantry battalion at a time, a three times more force was lifted by 
helicopters to put on heights occupied by the terrorists. Helicopter pilots who 
started their machines before dawn switched these off by almost midnight, the