259 

Overcoming Unrest in Balochistan 
Balochistan, about 45% landmass of Pakistan, area wise its largest province is 
sparsely populated. Only about 6 million people are living in its vast expanses 
because of peculiar geographical conditions although population statistics 
continue to be contested by the two major groups, the Pushtuns and Balochs for 
obvious interests. Broad distribution of population is that the Pushtuns are living 
in the northern and eastern parts contiguous to the tribal areas of Khyber 
Pukhtunkhaw (KPK) extending west from South Waziristan Agency. Other parts of 
the province are inhabited by Balochs, Barohis, Nowsherwanis (ancient Medes 
from Iranian plateau) Jats and Makrani people. Quetta city is mainly inhabited by 
Pushtuns, a group of Hazara tribe and settlers from other parts of the country. 
Some Baloch families have also moved in western part of Quetta valley during 
early seventies.  
There is lot of ethnic, linguistic and cultural diversity amongst the people living in 
the Province that is inappropriately named if ethnicity is taken as basis of naming 
provinces. The Balochs in Balochistan are much lesser in number than people of 
other ethnic groups.  In fact Balochs in Sindh and Southern Punjab are more in 
numbers that those residing in areas that are part of Balochistan. 
The Province experienced occasional unrest in parts of it since 1948. History of 
this unrest starts with Khan of Kalat’s brother, Mr. Abdul Karim Khan’s 
disagreement with his brother’s decision to accede to Pakistan. It remained 
confined to a small area around Kalat and died down soon without affecting other 
areas or tribes. During the early seventies, parts of Marri and Mengal tribes 
following their ‘Sardars’; Mr. Khair Bux Marri and Atta ullah Mengal created 
unrest in their respective areas when Mr. Z A Bhutto came to power in what was 
left of Pakistan after the 1971 war with India.  An Army operation was launched in 
1973-4 by Mr. Bhutto’s government in Marri tribes’ area and around Wadh – 
Khuzdar where a part of Mengal tribe was creating unrest. The situation was soon 
brought under control. The Province enjoyed peace for a few decades till the US 
landed in Afghanistan. Since then we are faced with unrest spreading to most 
parts of the Baloch inhabited areas of the Province.