171 

Photocopy of a page from the record showed details like the number of people, 
from where they were coming and where they intended to go, the truck number 
etc.  
The civil administration was at a loss on arrival of troops because they had not 
asked for troops in aid of civil power as is the practice in dealing with unrest 
beyond control of other law enforcing agencies. Mr Kamran Lashari, the Deputy 
Commissioner (DC) Sukker did take some days to call on the GOC after getting 
clearance from his superiors. In fact the administration and the provincial 
government were involved in ethnic cleansing, which had started gaining 
momentum. Having evicted such families who were living scattered in upper 
Sindh, now the attacks on settlements of ethnic non Sindhis were started. Had it 
been allowed to continue, the settlements in lower Sindh, in districts like Sanghar 
and Badin would also have been evicted. Reportedly when General Aslam Beg the 
COAS was asked by Prime Minister as to why troops had been moved in the area, 
his reply was that since 16 Division, responsible for internal security duties in the 
area was deployed in their battle locations on borders because of tension with 
India, there was a need to keep the lines of communications and logistic bases 
secure which were getting disturbed by increasing unrest. 
On arrival in the area, Headquarters (HQ) 5 Corps at Karachi started asking for the 
situation report. Since the GHQ had moved us on training, there being no request 
from the civil government for troops in aid of civil power, it created confusion 
initially as the Division was part of 12 Corps at Quetta. HQ 5 Corps responsible for 
the internal security duties for the province of Sindh provided us with the three 
types of lists. One was regarding the dacoit gangs operating in different areas, a 
fairly comprehensive list with names of gang leaders, gang members and their 
areas of operations. From the list one could make out that it was a very elaborate 
set up covering whole of upper Sindh which in the names of dacoits was actually a 
force capable of converting into insurgent force. The second list given was that of 
‘Patharidars’ a term used for protectors of these dacoit gangs. This included all big 
landlords like Jatois, Pagaras, Mahars, Mumtaz Bhutto and others. It was a well 
known fact that these big landlords were patronizing criminals for use against 
their disobedient and unmanageable tenants, the ‘Haris’, a tool used to terrorize