232 

theterrorists established parallel government in vast areas of Malakand region 
with threats to reach Islamabad. The Pakistan Army dislodged them from the vast 
mountainous areas in 2009 in a swift operation carried out with great skill, 
audacity and sacrifices to remove the threat. This feat, which no Army of the 
present day world can match surprised our enemies and overturned the whole 
game the US was playing with Pakistan. Their aim to take out Pakistan’s nuclear 
assets on the pretext of Islamabad going into the hands of Taliban was effectively 
checked. The US was reported to have kept their force ready in the Gulf area to 
act in such eventuality when Pakistani Taliban posed threat to take over 
Islamabad.  The plan to denuclearize Pakistan was averted for the present, for 
which the TTP was being relied upon to provide an excuse for direct US 
intervention with their forces to occupy Islamabad. A large area in our Capital has 
been occupied by the US Embassy, very unusual for any Embassy in the world that 
can provide residential facilities for thousands of people/troops. 
Mission Achieved 
US military intervention in our region starting with Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait and 
resulting chain of events was based on deceit and unabashed lies. The propagated 
cause of this intervention had no relevance to actual agenda i.e. twin goals of 
controlling energy resources of Iraq and Central Asia as well as eliminating 
possible threats to the State of Israel. After decades of bloody conflict US, rather 
the powers launching US forces have achieved success. The Iraqi Army, first 
strengthened by US to contain spread of influence of revolutionary Iran in early 
nineteen eighties that could pose threat to Israel has been completely destroyed. 
Iraq has been destabilised to an extent that there are more chances of its 
fragmentation than recovery towards a normal functional state. Other countries 
of the region already having made peace with the State of Israel, possible threats 
to Israel have been effectively eliminated. Long term contracts on extremely 
favourable conditions have been secured to exploit the vast oil resources of Iraq 
creating a monopoly to exclude other competitors.  
The US, Israel and the western powers allied to US in fomenting trouble have 
escalated the conflict and turmoil in Muslim region by dismantling Libya and 
creating a fresh force calling itself Daish/ISIS operating in Syria, Iraq, Turkey and in