296 

gas and energy resources, preventing misuse and theft, rationing of critical items 
and strict controls over wastage of resources will help to counter coercive 
measure by western powers if applied. 
Expenditure on Elections 
A serious issue is politics made into a lucrative business. To eliminate this curse it 
is essential that the candidate offering themselves for elections do not spendtheir 
own money to get elected. At the level of Union Councils elections the 
communities can pick up their representative during consultative sessions held in 
mosques without getting into exercise of voting through ballot boxes. For district 
councils and National Assembly elections the Political parties should bear the 
expenses on elections of their candidates from their party funds. In the suggested 
system, the provinces as administrative units will not have an assembly thus 
making the electoral process simpler and economical. Main strength of election 
campaigns should be manifesto and programs of the parties rather than personal 
efforts of the candidates to win votes by spending money on lavish meals, favours 
and money on buying votes.  Election expenditure should be strictly over watched 
by the Election Commission. 
Summary  
The overall scenario that should emerge from these changes in ascending order is 
envisioned as follows;  
 Union Council, provided with resources and delegated responsibility, will 
serve as hub of ‘Human Resource Development’ and will ensure that 
essential needs of the people are met. 
 Effective judicial system, by placing high powered judges at Union Council 
level and revising judicial process as explained in preceding paragraphs will 
provide timely justice to ensure peace in the society. 
 Tehsils Headquarters will be made to concentrate on revenue collection, 
keeping records on lands, population and statistics of all kinds on the 
pattern of Gazetteers maintained during the British period. 
 The main coordinating headquarters will be the District. The District Nazim 
will ensure smooth function of the government. A strong team of