184 

The Indians in their seasonal expeditions started descending the Saltoro Range 
and came in contact with our civilian population, the local police being informed 
with proof of Indian currency. This created alarm and it was decided to place 
troops on the passes on Saltoro Range.  
In 1984, before start of summers, Director Military Operations (DMO) at the GHQ, 
Brigadier Ghulam Muhammad Malik along with Brigadier Ajmal, Commander 62 
Brigade at Skardu went up in a helicopter to have a look over Saltoro Range to 
determine places where troops could be deployed. As they reached the area, 
their helicopter was fired upon by Indians who had occupied the passes much 
before start of normal movement season in that area. This was utter surprise, a 
most unexpected happening and an indication that the Indians had access to 
information of our plan, thus pre-empting Pakistan Army in occupying the area. In 
haste, our Army totally unprepared to operate on those heights placed few units 
of the NLI Regiment and regular infantry units opposite Indians posts, obviously at 
disadvantageous positions. Since troops were not equipped for the climatic 
conditions, nor trained or acclimatized, we suffered lot of casualties because of 
frost bite and other adverse effects of high altitude, till appropriate clothing and 
equipment was provided and operating procedures streamlined which took time. 
Bunji was very hot in summers particularly for those who would approach it from 
the Astore valley; the only route to Gilgit region from the Indian sub continent till 
a route was opened through Babusar Pass and later making of the Karakoram 
Highway (KKH). The old route started from Kashmir valley passing over Kamri and 
Burzil passes to descend into Bunji Das. ‘Das’ is plain areas on banks of rivers as 
known in local parlance. British officers who wrote their accounts described this 
heat very explicitly in catchy phrases, some of these I would use in opening of my 
briefings to visitors with desired effect to create interest in what I had to say 
subsequently. 
The Centre had created lot of attraction for visitors which was fully exploited by 
FCNA to impress the Army Chiefs. In 1992, General Asif Nawaz visited. After 
seeing the training and administrative facilities, he decided to bring the Prime 
Minister for a visit. All our preparations to receive the Prime Minister on 17 
August 92 were wasted because weather remained blocked for that whole week.