180 

Ismailis, Sunnis and Nur Bakhshis living peacefully for ages. The Sunnis were 
mainly in Chilas District, the Shia’s predominantly in Baltistan and Nagar, the 
Ismailis in Hunza and Punial and Nur Bakhsi’s, small in number in some parts of 
Baltistan. In Gilgit, people of every sect were residing in the town. During the 
years of sectarian tension, at start of summers every year a vehicle would 
suddenly appear in the main bazaar spraying bullets resulting in killing of some 
persons. That was enough to spread terror and the whole tourist season would go 
without much business because of the effects it created nationwide. The 
terrorists were never caught by local police.  
Winter months were generally a lull period, when except for essential training 
activities and routine there was nothing much to do. It was a good opportunity to 
get acquainted with the place, environment and problems before summers which 
was a busy period. On the occasion of Eid, I asked Subedar Major (SM) about 
arrangements for Eid prayers. He told me that there was no such practice in the 
Centre of offering Eid prayers; Sunnis joined the villagers of Bunji in their village 
mosque and the Shias and Ismailies went mostly to Gilgit. I told the SM to make 
arrangements for offering Eid prayers centrally at one place, an unprecedented 
event hitherto. It was most satisfying that persons of all four sects prayed 
together and continued to do so on all subsequent occasions of Eid during my 
stay there. In my monthly address to troops during Durbar, I would conclude the 
proceedings by a word of advice to all that sects were created because of political 
reasons and not due to any religious consideration, and sectarian differences 
were always exploited for political reasons.  
Centre Commandant enjoyed a prestigious position in the entire area because he 
could give employment to a large number of young men each year. Being 
successor of the Scouts, the Centre was also responsible to look after interests of 
retired persons of Gilgit Scouts, Northern Scouts and Karakorum Scouts which had 
merged to form the NLI Regt. These people, advanced in age, were quite 
influential in their communities. They proved very useful in joining our effort to 
overcome sectarian tensions in the area. The Centre, under the direction of Major 
General Zahir ul Islam Abbasi, Commander FCNA, organized nine ex-servicemen 
rallies in different valleys ending with a grand rally at Gilgit. The aim of holding