291 

Bhutto systematically destroyed the ‘Establishment’ by making it subservient to 
Head of the Government i.e. the Prime Minister rather than remaining servants of 
the State of Pakistan. The Presidents during Bhutto’s and Sharif Governments 
were weak persons looking up to the Prime Ministers for survival in office. This 
has made the State of Pakistan weak and self-serving individuals of different hues 
strong. To give just one example, if Pakistan is groping in the dark for so many 
years now and its industrial and agricultural capacity destroyed due to high rates 
of electricity, it is because the ‘establishment’ was not working according to rules 
and regulations that could prevent accepting wrong terms in contracts with 
Independent Power Projects (IPP) by Benazir-Zardai duo. Sharifs surpass Zardari in 
crimes against the people of Pakistan due to absence of checks by ‘Establishment’ 
working for the State of Pakistan.  
The only element of ‘Establishment’ still left to be destroyed is the Pakistan Army 
that miraculously still survives despite consistent efforts by Bhuttos, Zardari, 
Sharifs and their foreign backers. A major effort to demonize Pakistan Army has 
been made by a strong section of Pakistan’s media in its wild and disruptive talk 
shows and poisonous writings. Staged during prime time, television programs 
have fortified public ignorance about the role of State institutions, the 
‘Establishment’ that every State needs to function. Instead the media has tried to 
reinforce wrong perception, restricting use of term ‘Establishment’ only for the 
Military in negative connotations.  
Need of Basic Reforms  
After brief review of our journey thus far, we can understand that Pakistan 
urgently needs basic reforms. Essential steps as suggested in following paragraphs 
can help the country to stabilize, removing looming dangers and threats to its 
survival as a State, resuming the path to stability, peace, progress and prosperity 
in the lives of its citizen. 
Objectives 
• 
Unbridle people’s potential by involving them in decision making 
at local level in utilization of available resources for development 
and improvement of their living conditions.