221 

He came back with help from Brigadier Amir Muhammad Khan, my CO in East 
Pakistan who was posted at important position in Karachi. Later Brigadier Amir’s 
brother Brigadier Ghulam Abbas who was at Nawab Shah commanding 34 Punjab 
during 1984-5 would recall about the conditions Asif Zardari’s was in, an 
insignificant non entity mired in petty affairs. By choosing him as her spouse, 
Benazir Bhutto, aspiring to rule Pakistan failed to make prudent decision on such 
vital personal matter. Or maybe she wanted it that way. 
Benazir and Zardari duo put Pakistan into deep crises through their shady deals at 
the cost of country’s interests. Changing the ratio of electricity generation from 
cheap hydro power to expensive imported furnace oil through Independent 
Power projects (IPPs), presumably extracting huge amounts as kickbacks was one 
such action by the duo that has put Pakistan in deep economic crises. The terms 
decided unduly favoured private power producers, the State paying huge 
amounts to these companies as capacity charges as well as very high rates per 
unit that deprived the country of affordable energy.  
General Pervez Musharraf 
In 1999, General Musharraf removed the prime minister and took over 
government declaring martial law. During his about eight year’s rule the 
Americans occupied Afghanistan. Musharraf provided them all the facilities they 
asked for like air bases, air corridors and logistic support through the country 
using road network from Karachi port to Afghanistan.  
Earlier in 1999 as Army Chief he had launched Kargil operation without consulting 
even the Corps Commanders. This operation helped the Indians to overcome 
grave political crisis, enabling them to form stable government which they were 
unable to do since 1996 even after repeated elections. The results of this 
operation in Pakistan were disastrous as the civilian government was replaced by 
Musharraf’s dictatorial rule. Kargil strengthened India and eroded Pakistan’s 
image as a stable nuclear state weakening its position in the world as subsequent 
events unfolded. 
It may not be mere coincidence that before momentous events of the Iranian 
Revolution and Russian occupation of Afghanistan in 1979 General Zia ul Haq had