201 

difficulties reportedly created by the Chinese authorities in transporting goods 
through their area. The people are apprehensive of China’s domination replacing 
the Russians. The Russians had largely left the country with some people still 
residing in Bishkek. Large gathering on Friday’s congregational prayers indicated 
revival of religious character of the country after prolonged Soviet Union’s 
Godless rule.  
Since there was no direct flight from Pakistan to Bishkek, for the first trip I had to 
use the services of China Airline. This required a visa for China because two days 
stay was forced at Urumchi before boarding another plane from there to Bishkek. 
The return journey also involved same arrangements of staying at Urumchi the 
capital of Sinkiang province before reaching Islamabad. During stay at Urumchi I 
took a guided tour to visit the city particularly down town area where most of the 
local Muslim populations, the Uyghur’s are concentrated.  
During the second visit, I boarded a cargo plane from Karachi to reach Bishkek. 
This service was being operated by a Kyrgyz national on bi-weekly basis from 
Karachi. Since Mr Zahid had come to Pakistan and was using this flight, he had 
arranged for my travel with him. It took us about four hours to reach Bishkek. On 
return journey I came via New Delhi, staying within the airport premises for about 
five hours before boarding Air India flight for Lahore which took about forty 
minutes of flight time. During those hours of prime activity at the main airport of 
Indian Capital, I could not find a single attractive female to look at approvingly. 
The only consolation was somewhat tolerable Air India hostess during the short 
flight. Bollywood projects deceptive image of India. 
After successful running of the restaurant for about one year, differences 
developed between Ejaz Akmal and Mr Zahid ending the partnership and the 
business. Ejaz Akmal came back to Pakistan and died shortly afterwards. 
Working with ERRA 
On 8 October 2005 an earthquake of 7.62 magnitudes on the Richter scale caused 
extensive damage to life and property in parts of Khyber Pakhtunkhaw (KPK) and 
Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJ&K). It virtually paralyzed the organisational 
structure of nine districts; five in KPK i.e. Abbotabad, Mansehra, Battagram,