176 

Lure of Mountains 
Bunji 
Northern Light Infantry Centre is located at Bunji, about 55 kilometres south of 
Gilgit. Bunji, a small place on eastern bank of Indus River, was the last outpost of 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir till mid nineteenth century. From then on it 
served as staging point for launching further incursions by Kashmiri forces 
towards Gilgit. By mid nineteenth century the Kashmiri forces after some struggle 
succeeded in wresting control of Gilgit. After sometime the British decided to 
occupy this area to counter possible Russian incursions into this region. The 
British abandoned their first attempt of establishing residency (1877-1880) at 
Gilgit but again towards the end of nineteenth century (1889) British Residency at 
Gilgit was re-established. Gilgit was taken on lease from Maharaja of Kashmir 
from where the British expanded their control over Hunza and Nagar after some 
tough fighting. Apart from Gilgit, other small states and principalities in those 
inaccessible mountainous areas, like Nagar and Hunza towards east of Gilgit 
bordering China,  Punial, Gupis, Ashkoman, Yaseen towards west and Chilas 
towards south of Gilgit were administered by the British Resident in Gilgit. While 
Hunza and Nagar were ruled by hereditary rulers titled as ‘Mirs’, others 
principalities were ruled by governors titled as ‘Rajas’ appointed by the British. 
The lease period of British was yet to be completed when the momentous event 
of Independence of the sub continent from British rule took place in 1947.  
I recollected the tale of Subedar Abdul Rahman; senior JCO of my company when I 
joined 34 Punjab deployed on the ceasefire line in Dewa - Batala opposite Chamb 
Sector in June 1966, who marched from Jammu to Bunji as a young man, a Lance 
Naik in 6 J&K Regiment. I had listened to his adventures which seemed so distant, 
evoking romance of his exciting journey through difficulties and travails of 
traversing snow clad high mountain passes on foot. There was no mechanical 
transport in use in those days on the route taken by their unit to cross Burzil Pass 
and ultimately reach Bunji. His unit 6 J&K had its Headquarters and two 
companies, a Muslim Company commanded by Captain Hassan Khan and a Sikh 
Company comprising mostly recruits, located at Bunji. Its other companies were 
deployed at Skardu and elsewhere in Baltistan.