123 

 Movement in an area afflicted with insurgency environments needs special 
arrangements like moving in groups to deal with possible attacks and 
ambushes. No such need was ever felt throughout the period after 
clearance of opposition in the initial phase ending by last week of April 
1971. Till end of the war we could move in single vehicles never fearing or 
facing any threat from the population.  Even during war, the civilians saved 
Major General Nazar Hussain Shah, GOC 16 Div, and his party from being 
captured by Indians. 
 Our main concern was to ensure that rebels/ Mukti Bahini were denied 
establishing sanctuaries within our respective areas of responsibilities. To 
that end there was constant effort to reach out to the people, hold 
meetings and reassure the population that they had support of troops 
against any threat or intimidation from rebels. Because of these efforts, 
which kept us on the move most of the time, rebel activity was confined to 
areas near the borders in acts like laying mines on Katcha tracks, blowing 
up small culverts etc. Main threat while moving in the area was from land 
mines laid by rebels on tracks along borders. 
 By end April 1971, government writ had been restored in East Pakistan, 
creating conditions for resuming political process. Unfortunately the 
Government of Pakistan under General Yahya Khan was in a state of 
paralysis and had no intention to solve the problem. People around him like 
Z A Bhutto who saw no chance of coming to power in united Pakistan were 
working for breakup of the country to secure chance of ruling left over part 
of Pakistan. 
 Rumours or ‘langar gup’ since August 1971 was that GHQ considered these 
three Divisions in East Pakistan as written off. It was taken as a joke by 
naive junior officers like us but it proved true. 
 On declaration of war by Pakistan on 3 December, news was deliberately 
spread through command channels that Pakistan Army had captured 
Jammu. This joyful news proved wrong resulting in greater disappointment. 
Such cheap tactics by callous rulers caused unnecessary frustration.