249 

allotment of mere 76.2 acres of land. A retired Army Officer Lieutenant Colonel 
Nizam ud Din served its secretary for a long period making it a success story 
through his dedicated efforts. In nineteen sixties as I remember the young officers 
sold their rights for the price a scooter. Italian ‘Vespa’ brand scooters has come 
into use before motor cycles eased them out from the market after few years. 
The property dealers working in Karachi would visit cantonments in other parts of 
Pakistan and buy the rights fromofficers for paltry sums. Officers of the Army 
during nineteen sixties and seventies were not aware of material benefits lying in 
these plots for them in future. Most of us did not know that we were eligible to 
get plots, thinking that such befits come at the end of the service. Pakistan Army 
was not concerned with the scheme in any way for many years. No Army 
manpower or budget was ever used in the scheme. Later when the scheme 
expanded, a measure of supervision was provided through the local garrison 
commander to oversee its functioning.  
Seeing success of Karachi experience, similar schemes were launched, in Lahore in 
early eighties and for Rawalpindi/Islamabad starting in mid-nineties. Land for 
these schemes has been bought from land owners through money paid by the 
members and development undertaken on receipt of periodic installments paid 
by members. Retired personnel of the armed forces are employed in managing 
the schemes with top slots now held by serving officers. No State funds or State 
land have ever been used in these schemes. Some irregularities that came to light 
in these schemes were promptly addressed and corrective measures enforced. A 
major problem arose in Rawalpindi/Islamabad scheme courtesy Malik Riaz of 
Bahria Town with disastrous consequences for persons responsible from the 
Army.  A three star General had to commit suicide soon after retirement.  
Overall it has been a great service to the people of Pakistan with very small effort 
by the Army in organizing and patronizing these schemes that provide secure 
living for a large number of families, major population in DHAs being non-defense 
related citizens who bought the properties in these well managed schemes.   
Criticism on this account is therefore most unwarranted.