210 

India for about one thousand years till replaced by the British in nineteenth 
century as part of their global empire.  
In 1947 when the British left, India had leaders like Mahatma Gandhi, Mr. Jawahar 
Lal Nehru, Sardar Willabh Bhai Patel and other experienced men on the Indian 
scene during the ensuing period. A man of great caliber and charisma, Mr. 
Jawahar Lal Nehru as Prime Minister fully exploited the semblance of Indian unity 
created by the British to form the modern Indian state. All India Congress Party, 
well organised all over the sub continent striving to get independence from British 
rule was Nehru’s tool to wield political power. Soon after independence large 
parts of the new country, particularly the eastern parts like Assam, Nagaland, 
Mizoram started their struggle for independence from Delhi. Assam and the areas 
east of Bengal were never part of the Indian sub continent. Assam, an 
independent country was invaded by Burma (1817) and occupied for a few years 
when as result of First Anglo-Burmese war Assam, Manipur, Arakan and some 
other area was ceded to British by the Burmese in 1826. Burma itself came under 
the British rule as a province of British India in 1886 after Third Anglo-Burmese 
War and later declared a separate colony in 1937. Assam and areas east of Bengal 
were never part of India geographically or politically at any time in history. In 
Southern India the main regional political party, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam 
(DMK) was demanding an independent nation for Dravidians called Dravida Nadu 
consisting of areas that were covered under Madras Presidency during British 
rule. At one time there was armed resistance in twelve different regions against 
the central authority.   
Increasing internal turmoil was managed by the Indian rulers through initiating 
skirmishes on the Sino-Indian borders in 1962. After a short period of having very 
good relations with China with oft repeated slogans of ‘Hindi-Cheeni Bhai Bhai’ 
(Indian and Chinese are brothers) this was complete reversal in policy. The actions 
on both extremities of the long mountainous borders were initiated by the 
Indians and a great hype of external threat created with the basic aim of 
managing internal conflicts. The DMK changed its stance with this contrived 
threat from China in 1962, suspended its demand for independence and 
supported Indian government in raising funds for the war. When the war ended,