33 

On 6th September, when Indians crossed International borders in Lahore sector, 
Akhnur was just a few kilometers away from Mawanwali Khad, a seasonal nullah 
where our troops had reached. According to Brigadier Amjad Choudhry, who was 
commanding Corps Artillery allocated to the sector, Gen Yahya confided in him 
that Akhnur was not to be captured.He repeated the same to a team of Command 
and Staff College that interviewed him at his Harley Street residence in Rawalpindi 
before his death in 1980. To the questionon why he did not take Akhnur, he 
replied “Because I was ordered not to do it”. 
Failure to capture unoccupied Akhnur Bridge over River Chenab during initial 
offensive in Chamb Sector of Kashmir, the reasons for change of command and 
unnecessary rather deliberate delay breaking momentum of the operation 
continues to remain a mystery and subject of debate. The reason in my 
understanding is that the President as well as General Muhammad Musa had not 
contemplated or planned to initiate all-out war with India. Capture of an objective 
like Akhnur Bridge, the major link between Kashmir and India would have 
certainly provoked an all-out war that they wanted to avoid. Mr. Z A Bhutto the 
Foreign Minister has also given assurance that skirmishes will remain confined 
within disputed area of Kashmir. 
Against expectations of the National and Army leadership, the Indians crossed 
international borders on early morning of 6 September 1965 to attack Lahore. The 
troops from Chamb-Akhnur Sector were pulled out to counter Indian attacks 
launched against Sialkot on 8th September. Shortage of troops had been indicated 
by the Army Chief, General Muhammad Musa when operation to send infiltrators 
was in planning stage, apprehending escalation of conflict to an all out war. His 
demand of raising two more infantry divisions, roughly thirty thousand additional 
troops if the country was to go to war, was partially met during the war by raising 
one division. 
The War of 1965 lasted for seventeen days resulting into a stalemate. A ceasefire 
was arranged by the United Nations and negotiations between leadership of both 
countries facilitated by the Soviet leadership resulted in Tashkent agreement 
restoring status quo ante.Pakistan’s armed forces gave most commendable 
performance against greater numbers of the enemy forces, denying them to