321 

Annex D 
DR. SARMILA BOSE ON THE COURAGEOUS PAKISTAN ARMY’S STAND ON THE 
EASTERN FRONT: AN UNTOLD STORY OF 1971 INDO-PAK WAR15 
THERE is much for Pakistan to come to terms with what happened in 1971. But 
the answers don’t lie in unthinking vilification of the fighting men who performed 
so well in the war against such heavy odds in defense of the national policy. 
Rather, in failing to honour them, the nation dishonours itself. 
My introduction to international politics was 1971, as a schoolgirl in Calcutta. 
Many images from that year are still etched in my mind, but the culminating one 
was the photo on Ramna racecourse of two men sitting at a table — the smart, 
turbaned Sikh, ‘our’ war-hero, Jagjit Singh Aurora, and the large man in a beret, A 
A K Niazi, commander of the other side, signing the instrument of surrender. 
Nearly a generation later, a chance interview for the BBC (British Broadcasting 
Corporation) with Lt Gen. Aurora took me back to 1971. The interview was not 
about 1971, but about injustices suffered by Sikhs at the hands of the state 
General Aurora had served. I thought he was a bigger hero for what he had to say 
then. That view was reinforced as I read — with incredulity — the disparaging 
remarks by other Indian officers about him, and each other, in their books. If this 
is what happened to the winning commander, I wondered what had happened to 
the other man in the photo. The result was a revelation. 
It turns out that General Niazi has been my ‘enemy’ since the Second World War. 
As Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose and his Indian National Army fought on the Burma 
front in 1943-45 in their quest for India’s freedom, Niazi was fighting on the other 
side, for the British Indian Army, under the overall command of General (later 
Field Marshal) William Joseph Slim. Slim and his 14th Army halted the advance of 
the INA and the Japanese at the Imphal campaign and turned the course of the 
war. 

15 http://archives.dailytimes.com.pk/editorial/24-Nov-2003/op-ed-the-courageous-pak-army-stand-on-
the-eastern-front-sarmila-bose