39 

At that time, the policy making in the country was highly personalised. The 
institutions were weak and by-passed. Pakistan's Foreign Office with Mr. Aziz 
Ahmed as the Foreign Secretary and Mr. Z.A. Bhutto as the Foreign Minister called 
the martial tunes. It had miscalculated that despite operation Gibraltar, the 
fighting was likely to remain confined inside the disputed state of Jammu and 
Kashmir. The Foreign Office is on record to have assessed that India was not in a 
position to risk a general war with Pakistan...... 
For inexplicable reasons the General Headquarters based its operational plan in 
Kashmir on a wishful logic. The misplaced ego, the high ambition and the naive 
approach of a selected few plunged the country into an armed conflict. The 
outcome of the war, or the lack of it, eclipsed Ayub's position”.6 
Another writer, Arshad Ahmed, in an article on the 1965 war writes; 
‘Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto wanted to deprive Ayub Khan of his power, and this was not 
possible until the strength, ego and pride of the army was not smashed. This view 
was supported by Marxist leader Tariq Ali, who asked Bhutto about the 1965 war, 
and Bhutto told him, “Until these generals are not defeated it is not possible to 
get in power in Pakistan”.7 
It would be interesting to find out exact written directive of the President from 
the records of the President House/Foreign Ministry. Reportedly President Ayub 
Khan’s gave just a two worded directive; ‘Defreeze Kashmir’. Mr Z A Bhutto the 
Foreign Minister had succeeded in convincing the President that it was time to 
instigate disturbances in Indian Held Kashmir to bring Kashmir issue to world 
focus by sending some infiltrators to start the process. This was done on the false 
assurance that problem would remain confined within Kashmir, the disputed 
area.  
As operation in Chamb Sector across the ceasefire line was in progress, our High 
Commissioner in India Mr. Arshad Hussain on 3rd September sent an urgent 
communication to our Foreign Office that India had decided to launch attack 

6 http://www.defencejournal.com/july98/1965war.htm 
7 (Excerpt from article Kashmir And The 1965 War By Shabir Choudhry, 1st October 1998.  
(http://www.jammu-kashmir.com/shabir/shabir_1998_10_1.html)