113 

area in July 1971. Captain Akbar Niazi was a courageous person inclined to 
rashness while Afreen had a remarkable sense of balancing courage with 
prudence. During operations he always strived to kill the enemy without causing 
casualties to own men. Careful planning and audacious execution always got us 
intended results.  
After a few months in the camp, an underground tunnel was started using some 
improvised tools of digging and concealing the excavated earth. It was a slow 
process. In our camp, the tunnel was detected by Indians after a few weeks of 
work.  As we later learnt that almost during same time period tunnels had been 
started in most other camps but all except one were detected. The one successful 
was at Fatehgarh Camp from where Major Nadir Pervez awarded SJ as 2nd 
Lieutenant during Rann of Kutch skirmishes in April 1965, his cousin Major Tariq 
Pervez (later Lieutenant General) and some of their colleagues escaped and 
reached Pakistan. The other option of escape was to jump over barbed wires 
when visibility was poor due to fog. Major Arjmand and Qadir had done it when 
we were thinking of being in transit. It was intriguing as to how they had thought 
of escaping at that time. Later on Major Qadir was caught spying for India. After 
doing his Staff Course at Quetta, he was posted to one of the Brigades as Brigade 
Major but was caught while still on joining time as he was already under 
surveillance. Major Arjmand had reportedly left the Army and had gone to USA or 
somewhere out of the country. 
It so happened that during the whole year there was no fog despite changing 
seasons since last time that enabled escape of two officers from our camp. The 
escape party would prepare themselves every evening and keep waiting 
throughout the night if visibility conditions permitted approaching the barbed 
wires. After initial couple of months, the Indians, constantly working to improve 
security arrangements had erected more strands of wire around the cages. 
Anyone making escape attempt had to negotiate three to four strands of wire 
obstacles. One of these was more formidable in height and strength. In extreme 
frustration, Captains Niazi and Afreen attempted to throw an improvised weight 
on electric wires expecting to cause electricity failure thus creating opportunity 
for escape. For doing it, they had to cross four strands of barbed wire which they