7 

grossly exaggerated and accusations of atrocities patently false. In introduction 
chapter of her Book, she laments about Pakistanis on ‘deafening silence from the 
majority of those who had served in East Pakistan’.Obviously with her educational 
and cultural background she does not understand that those of us who served in 
East Pakistan during 1971 are shy with the pen, not inclined to undertake writing 
of our accounts. A few who wrote,including Lieutenant General Amir Abdullah 
Khan Niazi, the commander of Pakistani forces in East Pakistan narrated similar 
facts as by Dr Bose but their version does not get acceptance coming from a 
maligned and defeated party. General Niazi’s book ‘The Betrayal of East Pakistan’ 
published in 1998 gives overall picture of the situation on ground and the 
predicament he was faced with in dealing with callous,unresponsive and 
unconcerned ruling junta of the time. It is revealing study in the backdrop of 
vigorous propagation of fictional narrative for so many years. General Niazi who 
took over command of troops in East Pakistan on 10 April 1971 restored State 
writ in the country by end of April 1971 in just three weeks. Army operations 
under his command were strident and swift, creating enabling conditions for 
resumption of political process but that never happened because it was not 
intended by Yahya-Bhutto combine, with Yahya being in the driving seat.Brigadier 
Karrar Ali Agha’s book ‘Witness to Carnage, 1971’ published in 2011 fills another 
important gap in the records. Brigadier Agha, then a Major posted as staff officer 
in the Headquarters East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) during the period gives graphic 
details of events at different places. He also sheds light on the proceedings of 
negotiations held at Dacca between leadership of Awami League, Pakistan 
People’s Party and General Yahya’s Government.   
My basic motivation to write is to refute the outrageous lie of the grossly 
exaggerated number of prisoners of war. With about 34,000 (thirty four 
thousands) armed forces personnel that include Army, Navy and Air Force and 
another about ten to twelve thousand persons in different categories including 
some civilians, the total number of persons incarcerated in India as prisoners of 
war comes to about forty five thousands. The number of armed forces personnel 
can be easily calculated from the details of formations and units located in East 
Pakistan on 16 December 1971 that I have included as annex. This information 
was available in the form of order of battle given in the Indian publications right