289 

Government or even the senior commanders in the Army knowing about it. 
This was to help India in recovering from a grave political crisis, a 
preparatory move by western powers before launching operations to 
occupy Afghanistan. A destabilised India was then failing to form a 
government at the Centre after repeated elections. External threat blown 
out of proportion helped India to manage internal rifts. Pakistan’s position 
as responsible nuclear state got severely damaged. It became easier to 
manipulate Pakistan. 
 Musharraf was shown the door when no longer required. He was replaced 
by Zardari-Gilani duo, one convicted by Swiss courts for money laundering 
and the other having spent a few years in jail for his wrongdoings. Gilani’s 
most unexpected appointment as Prime Minister was announced from the 
premises of US Embassy in Islamabad. These imposed rulers put Pakistan 
into deep pit of loans that requires the largest chunk of Pakistan’s annual 
budget in debit servicing. The amounts of loans taken by Zardari 
Government from Global Banking octopus, exceeded the amount of loans 
accumulated in all the previous years, thus placing Pakistan’s economy in 
oxygen tent. The loans seem mere paper transactions because there is 
nothing on ground in the form of development projects where these huge 
amounts could have been spent.  
 GCE has complete control of decision making process in Pakistan through 
their operatives placed at decision making levels. The present rulers were 
imposed through massive rigging in May 2013 elections. Mr. Najam Sethi, 
as caretaker Chief Minister of Punjab took care of election results as 
desired with help from Iftikhar Chawhdhri led judiciary that provided 
returning officers for these elections. Najam Sethi has a history. In one of 
the TV interviews General Aslam Beg an ex-Army Chief came out with the 
information that when he was commanding a Brigade in Balochistan during 
early nineteen seventies, Najam Sethi who came to Pakistan in 1963 from 
India was actively involved with Baloch insurgents fighting against Pakistan 
Army.  
 Mr Ishaq Dar who admitted in the court of doing money laundering for 
Sharif family during the past has been placed as all important Finance