128 

Army, Navy and Air Force, the rest from the civil armed forces i.e. three 
wings of Scouts, four Rangers Wings, some Mujahids, Policemen and very 
few civilians.  Amongst the Army troops there were only about twenty two 
thousands infantry soldiers who were to do actual fighting against 
insurgents and the invading Indians, supported by the remaining elements. 
The Order of Battle of Pakistani forces in East Pakistan as on 3 December 
1971 is given at the end of this narrative (Annex C).   
 The figure of ninety three thousands prisoners of war was concocted to 
malign, degrade and vilify Pakistan Army. The prisoners were kept in India 
till Mr Bhutto could consolidate his hold on his New Pakistan. General Gul 
Hassan who helped in bringing Mr Bhutto to power did not contest these 
figures. His successor Tikka Khan also towed the line as he remained 
intimidated by Bhutto to be handed over for war crimes trial demanded by 
Bangladesh in the list of 195 persons. Tikka Khan was succeeded by Zia ul 
Haq, another character working for global powers who ruled for a long time 
to obscure the picture of past events. 
 Repatriation of Pakistani POWs was deliberately spread over about eight 
months whereas Indians had only taken two weeks to collect these troops 
from all over East Pakistan to place them in various camps over vastly 
spread areas. Repatriation was arranged in a manner which gave the 
impression that a very large force had surrendered to the Indians. It was 
also ensured that the personnel of those units who served in East Pakistan 
could not get together and rise in revolt knowing what Mr Bhutto had done 
to Pakistan. 
 Repatriation of prisoners was trumpeted to be a very big achievement of 
Mr Bhutto to deceive the people. But those of us affected knew and some 
thought of doing something to get him. They were apprehended and 
punished through a court martial conducted by Major General Zia ul Haq 
(later President). After Bhutto was hanged by Zia, reportedly one of those 
punished told Zia that this was what they wanted earlier and that Zia had 
realised it late.