71 

Rani Shankail, my Company Headquarters was rained with mortar shells during 
the night. The attackers were chased up to the borders about ten kilometers 
away. This was our first encounter with the Mukti Bahini operating from their 
sanctuaries inside India.  
Once I, with about ten men, marched out to see the two abandoned border out 
posts (BOPs) in my area earlier manned by the former East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) 
who had joined the rebels. After visiting one post and then moving along the 
border to reach the next one it started to get dark. I decided to stay the night 
there. This post was about two hundred meters away from an opposite Indian 
post, only a small stream separating the two. As darkness thickened, I realised 
that it was very dangerous to stay on the post with just ten men carrying personal 
weapons without any other fire support or even communications with any one 
because the wireless set, an old PRC-10 was out of range with others in the 
Company. I decided to take my men to a clump of trees located about six hundred 
yards away from the post along the stream and told them not to make even a 
slightest noise which could give away our location. At about 2 a.m. we heard 
noise of some vehicles moving towards the Indian post. Obviously it was 
additional force coming for some action as I had apprehended. About one hour 
after arrival of the vehicles, intense small arms firing started at our post from 
which I had moved away.  
These were some extremely anxious moments for me because generally our men 
are trigger happy in such situations and want to fire back. I had told my men that 
if we could see someone coming towards us, only then we will fire and that too 
not without my specific orders, myself firing the first bullet. Otherwise they just 
had to watch, rather get the feel of the show. As the night was very dark we could 
not see the enemy but just their direction of fire through tracer bullets. The firing 
continued for about an hour and those were some of the tensest moments of my 
life. One mistake by anyone of us, just a bullet fired, could land us in a situation 
jeopardising our life for no good cause. A familiarisation mission in our own 
territory had landed us in precarious position which could be exploited by the 
enemy.