310 

retirement, he became the Military Advisor to Sikh militant politician Jarnail Singh 
Bhindrawaley. When Bhindrawaley threw a challenge to the authority of Union 
Government, a strong-willed Mrs Gandhi ordered an attack on the sacred Golden 
Temple at Amritsar in 1984. Shahbeg Singh who was killed by Indian troops during 
the attack. 
On 15th December, while driving, I was stopped by a bearded, well-dressed 
gentleman who turned out to be the Chief Flying Instructor of Dacca Flying Club. 
He was famous for his flying prowess throughout India. He enquired of me 
whether it was true about the surrender. On my confirmation he tore at his beard 
and clothes and said what will happen to the Biharis now. His apprehensions 
turned out to be correct, as can be seen from the squalid conditions of camps 
where they have been living ever since, under very adverse conditions. Urdu-
speaking Biharis never integrated with the Bengalis and retained their own 
language, culture and traditions. They always considered themselves as true 
Pakistanis which they proved by their loyalties till the end, incurring the wrath of 
locals. Biharis were relatively better educated than Bengalis, and were also 
technically qualified, thus running railways, telephone and telegraph and other 
technical services. They were, however, all along considered as traitors for their 
open support to West Pakistani troops and civilians. After the war, Biharis 
justifiably expected to be repatriated to Pakistan. Barring a handful, no Pakistan 
Government permitted their repatriation. This reprehensible treatment in 
disowning patriotic Pakistanis would remain a blemish on Pakistan. 
The night 15/16th December, 1971 was traumatic and hectic to say the least. Army 
helicopters were flying out to Burma in the early hours. An injured General was 
also a passenger on one, without the knowledge of General Niazi who was 
annoyed by his departure. Niazi wanted all the six General officers to accompany 
him, a logic which is difficult to understand. There were three Pak Army Divisions 
in East Pakistan, hence only General Officers should, at best, have remained with 
him. Offering three additional trophies to the Indians was not called for. 
On repatriation to Pakistan, I was told by none less than the Chief of Air Staff of 
PAF that the sole purpose of going to war was to extricate West Pakistanis safely 
across India, therefore no meaningful operation against India was undertaken.