178 

reach the airport before sunrise. There, as it happened often, after waiting for a 
couple of hours one was told that flight would not operate because clouds had 
appeared in area of Nanga Parbat blocking the valley through which PIA Fokker 
aircraft, with maximum ceiling of about eighteen thousands feet, had to pass 
through. The adverse weather conditions would develop suddenly making air 
travel most uncertain. Going to the airport and coming back disappointed was a 
routine exercise. It happened with me twice during that tenure in Northern Areas 
that our aircraft took off, flew for some time and then had to land back at 
Islamabad airport because of unexpected cloud cover around Chilas.  
Abandoning the option of air travel after some unsuccessful efforts, we started by 
road on the Karakorum Highway (KKH). It was last week of December and before 
leaving Chaklala we did check up the road condition ahead which was reportedly 
clear. During the travel it started raining and by the time we reached Chattar Plain 
we found that we could not go any further because of heavy snowfall blocking the 
road. We had to abandon this effort and came back to where we had started. Yet 
another option was to travel by helicopter going to Gilgit if one could arrange a 
seat in it. Ultimately this option worked and we landed at the helipad of NLI 
Centre Bunji one fine morning in late December 1990. 
Colonel Ashraf Hussain Shah, a Punjab Regiment officer and a course mate from 
PMA briefed me about the organization. He had worked hard to improve 
conditions at the Centre. During his tenure, Chief of the Army Staff, General Mirza 
Aslam Beg and some other senior officers visited the Centre. Before that hardly 
any senior person would visit the place because of it being on the wrong side of 
Indus River across KKH, linked through a suspension bridge. Another reason was 
the Commandants who were mostly passed over for promotion like me were 
hardly interested in receiving any visitors. Colonel Ashraf had been posted to the 
Centre with a special consideration. Before him Colonel Muhammad Aziz had 
gathered around him few officers who like him were active participants in 
activities of the Tablighi Jamaat. Unfortunately during that period sectarian 
tension had developed in Gilgit resulting in clashes between Sunnis and Shias. A 
private force, a ‘Lashkar’ comprising Sunnis marched from Kohistan district 
towards Gilgit causing destruction of several houses of Shias in villages along the