219 

Weapon programme conveniently ignoring that after India exploded nuclear 
device at Pokharan near Pakistan’s borders in 1974, any ruler in Pakistan was 
bound to go for nuclear option. Pakistan’s Atomic Energy Commission was 
working since 1956 when Bhutto was still a non entity. India forced Pakistan to go 
for nuclear option. There was no other choice for Pakistan. 
Z A Bhutto was removed from the political scene and physically eliminated when 
no longer required as is the fate of such persons working for the powerful forces. 
His descendants and followers continue to plunder the country, the Party rightly 
being called Pakistan Plundering Party. For those who continue to refer to Z A 
Bhutto as a great leader should reflect upon the fact that if zenith of leadership is 
to be hanged by a subordinate, leadership needs fresh definition. 
General Zia ul Haq 
Mr. Bhutto’s successor, General Zia ul Haq also worked for US interests. When he 
was elevated to the slot of Army Chief by Prime Minister Z A Bhutto, it came as 
complete surprise. He was at seventh position in order of seniority. The general 
expectation in the Army was that either General Akbar or Majid Malik would be 
the next Army Chief considering their seniority and merit. But Zia, an unknown 
figure in the Army was most unexpected. Earlier in 1970 when seconded to 
Jordan in the rank of Brigadier, he participated in Jordanian operations to dislodge 
the Palestinians from Jordan. Major General Nawazish, the mission leader in 
Jordan gave adverse report that could end his career in Brigadier’s rank but he 
was saved by Guide’s Cavalry seniors Colonel Pir Abdullah Shah and General Gul 
Hassan in quashing the report. Gul Hassan was another scandalous personality 
who later helped Z A Bhutto in assuming power.  
Ziaul Haq ruled the country for about eleven years. During this period the USSR 
invaded and occupied Afghanistan in December 1979, a few months after Iranian 
Revolution led by Imam Khomeini replacing Shah of Iran in April that year. 
Resistance against Russian occupation was organized using Pakistan’s tribal areas 
as bases. The US and rulers of some Arab countries provided support with 
weapons and funds to help Afghan resistance movement. Young men from other 
Muslim countries like Osama bin Laden from a very rich family of Saudi Arabia