324 

defense of the east is in the west”. Jackson writes, “Pakistani forces had largely 
withdrawn from scattered border-protection duties into cleverly fortified 
defensive positions at the major centres inside the frontiers, where they held all 
the major ‘place names’ against Mukti Bahini attacks, and blocked the routes of 
entry from India…” 
Sisson and Rose point out the incongruity of Islamabad tolerating India’s invasion 
of East Pakistani territory in November. On 30 November Niazi received a 
message from General Hamid stating, “The whole nation is proud of you and you 
have their full support.” The same day Islamabad decided to launch an attack in 
the West on 2 December, later postponed to 3 December, after a two-week wait, 
but did not inform the Eastern command about it. According to Jackson, the 
Western offensive was frustrated by 10 December. 
Though futile, the Western offensive allowed India to openly invade the East, with 
overwhelming advantages. “ …despite all these advantages, the war did not go as 
smoothly and easily for the Indian army…”, but Sisson and Rose come to the 
balanced judgment that “The Pakistanis fought hard and well; the Indian army 
won an impressive victory.” Even Indian officers concede the personal bravery of 
Niazi and the spirited fight put up by the Pakistanis in the East. That the troops 
fought so well against such overwhelming odds is a credit both to them, and to 
their commanders, for an army does not fight well in the absence of good 
leadership. 
However, as Jackson put it, “…India’s success was inevitable from the moment the 
general war broke out — unless diplomatic intervention could frustrate it.” As is 
well known, Pakistan failed to secure military or diplomatic intervention. Sisson 
and Rose also say, “The outcome of the conflict on the eastern front after 6 
December was not in doubt, as the Indian military had all the advantages.” On 14 
December Niazi received the following message from Yahya Khan: “You have 
fought a heroic battle against overwhelming odds. The nation is proud of you 
…You have now reached a stage where further resistance is no longer humanly 
possible nor will it serve any useful purpose… You should now take all necessary 
measures to stop the fighting and preserve the lives of armed forces personnel,