247 

powers to support them in their plans to control energy resources of the region 
by occupying Afghanistan. As Army Chief, he did immense damage to interests of 
Pakistan, helping India by launching Kargil misadventure. India which could not 
form a government despite repeated elections after 1996 got their political 
system stabilised after Kargil. The timings of Indian general elections during these 
years reveal real cause of Musharraf’s action. Elections in India were held in Apr–
May 1996 but as the coalition government formed could not stay in power due to 
dissentions, the process had to be repeated in Feb- March 1998. The government 
formed after these elections also became unstable. India again went into 
countrywide electoral process in Sep-Oct 1999, just after Kargil war (May–Jul 
1999) forming a stable government that completed five years. Organising general 
elections at such brief intervals in a country like India, a sub continent rather than 
a country, with population of more than one billion people is not a normal 
happening. India was faced with a very grave situation of instability and possible 
fragmentation 
into 
different 
parts 
with 
simmering 
discontent 
since 
independence. External threat posed by Pakistan through Musharraf’s action was 
fully exploited by the Indians, generating unprecedented media hype on war with 
Pakistan that helped them to overcome internal discord. 
After the 9/11 drama created as an excuse, the US occupied Afghanistan, rather 
its ‘Af-Pak’ theatre of operations, pushing Al Qaida linked fighters into tribal areas 
of Pakistan. Renewed fighting in Afghanistan, now against the US and her allies, 
disturbed peace on our western borders. The situation having gone beyond 
control of para military forces traditionally deployed in tribal areas, Pakistan Army 
had to be deployed on the western borders to fight against terrorist groups, 
created and supported from Afghanistan. India established their support bases in 
the form of ‘consulates’ in Afghanistan near our borders with Afghanistan to help 
these terrorists. The fighting caused Pakistan immense losses in men and 
material, has destroyed our economy and caused incalculable damage to interests 
of Pakistan. Security installations throughout the country remain targets, attacked 
many times with considerable damage. Federally Administered Tribal Areas 
(FATA), Balochistan and Karachi are particularly affected, remaining parts of the 
country also having lost peaceful living conditions for the citizen.  Pakistan lost its 
prestige during Musharraf’s rule despite being a nuclear power.