58 

to encircle rebels, started crawling towards the position. The area in front of the 
trees from where fire was coming was open and without any cover except for 
slightly raised edges of the fields from where rice crop had been harvested. Naik 
Amanullah reached LMG position from behind and physically got hold of the man 
firing it. In the process he got a bullet in his thigh. Naik Amanullah, was an 
interesting character. He had recently been demoted from Lance Havildar to Naik. 
This had happened to him second time. He would always do some funny thing to 
deserve a demotion soon after he got promotion because of his seniority. He 
rejoined the unit after his wound had healed.  The person who was firing the LMG 
to cover withdrawal of rebels from ambush site was a stout, well built person. 
Despite efforts, he did not speak a word. He did not look like a Bengali.  In all 
probability he was an Indian working with rebels as we learnt of Indian’s physical 
involvement later. During exchange of fire few unoccupied thatched huts caught 
fire, most likely torched by retreating rebels which were later shown as evidence 
of arson against the Army. 
As that position got cleared in about two hours’ time and unit was preparing to 
resume advance, General Officer Commanding (GOC), Major General M Rahim 
Khan landed on the roadside in a small helicopter. He had recently taken over 
command of 14 Division replacing Major General Khadim Hussain Raja.General 
Tikka Khan Commander Eastern Command had also been replaced by Lieutenant 
General Amir Abdullah Khan (AAK) Niazi who assumed command on 10 April 
1971.  
Major General Rahim was briefed by our CO about the situation. The move 
restarted with Alpha Company (Major Saeed Azam) leading. Study of the map 
indicated a possible rebel’s position about five kilometers ahead in areas of two 
road bends. As our leading elements neared first road bend, the CO ordered my 
company to move towards a possible escape route of the enemy and take up 
position to block that route. I quickly moved in that direction and as soon as 
reached the indicated position, fire fight in the road bends area had begun. 
During this firing, the unit called for Artillery fire from the four guns following the 
column. Captain Muhammad Saleem, my course mate from 2nd War Course was 
artillery observer directing the fire. Distance between rebel’s position deployed in