48 

or staff officer, he would ask for the actions of various company 
commanders whom he would refer by name. He knew the company 
commanders and their abilities by now having frequent interaction with 
them during the last three years. Since he was using wireless sets of my 
unit and I had the frequency, it was great education listening to him and his 
grasp of continuously changing situation. 
 The General would provide guidance for the smallest detail. He had 
ordered that the vehicles when stopped or parked must face the direction 
in which these had to move out. If the moving column had to stop even for 
a very short duration, the vehicles were immediately camouflaged by using 
appropriately garnished nets. This appeared cumbersome at first but with 
practice it became easier. Once Lieutenant Colonel Saeed Qadir (later 
Lieutenant General) commanding officer of Electrical and Mechanical 
Engineer (EME) Battalion of the Division came to our Mechanical Transport 
Park asking to start up the vehicles. 34 Punjab had about 150 vehicles, 
mostly jeeps to carry the recoilless rifles and machine guns detachments. 
His purpose of visit was to find out which of the vehicles emitted smoke. 
While returning from exercise area, the General has observed our vehicles 
emitting smoke and instead of asking our CO, he asked the EME officer as 
to why these vehicles had defects. The General knew who was to be made 
accountable to get results from his subordinates. 
 For physical training apart from the normal routine, a special exercise plan 
known as BX Plan was introduced. These exercises of about fifteen minutes 
were to be done before the afternoon games period and every individual 
was to do these at that time wherever he was located. The cooks carried 
out these exercises outside their place of duty i.e. the Cook Houses. 
 Almost half of the year was spent outdoors in the exercise area bounded by 
Grand Trunk (GT) Road in the west, up to Bhimber in the east and from 
Jhelum River down to the Chenab River. There was no dearth of fuel 
required for training and we had become familiar with the terrain to the 
extent that we could even refer to old trees in the area.