11 

Hindus who revered cows. Both communities had lived under a system where the 
Muslims, less in numbers were a dominant class for almost a thousand years.  
The Muslims came into the Indian sub-continent from a position of strength that 
they enjoyed for about a thousand years despite being less in numbers than 
Hindus. Before the advent of nation states and present democratic systems the 
general public was ‘subjects’ of the kings and not ‘citizen’ of a State. As the 
Muslim emperors and kings were ruling most parts of the sub-continent starting 
from early eleventh century, the Muslims as a community did not feel threatened 
or in danger.  End of British rule from the sub –continent created a different 
situation where rule by a majority under the promised democratic system would 
relegate the Muslims to a position of permanent minority.  
To avoid that possibility and to secure Muslim’s interests, Quaid-e-Azam (Great 
Leader) Mr. Muhamad Ali Jinnah gave a call for a separate homeland for Muslims. 
His call reached all parts of the sub-continent despite very limited means of 
communications in those days resulting in emergence of Pakistan. 
Life in the household with agricultural background entailed multiple chores like 
grazing animals after the school hours, bringing fodder from fields, chopping 
wood and other numerous small tasks mostly involving outdoor activities. I still 
feel longing for the fragrance of land and its crops of different seasons. The village 
at that time was a self-sufficient unit meeting almost all the requirements of life. 
The means of transporting materials were mainly confined to camels for longer 
distances and donkeys for short hauls. Movement of people was mostly on foot. 
For distant travel, camels were used to carry the women and children being 
placed in ‘Kajawas’ (a wooden contraption). The present means of 
communications which make movement of goods and material so easy were not 
available then. The communities were therefore forced to stay self-contained, 
devising their own solutions to meet essential requirements.  
Travel was an adventure undertaken under extreme compulsion. As a child I 
would hear my grandmother narrating account of very long travel on camels and 
the railway network during second and third decades of twentieth century. My 
grandfather Malik Sher Muhammad and another person named Ghulam