122 

did not find those people who needed to be killed as they escaped to India 
retreating before the Army’s movement towards borders.  
 The civil population along the routes of movement of Army’s marching 
columns moving from Dacca towards borders avoided contact with Army 
except when a town was reached. In the towns, people came out on the 
roads waving Pakistani flags and informed that the miscreants had left the 
place "Malaoon log bhag gia”.The people involved in mass killings and rape 
of non Bengalis safely reached India, keeping about twelve hour time gap 
from the Army columns marching towards borders. The general population 
was not opposing the Army that could evoke violent response. 
 After reaching the borders, express orders constantly hammered were to 
"restore normalcy". Formations and units were given vast areas of 
responsibility to restore peace and normal conditions. The period from end 
of April up to June passed peacefully. Focus of the Army during this period 
was to restore confidence of the population to resume normal activity. 
 By the month of June, rebels, organised by Indians into a force called Mukti 
Fauj (Bahini) started their sabotage activity, planting mines on the tracks, 
blowing up small bridges/ culverts in areas close to the borders. Also by this 
time Indians started shelling our posts in the border areas. 
 Rebels operations did not escalate to a scale which could disrupt normal 
activity of the civilian population. The common people were not supportive 
of rebels’ seeing that the Army was not interfering in their routine affairs 
and was striving to restore peaceful living conditions.  
 The people of East Pakistan had voted for Awami League who promised to 
get them maximum autonomy based on a six point formula. The people 
had not voted for breakup of Pakistan. While a small segment of population 
was actively engaged in fighting Pakistan Army, a large number of Bengali 
young men were working as volunteers with the Army to counter sabotage 
activities by rebels and to deny them sanctuaries.