34 

achieve their ground objectives. The most remarkable phenomenon however was 
the spirit of Pakistani nation to show complete solidarity in facing the Indians. The 
streets of Dacca and other cities in East Pakistan saw large scale demonstrations 
against India although the Indians focused their effort on West Pakistan with only 
an air raid at Lal Munir Hat in East Pakistan. However despite the fact that India 
could not cause much damage to Pakistan and its armed forces despite their 
numerical superiority, the conspirators achieved their aim as Ayub Khan did not 
survive in office for long after the War. In fact he suffered heart attack soon after 
the war and never regained health that he had enjoyed earlier. Indian Prime 
Minister Mr Lal Bahadur Shastri died of heart attack on conclusion of proceedings 
at Tashkent, President Ayub Khan joining USSR Prime Minister Mr Kosygin to 
shoulder Mr Shastri’s coffin to the aircraft. 
The 1965 War between India and Pakistan effectively sealed Pakistan’s fate as a 
strong and prosperous country. Pakistan drifted into this War by machinations of 
a rabidly ambitious man in too much of a hurry, Mr Zulfiqar Ali (Z A) Bhutto, the 
young foreign minister in Ayub Khan’s cabinet. Working for global capitalist 
interests who wanted to derail Pakistan from path of progress, he planned and 
worked to remove the President by initiating armed conflict with India. The global 
forces had found Ayub Khan obstructive to their dictates when he tried to keep 
them at the status of FRIENDS and NOT become MASTERS. The largest Islamic 
country progressing at unprecedented pace going out of their control was 
unacceptable to global forces focussed on the region. 
Z A Bhutto, a man armed with Brahamanic intellect, a courtesan’s charm and a 
feudal’s duplicity, was gifted with qualities that are best described by Sir Maurice 
James, the British High Commissioner in Pakistan (1961-65). He had following to 
say about Bhutto,3 

"Bhutto certainly had the right qualities for reaching the heights--drive, charm, 
imagination, a quick and penetrating mind, zest for life, eloquence, energy, a 
strong constitution, a sense of humour, and a thick skin. Such a blend is rare 
anywhere, and Bhutto deserved his swift rise to power…..but there was - how shall 

3 http://www.baaghi.tv/bhutto-in-the-eyes-of-british-high-commissioner-sir-maurice-james/