60 

Gujranwala Cantonment) assaulted the positions from behind after heli-landing at 
dawn. The rebels, suffering heavy casualties, abandoned their trenches and ran 
towards east leaving huge caches of arms in their abandoned positions. 
After spending about two days at Bhairab Bazar, the unit moved over the 
Ashuganj Bridge towards Brahmanbaria. After covering some distance in that 
direction it was ordered to turn back and move north in the direction of 
Kishorganj, as part of the Brigade tasked to clear area up to Mymensingh.  In this 
move there was no opposition encountered but the march to Mymensingh took 
us over a week ending on 23 April. As our Brigade approached from the east, 
another force supported by some tanks had already reached the city from south a 
day earlier as transpired later after some confusion and loss of life. A branch of 
River Brahmaputra running east of city separated the two forces. On reaching the 
river from east our leading troops were fired upon from across the river. The fire 
fight raged for some time when noise of tanks getting started in Mymensingh was 
heard. This rumbling of tanks caused alarm. After frantic efforts to establish 
contact the confusion got cleared. The Division had failed to coordinate the 
movement causing this unfortunate situation resulting in loss of life of two 
soldiers of the leading unit of our Brigade. The reason given was that our Brigade 
was out of communication with the Division. The elderly Brigadier Zulfiqar Khan 
had been marching with us, losing contact due to the distances involved and lack 
of appropriate communication equipment. 
While marching towards Mymensingh, normal routine was to start the move early 
morning and after covering a distance of roughly 30 to 35 kilometers set up camp 
for the night. On first day of our march, main problem confronted was from 
where to procure meals because there was no system of logistics supporting the 
move. When the unit halted for a break at mid day, solution was found in 
searching for rice and cooking utensils from abandoned houses. It took lot of time 
to prepare a meal of boiled rice and some lentils. Later it became a practice to 
prepare meal of boiled rice and meat by slaughtering a goat or even a calf taken 
from the abandoned habitats en route. As our column advanced, the local 
population living in small villages/hutments on the route vacated their houses and 
moved away on sides to avoid contact with the force. As we approached towns