141 

South Waziristan 
By early autumn 1976, I reached Wana via Dera Ismail Khan, Tank, Jandola and 
Sarwakai. Wana is located in a wide fertile valley with pleasant summers and cold 
winters. The South Waziristan Scouts (SWS) camp was spread over a vast area.  
Enclosed in its about five-feet high walls were offices, barracks for troops, Officers 
Mess, officers’ family accommodation, some family quarters for the troops and 
horse stables etc. Life in Scouts was much different than the regular Army. The 
dress was baggy trousers and long shirt of a special rough cloth of dark grey 
colour known as ‘militia’. Because of this dress the whole force is called ‘militia’ 
by general public. The footwear was of local design, a ‘chappal’ of brown colour 
and the headgear a beret in normal use. For ceremonial occasions a very colourful 
‘Pugree’, starched cloth woven around a cap in particular way, was worn. The 
organizational structure was made up of Wings comprising different platoons. 
These platoons were formed on tribal basis. Each platoon had its Tribe (Qoum) 
Commander responsible for the administration and discipline of his platoon. If 
someone lost a rifle or some piece of equipment, the Platoon Commander was 
responsible to make good that loss on the principle of collective responsibility. 
Thus the job of officers posted from Army for about two years was mainly in 
operational role. Overall it was a very effective force. 
The SWS Officers Mess had a small library containing some old books. One of the 
books I found was ‘Seven Pillars of Wisdom’ donated by its author, T E Lawrence, 
the famous Lawrence of Arabia. He was employed by British intelligence to 
instigate Sharif Hussain ruling Hijaz to revolt against the Ottoman Caliph during 
First World War, consequently redrawing the map of Middle East. That signed 
copy of his book was presented by him to the Mess library when he visited the 
Mess. After completion of his mission in Middle East, he had been sent to these 
tribal areas with a different identity as Corporal T E Shaw serving with the Royal 
Indian Air Force. The library also had a set of Thousand and One Nights (Alif Laila) 
comprising many volumes translated by Sir Richard Burton, a soldier, adventurer, 
orientalist who served in Sindh during the period of invasion of Sindh by Charles 
Napier in mid nineteenth century.  He had also compiled a report giving very