239 

The Regional Context 
Reviewing our journey since Independence in 1947, one gets amazed as to how 
our early rulers formed alliances with the west against the Soviet Union and 
China. A cursory look at the map would suggest otherwise. Whether it was due to 
exiting personal contacts with the British and the ease in communicating 
with British and Americans in English, this policy resulted in breakup of Pakistan 
even before the country had completed its first twenty five years of existence. 
Ignoring regional realties and shying away from the communists, we harboured 
Masonic Lodges, preferring to be enslaved by the rapacious practitioners 
of western capitalism. Pakistan despite its abundant resources and enviable 
geographical position remains at the mercy of World Bank, IMF etc. Pakistani 
rulers have acted as pawns in the hands of Global Capitalist’s Establishment 
through their agents, the American administration. Our finances are controlled by 
their nominees and employees. 
Our geographical location, which gives us a unique opportunity to act as trade 
and energy corridor between the vast expanses of the Eurasian land mass, most 
populous regions on earth i.e. India and China, the oil rich gulf region and the 
emerging markets of the African continent, have not been exploited. 
Russia, spreading over vast expanses of Eurasia, always needed all weather warm 
water ports in the open seas. Her earlier efforts to reach the Arabian Sea by 
applying force failed. While the Czarist Russia got exhausted north of Aamu 
Darya, its successor, the Soviet Union, after lapse of considerable years invaded 
Afghanistan but had to retreat with disastrous consequences. With this 
experience of application of force having failed, it is time to forge relationships on 
the basis of mutual benefits which are there for everyone in the region.  
Today's Russia, asserting her influence in the region can take the lead in carving 
out a corridor of trade and commerce through the Central Asian states, 
Afghanistan and Pakistan to reach the resource rich South Asia and emerging 
markets of the African continent. China and Pakistan are already working to 
develop a trade corridor between Western China and Pakistan’s coast on Arabian 
Sea.