149 

hardworking and diligent officer who would stretch things to undesirable limits 
most of the times. His honesty and hard work came to fruition after retirement 
when he was employed to head the Army Welfare Trust (AWT). Starting from 
scratch with very limited means, he made the Trust into a large profitable 
organisation. 
At Quetta, the unit got into routine training as part of the Division in a possible 
offensive role. Training area for field exercises extended from the field firing 
ranges north of Samungli to across Ghazaband Pass in the north and towards 
Shiekh Wasil – Kanak towards west from the field firing ranges. Across Ghazaband 
Pass a wide valley between two mountain ranges provided ideal ground for joint 
exercise with the armour regiment of the Division, then 20 Lancers, commanded 
by Lieutenant Colonel Jamshed. On conclusion of one such exercise it was a great 
spectacle to watch 44 tanks of 20 Lancers rushing through the wide valley in a 
simultaneous dash to assigned objective. Even in those days there were 
instructions not to go near the large village of Gulistan, the ancestral place of late 
Abdul Samad Achakzai and his clan.  
During this period of command of 34 Punjab at Quetta I was once detailed as 
President of a Special Military Court constituted to try a high profile murder case.  
A man had been killed in the Bazaar of Dalbandin town in broad daylight. His case 
was brought to the notice of President General Zia ul Haq during his visit to 
Dalbandin who directed that the case to be tried by a military court. The Court 
comprised of three persons. Besides myself, there was one Major Khalid Usmani, 
Signals from the Army and one civilian Magistrate, Mr. Jogizai. The accused was 
being defended by an able lawyer Mr. Munawwar Mirza who later served as 
Advocate General of Baluchistan and then as a judge in the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan. The government side was represented by Mr. Sardar Dur-e-Yemen a 
senior police prosecutor. As the proceedings progressed, evidence against the 
accused was inconsequential despite the fact that the man had been murdered in 
broad daylight in a bazaar with dozens of the people present. Only one person 
came out with statement that he had seen the man stabbing the deceased but 
stabbing man’s back was towards him (the witness) and face towards the other 
side. On such evidence no court would give a sentence to the accused because