260 

Considering the alarming law and order situation in Baloch inhabited areas of the 
Province and particularly Quettain recent years, those of us who saw very 
peaceful and pleasant environments are at loss to understand why the situation 
was allowed to deteriorate to such an extent. My association with the Province 
spans over a period of eight years at different intervals in three decades; from the 
sixties to late eighties. I first visited Quetta in early Sep 1960. At that time it was a 
small, well laid out clean city. The cantonment was spread out in eastern part of 
the valley and the city, re-laid after devastating 1935 earthquake, occupied center 
of the valley. Main market of the city was Qandhari Bazaar, the famous fruit 
market at one end of the Bazaar. Bicycles were main means of movement. 
Immaculately turned out men mainly Pushtuns attired in their traditional dress 
with Kullah/turbans and waistcoats moved about in the city on their decorated 
‘Raleigh’ and ‘Humber’ brand bicycles. The population in the city was Pushtuns, 
Hazaras and the settlers from Punjab and other parts of pre partition India who 
came at the time of laying the railway network by the British during the last 
decades of the nineteenth century. There was no Baloch population in the city 
except houses of some tribal ‘Sardars’. The Baloch tribal families were brought to 
Quetta when Sardar Atta ullah Mengal became Chief Minister of the Province in 
early nineteen seventies.  
My next visits to attend courses at the Infantry School were in 1967 and 1969 
both times during the pleasant summers. There was no provision of fans in the 
living rooms nor were these needed. It is much later, during late eighties that the 
weather changed to necessitate not only fans but air conditioners. Jinnah Street 
had a couple of cafes, some drug stores and general stores.  A Chinese restaurant 
located at the end of cantonment limits was mainly frequented by the army 
officers and their families doing courses at the Staff College and Infantry School. 
One could see a few large American Convertible cars with their open hoods being 
driven by sons of some tribal chiefs while Sardar Ata ullah Mengal, Nawab Akbar 
Bugti and Sardar Khair Bux Marri would be seen strolling in the cool afternoons on 
the pavement of Jinnah Street. Nawab Akbar Bugti was tall and handsome, a very 
impressive man. Quetta was a very peaceful city with efficient police and hardly 
any crime