309 

This time in 1971 it was an encore. That walk-out ended all hopes of one 
Pakistan……… 
Before 16th December, hardly any Bengali was visible anywhere, but from that 
morning onwards they started pouring in large numbers from nowhere onto the 
airfield, streets and were present in great number at this ceremony. Mukti Bahini 
were thrashing and killing non- Bengalis even during the ceremony while nearby 
Indian troops made no attempt to stop the carnage. A small group of Mukti Bahini 
approached and addressed me, ignoring the Indian Air Commodore (my escort) 
standing beside me, and said “thank you Sir for liberating us from the Pakistani 
barbarians”. When I replied that I am one of those barbarians, they got perplexed 
and slipped away. 
For a couple of days after surrender, the Indian GOC of the formation investing 
Dacca allowed us to retain our arms, as the Mukti Bahini had started sniping at 
our personnel in our Camps. Our men retaliated and killed a few snipers. This 
could have flared into a serious problem, so I went to the Indian GOC for 
restraining the Mukti Bahini from provocative shooting. The Indian GOC was 
occupying the office of General Niazi, sitting on his chair while Niazi was sitting on 
one side and, without any remorse, telling jokes and laughing. On my request, the 
Indian GOC called in Brig Shahbeg Singh and asked whether the Mukti Bahini 
could be restrained. Shahbeg hurriedly consulted Tiger Siddiqui, (Commander, 
Tangail Mukti Bahini) who was standing in the veranda outside, and reported back 
that they would not be able to comply. The GOC then ordered Shahbeg to 
accompany me to the Base, where the latter contacted the Officer Commanding 
of an Infantry Battalion to sort out the sniping. On reaching the office, the 
Battalion Commander was called in and assigned the task. During this period 
Shahbeg Singh told me that he was in charge of Mukti Bahini training and 
organizing in Agartala Sector. He had made many trips into East Pakistan and 
Dacca prior to war. His last trip to Dacca was on 3rd December, masquerading as a 
rickshaw driver with his small beard flowing and balding head covered with a 
white maulvi cap. Shahbeg Singh also offered me safe-keeping of any jewellery or 
fire arms that I may have had. I had none. As luck would have it, he was promoted 
and posted as GOC Jubbulpore where our camp was located. Later, after