279 

Given the responsibility and provided with resources in the form of grants and 
local taxes, local governments must devise solutions according to their peculiar 
circumstances. For example, in Punjab, Sind and parts of KPK where agriculture is 
basic means of sustenance, the local governments can organize cooperatives like 
small dairy and livestock projects making people shareholders with initial 
investment through grants or soft loan, thus not hurting self respect of the 
people. In large parts of Balochistan raising livestock and horticulture with input 
from experts will increase employment and incomes.  
There would be a need to emphasis on the people that if they face any problem, 
President or Prime Minister is not supposed to take notice. The solutions to their 
problem must be sought at local government level. 
Shelter. Every family must have suitable shelter. Housing even at the village level 
must be planned to save fertile agricultural land going to waste. 
Health, Hygiene and Sanitation. The local governments should be responsible for 
providing essential health , hygiene and sanitation services including provision of 
clean drinking water. Every citizen must get medical cover in time of need. A 
comprehensive health policy at the national level would cater to the 
infrastructure needs of population by providing basic health units and hospitals at 
appropriate levels. The local governments should oversee the functioning of staff 
and provision of medicines. 
Education. The local governments should ensure that every child, male or female, 
in their respective area is provided basic education and chance to pursue higher 
studies/technical education. Performance of teachers and educational institutions 
must be monitored. 
Security. Peaceful atmosphere must be ensured by cubing criminal activity in the 
area using the local police. The local councilors must know every person living in 
their area of jurisdiction. No terrorist should remain sheltered amongst our 
population. 
Conflict Resolution and Provision of Timely Justice. Prompt and timely justice 
must be provided to victims of any crime committed. Restructuring of present