182 

heavy on the unit deployed in Shaqma area because Indians sitting on the heights 
above Dalunag would not allow any supply to pass through from that area.  
Major General Zahir ul Islam Abbasi replaced General Tarar during second half of 
1991. General Abbasi, as a Brigadier had worked as our Defence Attaché at 
Pakistan Embassy in India. He was roughed up by Indian intelligence people and 
got injured when according to them he was meeting with some persons in Delhi 
city to obtain documents from them. He was prematurely reverted to Pakistan. 
Having strong Jehadi inclinations, he supported a plan worked out by Brigadier 
Masood Naveed Anwari to establish a new post in Siachin Sector. This was against 
the policy of previous Commander FCNA who was for maintaining the existing 
posts. A reconnaissance party under command an officer was sent to explore the 
route and determine location of establishing the post. The officer, a Captain, on 
return told that establishing a post in that area was not feasible because the route 
to it would be passing in front of Indian posts. He was dubbed a pessimist and the 
plan was not abandoned.  
One morning I was picked up from Bunji helipad to travel along with General 
Abbasi in connection with the ex-servicemen rally I had arranged at Skardu. The 
General had to first visit forward troops and then join the rally. I was dropped at 
Gamba helipad in Skardu and the General proceeded ahead.  About mid day he 
returned visibly shaken and dejected. It transpired that he had gone to address 
the troops of 1 Azad Kashmir (AK) Battalion before they were launched to secure 
a height for establishing the post. The route to reach the height where post was 
to be established was in effective firing range of Indian posts dominating the 
approach. As 1 AK reached within range of Indian weapons, it came under intense 
fire resulting in large scale casualties to the unit, its eight officers killed. Brigadier 
Anwari tried to find out progress in his helicopter. Although before that day the 
helicopters were considered safe because no weapon had been found effective 
due to peculiar weather conditions, Brigadier Anwari’s helicopter was hit by the 
Indians, causing his instant death besides the two pilots. In all eleven officers 
including the Brigadier lost their lives. Total casualties of the unit were over one 
hundred persons killed and wounded including their CO who was wounded. All 
this happened within just about one hour’s time; the catastrophic result of