101 

clearly see that spirit of these men was not affected by the hardships caused 
during intense battle for such a long period of time. Subedar Aziz Khan was the 
same calm and confident man and his subordinates equally cool and unruffled. 
One of them acted with unmatched valour being narrated in succeeding paras. 
Since on the previous day while going towards Bogra, Brigade Commander had 
told 8 Baloch to vacate Jaipurhat to occupy positions on a small nullah in area 
Khetlal, my company was left on its own without any  support from own troops 
who were now about twenty kilometres away from my location. I, being on 
Brigade wireless communication network (using GRC-9 Sets) tried to contact the 
Brigade for fresh orders, but there was no response to my calls. It was only 8 
Baloch who responded with the message that I was to remain in position at 
Panjbibi. The day passed without any activity from the Indian side. The eerie 
silence after deafening noise of battle raging in the area for so many days was 
unusual and depressive.  
On night 12/13 Dec, Lieutenant Mohammad Saeed Tariq, occupying position 
north of village between a nullah and the railway line reported noises of possible 
troops movement some distance away from his positions. Since I had no artillery 
support to engage the enemy, there was no option but to wait for them to 
approach our positions. This was unexpected direction of enemy move because 
Indian troops who had cleared 4 FF positions were on eastern side of the village, 
their tanks visible at a distance. By about 4 A.M. intense artillery fire started on 
my positions. Although my troops and I had gone through enough battle 
inoculation, this was the worst we had to endure. Intense shelling continued for 
about an hour during which the Indian attack came on the positions of Lieutenant 
Saeed Tariq’s platoon. The fire fight continued for about one hour, the Indians 
trying to get closer to our positions. Suddenly there was a lull in the fire fight, 
meaning that first Indian attack was beaten back. Indian artillery fire however 
continued unabated.  After a break of about an hour, Indians resumed their attack 
with greater intensity, overrunning part of the positions of Lieutenant Tariq’s 
platoon. In the process Lieutenant Mohammad Saeed Tariq embraced Shahadat 
and his platoon JCO Naib Subedar Abdul Aziz was injured. I had two JCOs by the 
name of Aziz. One was SubedarAziz Khan commanding No 9 Platoon that had re-