98 

but despite that the party was quickly provided shelter by the local civilians, 
hiding them from the searching Indians. Only one jeep could turn back that 
reached Rangpur to tell the tale. The civilians who provided shelter to the General 
and his party, arranged for their safe passage to Bogra during the night on a 
different route. 
On reaching Bogra, Brigadier Tajammal’s response to deal with this situation was 
ordering 32 Baloch to evict Indians from that area. When CO 32 Baloch tried to 
tell him that an infantry battalion could not evict tanks from the area, he was 
rebuked. The CO Lieutenant Colonel Raja Sultan conveyed these orders to his 
officers who also showed reservation in undertaking the mission. After some 
discussion the CO told them that he was moving as ordered, the officers and men 
then followed.  In the ensuing battle in Pirganj area, CO lost his life and the unit 
suffered over thirty dead, besides many persons wounded. Next morning the 
Indians started advance towards Bogra. 32 Baloch took up delaying positions at 
two different places between Pirganj and Bogra but each time they were 
bypassed, the Indians going behind their positions. 
There was no Lord Tennyson to describe 32 Baluch's attack on Indian Armour 
Regiment that could eternalize obeying suicidal order and not to reason why. CO 
Raja Sultan lost his life along with over thirty men in one go, the overall casualties 
over one hundred in ensuing battle the next day. The unit was 'ordered' to clear 
the area from Indian armour by Brig Tajammal Malik. It was not wrong passing of 
order but the order itself was wrong.  
In the words of  French Marshal Pierre Bosquet on The Charge of the Light Brigade 
of British light cavalry led by Lord Cardigan against Russian forces during the 
Battle of Balaclava on 25 October 1854 in the Crimean War "It is magnificent, but 
it is not war." He continued, in a rarely quoted phrase "it is madness." There could 
not be more apt description of Brigadier Tajammal’s act on the night of 8 
December 1971.  
Brigadier Tajammal had his tactical headquarters (Tac HQ) in 4 FF area. When 
Indians started moving from Pirganj astride main road towards Bogra, they 
decided to clear 4 FF position from the rear. The GOC told Brigadier Tajammal to