246 

funds at the disposal of senior Generals of the Army, smearing clean and honest 
working within Army. Generals like scholarly E H Dar and some others quietly left 
prematurely finding the change stifling.The corrosive effect of Zia’s policy 
adversely affected the image of the Army. Before his period officers and men of 
Pakistan Army were not expected to be dishonest in financial matters. 
Maintaining private funds that endorsed misuse of money adversely affected the 
image of the Army despite the fact that barring some exceptions the Army 
retained and abided by the basic values of honesty and integrity. To quote just 
one example, a few years back while visiting Captain Ghulam Muhammad Awan 
my friend in his real estate office, I found one Brigadier Iftikhar, EME,an elderly 
man who had come in connection with sale of his plot. He had agreed to a price 
on telephone. Within about half an hour as I was there the man received calls, 
offering him a million rupees more than what he had committed verbally with my 
friend. The Brigadier was short and crisp in replies that he had already given a 
word and could not go back on that. He was product of those environments 
where a junior could not dare offer to pay a bill in presence of a senior,expenses 
on guests visiting the units were shared according to sliding scale, the senior most 
paying the maximum and there was no concept of offering gifts to seniors. After 
about a month when I went to visit my friend again, he had gone to attend 
funeral of Brigadier Iftikhar who had completed his journey of life. Such conduct 
was the hallmark expected from the personnel of the Pakistan Army that it has 
largely retained despite Zia ul Haq’s damaging impact.   
After Zia was eliminated, a decade of civilian rule saw two political parties led by 
Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif taking turns in short stints. Political leadership 
proved unequal to the daunting tasks faced by the country. Both leaders did not 
display maturity in their conduct demanded by their exalted position, nor were 
they correctly advised from within their parties which did not develop into 
institutions. Their musical chairs ended when General Musharraf assumed power 
in 1999 by removing Nawaz Sharif’s government. 
General Musharraf ruled for about nine years, getting support of a group of 
politicians who were previously allied with Nawaz Sharif. As the events unfolded 
soon after his taking over, he, like Zia ul Haq, was also chosen by the global