168 

nineteenth century.  He was a remarkable man who despite his very busy life of 
fighting skirmishes on the frontier which included raids right up to Dera Bugti, 
could also spare time to think of inventions like a large clock which was still 
surviving and functional at his residence now in use as the Deputy Commissioner’s 
House. Having lived without getting married and raising a family, he is buried in 
the city alongside the main road leading towards Quetta.  
I undertook visits of different places in the unit’s area of responsibility meeting 
deployed troops, getting the feel of conditions in interior Sind, the Province I was 
to serve in again later. 
Lahore 
In the meantime orders were received for the unit to move to Lahore as part of 
10 Division/ 4 Corps. By August 1985 the unit moved to Lahore. It did not take 
much time for the unit to regain its élan due to change of command and posting 
of some of its officers serving elsewhere back to the unit. With Major Raja Haider 
as Second in Command (2 IC), Majors Javed Iqbal, Waqar Raja, Javed Manj, Ibrar 
as company commanders and Captain Asif Alvi as Adjutant, I did not have much 
problem in getting the unit back to its very high standard of competence level in 
training and sports. Ibrar, a national level sportsman in his younger days, was 
instrumental in winning a number of Divisional level competitions. Australian 
Army Chief visited the unit busy in carrying out training and was impressed by the 
standards. 
The unit was made responsible to maintain Lahore Garrison Golf Club, its course, 
the fairways and greens yet in initial stage of development which required lot of 
work to be done. Just a few weeks after this task was assigned, the President, 
General M Zia ul Haq decided to play golf on this course along with the Corps 
Commanders on their dispersal after a conference at GHQ. For me as Secretary of 
the club, it was an unfamiliar task. In this I was greatly helped by CO 23 FF, 
Lieutenant Colonel Mansur Hamid (later Brig), who earned my everlasting 
respect. 
Once a Bara Khana, (meal on special occasions for all ranks of the units together 
at one place) was arranged by the unit on the occasion of 6th Sep celebrated as