147 

Staff. During about six week’s summer collective training near Sialkot, he was 
exposed to heat which he did not seem to have suffered earlier. The accumulative 
effect of those six weeks of exposure resulted in his getting a heatstroke while 
marching in company of the GOC, Major General Shah Rafi Alam leading a column 
of 28 AK, a unit in our Brigade. It was late evening when during march Captain 
Ayub Uppal, GSO-3 accompanying Brigadier Nafees noticed signs of attack and 
called for an ambulance. He became unconscious while en route to CMH and died 
by next morning. His tragic and unexpected death left a very depressing effect 
from which I recovered after considerable period of time.  
Major Javed Iqbal, who was a great company, platoon mate and friend from PMA, 
was replaced by Major Abdul Qayyum Qureshi, AK. Captain Sajjad Akram was 
replaced by Captain Ayub Uppal, Baluch, another very fine officer, diligent and 
methodical in his work. After the demise of Brigadier Nafees, Lieutenant Colonel 
Zafar Dogar, CO 44 FF became acting Commander. He had transformed 44 FF 
from a lethargic, inefficient set up to a very efficient unit within a very short span 
of time. I once asked him as to how he had done that? His recipe was to go 
around the whole area of the unit first thing in the morning, pulling up people for 
any lapse on their part. He was man full of energy and enthusiasm. Alas he also 
died later due to a heart attack while commanding a Brigade at Landikotal.  
Service in the Brigade with three different commanders was a valuable 
experience and a very pleasant one. In September 1979, I was posted back to 34 
Punjab at Okara. 
Back to Okara 
When I rejoined the unit at Okara after my tenure at Sialkot with 104 Brigade, 34 
Punjab was being commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Abdul Hameed, popularly 
known as Hameed Jan. The unit was performing border duties at Sulemanki 
Headwork where during winters it was a very enjoyable stay. As the CO, still a 
bachelor, was fond of ‘shikar’, we would spend lot of time in duck shooting over 
the vast reservoir of water attracting lot of migratory birds. I saw a flock of 
'Surkhabs' for the first time. The officer in charge of Rangers Wing located at the 
Headwork was also a keen ‘shikari’. The area around the headwork was kept as 
game reserve for senior officers and guests of the Ranger officer.