266 

The Question of Provinces in Pakistan 
Pakistan, the largest Muslim country of the world could not maintain its integrity 
mainly due to inequality of the size of provinces and unresolved regional 
concerns. In 1971, it was fragmented into two parts just before completing 
twenty five years of its existence. Remaining Pakistan continues to face the same 
problems with increased complexity.  
Sitting in a small mud fort at Sangsila in the wilderness of Bugti Tribal agency in 
early 1975, I used to ponder over the fact that while the unrest was confined to 
Marri Agency and some area around Wadh – Khuzdar, two small pockets of the 
vast province of Baluchistan, why was it being projected as revolt of the whole 
Province against the State of Pakistan. Having been repatriated from India shortly 
before that and having firsthand knowledge of how a small active group could 
achieve its objectives with outside support, the thought was most disturbing. 
The need of forming smaller provinces was advocated by many people at 
different times.  Air Marshal (retired) Asghar Khan suggested forming of about 
twelve provinces. General Zia ul Haq who replaced Z A Bhutto could have resolved 
the problem but he was more concerned about fighting the Russians in 
Afghanistan and had no interest to take up domestic issues. In 1984 while serving 
at Quetta I was required to suggest topics for discussion by officers during a study 
period. I included the question of forming smaller provinces in my suggestion. My 
immediate senior Colonel (later Brigadier) Nazar Abbas who had recently come to 
Quetta after serving in General Zia ul Haq’s Chief Martial Law Administrator’s 
(CMLA)  Secretariat got suspicious as if I had suggested  this topic on someone’s 
behest. He told me that this was a very sensitive issue pending with the CMLA 
Secretariat and how I had come to suggest it for discussion. It took some effort to 
convince him that I had thought of it on my own because my observation and 
experience in Balochistan. The topic was excluded from subjects for discussion. 
Background of the Present Provinces 
In 1947 when Pakistan came into being, the large province of Bengal was being 
divided, its eastern part becoming erstwhile East Pakistan. Punjab, stretching 
from River Indus to River Jumna and then ruled by the Unionist Party government