253 

Occupation of glaciated areas is a great folly and crime against global 
environment, cause of deep concern frequently voiced by environmentalists at 
global level. Indian intransigence is impediment in reaching an agreement to 
vacate these heights by both sides; a sad reflection on Indian decision making 
process where a high altitude Indian tour operator was able to cause this human 
disaster as explained in the narrative. Viewed from another angle, continued state 
of confrontation with Pakistan posing external threat has helped India to retain its 
integrity as a country. Not resolving disputes with Pakistan, therefore in India’s 
interest. 
Kargil 1999 
General Pervez Musharraf as Army Chief decided to occupy certain posts opposite 
Kargil in disputed area of Kashmir which were vacated during winters by the 
Indians and reoccupied during summers as a routine. From where Musharraf got 
this inspiration to launch his private war is a matter of conjecture. There are 
claims and counter claims as to the extent of this action being known to the 
government or otherwise. However senior officers of the Army, the Corps 
Commanders who form decision making body in formal meetings were kept in the 
dark, the plan known to a few individuals only. The action evoked violent Indian 
response putting the two nuclear armed countries at the brink of all out war. 
External threat helped India to stabilise their political situation, forming stable 
coalition governments which they were finding difficult to form despite repeated 
elections. Here it is suffice to say the Army troops used during the operation 
displayed remarkable courage during fighting despite being left without logistic 
support. 
Operations in FATA, Swat, Malakand – 2004 – 2015 
US occupation of Afghanistan in 2001 pushed Al-Qaida linked fighters belonging 
to some Central Asian and Arab countries into Pakistan’ tribal areas on our 
western borders. Pakistan was forced to send its Army into tribal areas hitherto 
manned by Frontier Corps (FC) that needed to be reinforced. The terrorists gained 
control over tribal areas particularly in North and South Waziristan by eliminating