50 

Military Academy every month so after one year of being raised, each unit 
had about ten to twelve Second Lieutenants on its strength. To improve 
their professional competence and mould them into effective team, the 
General ordered a very comprehensive promotion examination spread over 
about two weeks for them to get the next rank, of a Lieutenant. According 
to Army rules no such examination is required and the promotion is 
granted after completion of short period. It was a very unusual and 
interesting activity when about one hundred and twenty young officers 
spent about two weeks together in outdoor activities being put through 
tests of physical fitness, firing skills, decision making in battle situations, 
knowledge about administration, rules and regulations etc. It created very 
healthy feelings of comradeship among the officers of different arms and 
services in the Division in addition to a concentrated dose of professional 
training. 

 There is endless tale of interesting incidents. Each day was an exciting day 
generating activity stimulated by boundless commitment to achieve 
professional excellence by everyone in the Division under an inspiring 
commander.   
The years between 1966 and 1971 spent at Kharian were full of learning, 
adventure and joy. The life and its requirements were very simple. A young 
officer’s pay in mid sixties when I joined my unit was less than Rupees 500/- (five 
hundred) per month. This was more than enough because the expenses on food 
were about one third of pay and rest of the amount was enough for other 
expenses i.e. on clothes, travel and entertainment, mainly cinema even if one had 
to travel to other cities. The quality and quantity of food was much better than 
one can afford these days. The day started with bed tea. Breakfast comprised 
porridge, two eggs, bread, butter, jam and tea. After some snacks with tea or 
coffee in the offices/unit, lunch in the mess contained two dishes, one a meat 
dish and the other vegetable or lintels and fruit.  That was followed in due time by 
evening tea with biscuits. Dinner again was an elaborate affair in the form of 
frequent dinner and guest nights. The expenses on the day's meal, the 'daily 
messing' was not to exceed Rs 3.5 as laid down in the regulations. However the