322 

In the process of inflicting military defeat upon my ancestor, Niazi’s performance 
was so exceptional that the British awarded him an on-the-spot Military Cross for 
action on the Assam-Burma front in June 1944. On another occasion they wanted 
to award a DSO, but he was too junior, so a Mention in Despatches was recorded. 
In the original record of his MC signed by his commanding officers all the way up 
to Slim, which I obtained from the British Ministry of Defence, the British 
commanders describe Niazi’s gallantry in detail: “He organized the attack with 
such skill that his leading platoon succeeded in achieving complete surprise over 
the enemy.” They speak of how he personally led his men, the ‘great skill and 
coolness’ under fire with which he changed tactics with changing circumstances, 
created diversionary attacks, extricated his wounded, defeated the enemy and 
withdrew his men by section, remaining personally at the rear in every case. 
The British honoured Niazi for “personal leadership, bravery and complete 
disregard for his own personal safety.” On 15 December 1944 the Viceroy Lord 
Wavell flew to Imphal and in the presence of Lord Mountbatten knighted Slim and 
his corps commanders Stopford, Scoones and Christison. Only two ‘Indian’ officers 
were chosen to be decorated by the Viceroy at that ceremony — ‘Tiger’ Niazi was 
one of them. 
In 1971 Niazi was a highly decorated Pakistani general, twice receiving the Hilal-e-
Jurat. He was sent to East Pakistan in April 1971 — part of a sorry tradition in 
South Asia of political rulers attempting to find military solutions to political 
problems. By then Tikka Khan had already launched the crackdown of 25 March 
for which he has been known to Bengalis as the ‘butcher of Bengal’ ever since. 
The population of East Bengal was completely hostile and Pakistan condemned 
around the world. 
Authoritative scholarly analyses of 1971 are rare. The best work is Richard Sisson 
and Leo Rose’s War and Secession. 
Robert Jackson, fellow of All Soul’s College, Oxford, wrote an account shortly after 
the events. Most of the principal participants did not write about it, a notable 
exception being Gen. Niazi’s recent memoirs (1998).Some Indian officers have