256 

of the country are being conducted jointly by the law enforcing agencies. Terror 
financing, a major factor in sustaining terrorism is also being addressed to. The 
success of operation however will depend on the will of political leadership.  
A major impediment in dealing with terrorism is present judicial system that does 
not punish theterrorist’s for want of required evidence. There is need to 
restructure judiciary that stops being criminal friendly, provides justice so 
essential for a peaceful living in the society and can contribute to winning the war 
against terrorism imposed on Pakistan.   
Army’s Strength  
Pakistan Army, being a volunteer Army draws the best Pakistani young men in 
each category of its ranks. The Army has overcome its initial imbalance in 
induction of manpower, now having representation from all areas of Pakistan. 
Structure of the Army, rather the armed forces is built upon the principle that 
everyone in chain of command obeys order of the ‘chair’ irrespective of the man 
occupying it. This is the cardinal factor without which no force can retain its 
cohesiveness. Pakistan armed forces remain a disciplined force by obeying orders 
of the command and have a robust internal accountability system which remains 
largely intact, recovering from some malpractices creeping in during the period of 
Zia and Musharraf’s rule. The crucial element in maintaining an effective fighting 
force, however, is the public support which despite focused and sustained smear 
campaigns, Pakistan Armed Forces enjoy. Without public support the forces 
cannot perform their assigned tasks successfully. 
Centre of Gravity  
Pakistan Armed Forces remain ‘Centre of Gravity’ of the country for mainly two 
reasons. The first reason is our location in a volatile and disturbed region with a 
rectangular geographical configuration forming long borders with the 
neighbouring countries. This necessitates maintaining strong, well trained armed 
forces. The numerical strength of forces is determined keeping in view the 
strength and capabilities of the armed forces maintained by neighbouring 
countries. Pakistan is forced to maintain credible deterrence against possible 
aggression, a defensive posture not designed or organized to undertake invasion