217 

Pakistan’s interests. The US influence and controls made Pakistan a weak and 
pliable State causing its dismemberment when the country started making 
progress at unprecedented pace in early sixties.  
After removal of Ayub Khan in 1969 and dismemberment of Pakistan in 1971 
under General Yahya’s Khan’s short, destructive rule of about two years, the 
persons following him contributed their share that has brought the country to 
itspresent abysmal state. 
Zulfikar Ali (ZA) Bhutto 
Pakistan was well on road to rapid progress in early sixties after having overcome 
teething problems of earlier years. The 1965 War with India derailed that 
progress putting Pakistan into a tailspin from which it never recovered. The 
initiator of this derailment was Mr. Z A Bhutto who influenced events in the short 
history of this country in most negative way. Born in Bombay and educated in US, 
he came to Karachi after Pakistan came into being and started cultivating contacts 
with rulers. Sharp, handsome and articulate, he soon succeeded in courting 
favour with Mr. Iskandar Mirza who inducted him into the cabinet as minister, 
where he survived and progressed during Ayub Khan’s rule. His burning ambition 
was to rule a country irrespective of its size. 
American intelligence agency CIA, the main tool of capitalist interests works on 
talented people who undertake their studies in the US. This includes armed forces 
personnel who attend courses in US institutions as brought out by Lieutenant 
General Shahid Aziz in his recently published memoirs in Urdu ‘Yeh Khamoshi Kab 
Tak’. They use such persons to pursue their global agenda. Mr. Z A Bhutto was 
one such man with unbounded ambition, gifted with ability to agitate and arouse 
masses. Since he could not foresee his success in united Pakistan because Bengal 
having larger population where he could not get ingress, he worked to weaken 
Pakistan and ultimately to dismember it creating space for himself in a part of 
Pakistan. His first target was to remove Ayub Khan from power. Acting on a lesson 
from Kutalia’s Earthshastra that if the minister wants his ruler to be weakened he 
should get the state into war with the neighbouring state, Mr. Bhutto was prime 
mover in initiating armed conflict with India in 1965 as narrated in some detail in