25 

held at Lahore for a number of years. Other significant means of entertainment 
were frequent ‘Melas’, the main event being annual three days festival organised 
by the local administration at Talagang. One major attraction on this Mela was 
the game of 'Pirr Kaudi' for which famous players of area including surrounding 
districts would participate. Akbar Niazi from some village in Mianwali district was 
a famous player of that game in late fifties. The game was different from 'Kabaddi' 
which is played in a confined space and is still being played, the East Punjab 
government being its recent patron. 'Pirr Kaudi' is played no more. In this game a 
player challenges the opponents to catch him. Two players of the opponent team 
accept the challenge. The challenger then starts running away from the start point 
being pursued by the two men. The challenger, after running for a few hundred 
yards remaining in sight of the audience, turns back to reach the starting point 
avoiding being stopped by the two men pursuing him. He scores the point if he 
can reach back to starting point without being stopped. This game was played by 
tall men of ideal physique and it was a pleasure to watch them running and using 
different techniques to score their points.  The pursuers would often use a 
technique called 'Kainchi' (Scissor). This was to use one's legs in a scissor fashion 
to drop the challenger entangling his legs. The challenger would mainly use his 
better speed, pushing and slapping the pursuers when they tried to come near 
him. This whole process was most amusing for the audience. 
The overall environment was of contentment, happiness and enjoyment in 
outdoor sports and Melas. Almost every man living in the village was self-
employed. The peasants after sowing their wheat crop would go to Karachi in 
winters to work in construction industry as labourers till the time of harvesting 
their crop in April, earning some cash during the period. The animals would be 
looked after by the women and children. Women worked more than men in the 
agricultural households. Service in Army was preferred choice as agriculture could 
not provide sustainable livelihood to the communities in the arid, rain fed area. As 
a young man I started this journey of adventure spanning over three decades.  
Looking back at the life as a witness and participant of events, I feel the pain of 
distortions, misconception and lies about important events during our short 
history as some would get revealed in the subsequent chapters.