111 

Our group was brought to Ranchi, in Bihar Province of India. As we detrained at 
railway station, we found the attitude of Indian officers completely different from 
what we had experienced in East Pakistan. They were harsh and mean in their 
conduct. On reflection we realised that the Indians’ exemplary conduct in East 
Pakistan was a deliberate effort to save them of any problem during our transit 
which their hostile attitude would have provoked. They were very sweet and nice 
till we reached India. All of that appeared to be so well planned by our enemies 
down to minute detail.  
After staying at Ranchi camp for about two days, some prisoners were moved to 
another camp at Ramgargh, about forty kilometres away from Ranchi. I along with 
Captain Afreen was part of this group. Our request that we should be allowed to 
meet with and stay with officers of our unit who were also brought to Ranchi was 
not met by the Indians.  
The camp at Ramgarh, as at other places, was made by converting barracks of 
other ranks of the Indian Army into prisoner cages. Barbed wire was erected 
around a group of three to four barracks to make a cage. The whole cantonment 
was converted into prisoner camp. We were in Camp No 25. There was another 
small camp at Ramgarh for senior officers. There were about three hundred 
officers at Ramgargh camp No 25, kept in two cages each comprising three/ four 
barracks. Initially we were provided with tubular cots which the Indians kept 
withdrawing as punishment and reissuing, a continuous process for over two 
years. Cook houses were established inside the cages where our unit cooks were 
employed, provided with rations authorised to soldiers. It was Dall and chapatti 
during day and meat/ vegetables with chapatti in the evening, apart from 
morning and afternoon tea.  Life in the camp started with recounting the events 
and exchanging notes with other officers. Major Sajid Jalal Mazari, who was 
Artillery Battery Commander with 34 Punjab at Thakurgaon also landed in this 
camp and through him we came to know the details of actions of our unit.  
The reality of losing half of the country weighed heavy on everyone’s mind 
particularly when every unit that encountered the enemy fought with 
determination, grit and courage. The incidents of unparalleled gallantry were 
many but it all went to waste. The units of the three under strength Divisions