179 

way before it was stopped just south of Gilgit. Word spread that while passing 
through Bunji, the Lashkar had been provided with weapons and ammunition by 
NLI Centre and some thought that Commandant had actually joined the Lashkar. 
Although untrue, this was a very negative perception. Colonel Aziz was posted out 
and replaced by Colonel Ashraf Hussain Shah.  
The sectarian tension between predominant Sunni population of Pakistan and the 
Shias exacerbated during the period of Zia ul Haq when religious seminaries were 
funded and used to recruit fighters for war against the Russians in Afghanistan. 
There was no state control over the movement on our western borders, nor any 
restriction on movement of Afghan nationals within the country. Although 
refugee camps had been established but very large number of Afghan nationals of 
every ethnic and sectarian dispensation were free to move anywhere they liked. A 
large number had got them registered as Pakistani nationals due to lax 
procedures in giving national identity cards. In Northern Areas, external forces 
were involved using their local agents to disturb peace in the strategically 
important area on our borders with China. According to reports, posters 
distributed in the area by rival groups to fan hatred using abusive and derogatory 
language against each other were printed at faraway Multan in the same press, a 
clear indication on the common source of funding and people involved in 
fomenting trouble being the same. One important player in this game got killed in 
Gilgit due to personal enmity during my tenure. His removal from the scene and 
simultaneously our efforts in reaching out to motivate ex-servicemen and the 
common people helped in reducing intensity of the trouble for quite a few years 
afterwards. 
With this sectarian background, my posting created ripples in the concerned 
circles, a Sunni replacing a Shia Commandant, of which I learnt a little later. In 
Pakistan Army, sect of a person was never a consideration. Before Pakistan’s 
involvement in the fight against Russians in Afghanistan, there was hardly ever a 
case of sectarian dispute in the country, the Sunnis facilitating Shia’s annual 
Muharram processions by making arrangement for provision of milk and 
‘sharbats’ on well defined routes from where processions had to pass through the 
towns and cities.  In Northern Areas, there were four different sects i.e. Shias,