35 

I put it? - a rank odour of hellfire about him. It was a case of CORRUPTO OPTIMA 
PESSOMA a flawed angel. I believe that at heart he lacked a sense of dignity and 
value of other people; his own self was what counted. I sensed in him ruthlessness 
and capacity for ill-doing which went far beyond what is natural.  

Except at university abroad, he was surrounded by mediocrities, and all his life, for 
want of competition, his triumphs came too easily for his own good. Lacking 
humility, he thus came to believe himself infallible, even when yawning gaps his 
own experience (e.g. of military matters) laid him---as over the 1965 war--wide 
open to disastrous error.  

Despite his gifts, I judged that one day Bhutto would destroy himself -- when, I 
could not tell. In 1965, I so reported in one of my dispatches from Pakistan as 
British High Commissioner. I wrote by way of clinching the point that Bhutto was 
born to be hanged. I did not intend this comment as a precise prophecy of what 
was going to happen to him, but fourteen years later that was what it turned out 
to be".  
Bhutto was born and brought up in Bombay (Mumbai) in India.  At the time of 
creation of Pakistan he was studying in USA. After completing his studies, he 
came to settle in Karachi. Till early sixties, when he was a minister in the 
Pakistan’s cabinet, he claimed to be an Indian citizen in litigation to get his 
father’s property in Bombay, India. In Karachi soon after his arrival from USA, he 
cultivated contacts with the then President Mr. Iskandar Mirza by befriending 
Mirza’s son, Mr. Humayun Mirza. Although already married, he contracted 
another marriage with a Persian girl reinforcing his contact with Presidency 
through Persian second wife of the President. A man of sharp intellect and 
impressive personality, he soon got inducted in the cabinet as a very young 
minister. When Ayub Khan took over from Iskandar Mirza, he retained Mr. Bhutto 
as a minister in his cabinet first as Minister for Commerce and then as Foreign 
Minister of Pakistan. 

About his scheming and role in initiating armed conflict with India that led to 
breakup of Pakistan, I got a chance of listening to a retired bureaucrat, a veteran