224 

a number of times from one spot before moving forward to take next shot. I could 
not make out what was real purpose of undertaking such seemingly useless 
exercise by the President. Being in the profession of dealing with men, my 
observation was that Nawaz Sharif was a dumb person, easy to exploit, a perilous 
weakness in a person leading government of a nuclear armed country. 
Jokes invented, although not true, reflect the bent of mind of target persons. In 
the backdrop of reports of getting huge kickbacks and commissions in mega 
projects by the ruling elite, a famous joke invented some years back goes as 
follows. On inauguration ceremony of a major road completed with lot of fanfare, 
a sycophant suggested that the chief guest performing opening ceremony should 
be given the title of ‘Sher Shah Suri Sani’ (Sher Shah Suri, the Second). Curious, 
the chief guest asked, “Who was Sher Shah Suri?” When he was told that Sher 
Shah Suri was a King of India who laid the Grand Trunk Road covering his Kingdom 
from Peshawar to Bengal spanning thousands of kilometers; spontaneous 
remarks attributed to the chief guest were that “He must have made lot of 
money”.  
Nawaz Sharif was picked up during General Zia ul Haq’s rule when Lieutenant 
General Ghulam Gilani Khan who had been heading the Inter-Services Intelligence 
Agency (ISI) during Z A Bhutto’s period was Governor of Punjab. When Mian 
Muhammad Sharif, a business man from Lahore was approached to get his family 
into political field, he spared Nawaz Sharif to be inducted into politics being of no 
use to him in running his business. Shahbaz Sharif joined his brother later to use 
political positions in expanding their businesses by robbing banks and state 
resources. They have become enormously rich with properties and businesses in 
UK, Saudi Arabia and other places. On Mr Nawaz Sharif becoming prime minister 
of Pakistan, someone asked Mian Sharif to cap their business activities. Mian 
Sharif reportedly told the interlocutor that for them the time of doing business 
had come now. 
Mr Shahbaz Sharif is projected as man of action doing great service to the people 
of Punjab. It is a big farce. A close look at his actions reveals that in initial years of 
his becoming Chief Minister, his elder brother being the Prime Minister, Shahbaz 
did bring improvement in functioning of the provincial government. That was