51 

messing would exceed that limit at times. A strict check was kept by the officer 
detailed as Mess Secretary and further supervised by the second in command of 
the units as their duty. 
The officer’s messes and the officers clubs served drinks from well stocked bars. 
We who had joined in bulk after 1965 War, mostly from the villages were from 
different family backgrounds where in our houses and environments we were not 
exposed to use of spirits. On joining the units we were initiated into drinks by our 
seniors. Some of us started enjoying occasional drinks particularly during the 
week ends. Most favourite place was the garrison club where one had the facility 
to watch a movie screened on a wall out in the open, a game of ‘Tambola’ and a 
bottle of very fine quality Murree Brewery beer in the summers. During winters 
Whiskey and Jinn were in demand. The ‘Aabdaar’, a term no more in use, who 
poured drinks ordered at the bar remained quite busy on the weekends. Liquor 
was freely available throughout the country from particular shops that had the 
license from the government to sell it. Even opium was available from specified 
shops having license to sell till late nineteen fifties. Sale and consumption of 
spirits was banned by Mr. Z A Bhutto in his last days in power to please Mullahs 
expecting to save his rule.  
The routine of officers in an infantry unit started with physical exercise period in 
the morning with the troops. After that we would come back to the mess to 
change into uniforms, have breakfast and rush back for training with the troops 
which lasted till mid morning. After attending the training in unit training areas 
we would come to the company offices located in the residential barracks of 
troops to attend to office routine. At lunch time we would go back to the messes, 
have some rest after lunch and then come back to units for a sports period with 
the troops. This lasted till about sunset after which we would get back to our 
rooms in the mess and prepare for the supper in the mess or dinner/guest nights 
which were quite frequent. These were attended by senior officers of the unit in 
turn basically to ensure propriety and grooming of young officers. All this running 
about during the day was done on rented bicycles. Every unit maintained a cycle 
shop to cater for the needs of the officers and the soldiers alike. Television was