69 

About awards, Lieutenant Colonel Hafeez Ur Rahman, the CO till mid July 1971 did 
not initiate any recommendation. It was suggested to the CO to initiate citations 
for awards for the first day’s actions. On that day we had two encounters and 
cleared the opposition in a very short time in most audacious manner. In those 
actions we had suffered nine casualties including one officer being martyred. The 
CO’s response was that we were being paid for the job and should not claim 
awards for fighting against rebels. This was faulty logic because the bullets fired 
by rebels were equally lethal and acts of bravery merited recognition. 
After change of command, the new CO sent some recommendations including 
that of Captain Muhammad Afreen for an action in Pachagarh area but because of 
unsporting attitude from the Brigade Headquarters as alluded to from the 
incidents mentioned earlier, these recommendations were not processed. Later 
when the gallantry awards were announced after few months, a large number of 
people from other units had been bestowed with gallantry awards. As the awards 
were announced, I got in touch with Major (later Lieutenant Colonel) Muhammad 
Safdar (popularly known as ‘ginger’, a Khattak from Shaidu near Nowshera) of my 
unit who was posted at Headquarters Eastern Command as staff officer dealing 
with the awards. I asked him as to why 34 Punjab had not received any awards 
having lost two officers by then and having achieved some most spectacular 
successes in operations. He informed that Eastern Command had not received 
any citation/recommendation about any one from 34 Punjab.  
The only gallantry award received by the unit was Tamgha e Jurrat (TJ) to Havildar 
Muhammad Sharif (retired as Honorary Captain) after repatriation from the 
Indian POW camps in 1974.  One of our anti tank platoon had been placed under 
command 27 Brigade deployed in Brahman Baria area opposite Indian State of 
Tripura in the East. This platoon was commanded by the burly Captain Mian Bux, 
a Chandio Baloch from Sindh. Brigadier Saadullah, on repatriation made a special 
effort to initiate Havildar Sharif’s citation and got him this award for an action 
during battle near Aashuganj Bridge on Meghna River in December 1971. 
Brigadier Saadullah was a very reputed officer for his courage, character and 
competence. His Brigade while withdrawing from Brahmanbaria towards Bhairab 
Bazaar was being closely followed by advancing Indians from east.  On reaching