77 

allowing criminal gangs to indulge in an orgy of killings at their leisure. When a 
column led by Brigadier Jahanzeb Arbab reached Santahar railway junction in 
North Bengal, the place was littered with dead bodies killed moments before 
arrival of the Army. Other columns also witnessed signs of similar atrocities. On 
reaching Mymensingh we found people of a whole colony of non Bengalis 
butchered; even those who had taken refuge in the mosques had not been spared 
and were killed inside the mosques. When our column was moving towards 
Brahamanbaria from Aashuganj Bridge and was recalled to move towards 
Kishorganj towards the north, lots of dead bodies of freshly killed people were 
found lying along the railway line. Recollection of such atrocities becomes more 
painful when the lies and false perceptions blaming Pakistan Army have become 
an accepted truth. 
Dr. Sarmila Bose in her book ‘DEAD RECKONING – Memories of the 1971 
Bangladesh War’ published in 2011 is a research study on the subject of killings 
and atrocities during that war. She spent some years (2003-6) in her research, 
repeatedly travelling to Bangladesh and Pakistan in search of truth. She 
completely negates Indo-Bangladesh narrative on these issues, absolving Pakistan 
Army to have committed rapes, atrocities and murders.  
Raid across Jagdal Hat 
Proceeding with my narrative, as my Company was replaced and brought to 
Thakurgaon in July, Captain Muhammad Afreen was taken away by the CO to lead 
newly formed Commando Platoon. This platoon comprised of about twenty young 
soldiers who went into an operation in Pachagarh area. A rebel position of 
considerable strength was positioned on the approach from Pachagarh into the 
Titulia salient. Since it had been decided not to go into Titulia salient because it 
was difficult to hold a narrow strip of land flanked from three sides by Indian 
territory, this rebel position had not been cleared. The rebels, undisturbed since 
last so many months has started giving trouble.  
Paucity of troops did not allow use of adequate strength to launch a conventional 
attack so it was decided to conduct a raid on those positions. Only two platoons 
could be made available for the raid. While one platoon from 8 Baluch Company