76 

Similarly the stories of killing of Bengali civilians attributed to Pakistan Army were 
exaggerated beyond limits. At the start of operation from Dacca on 25 March 
1971, some people had been killed due to indiscriminate firing in the city as we 
came to know on reaching Dacca. Main place where people got killed was Dacca 
University where rebels were concentrated. Because of dissatisfaction of High 
Command with handling of the operation on that night of 25/26 March, both the 
Generals responsible were relieved of command. Major General Khadim Raja the 
General Officer Commanding 14 Division was replaced by Major General M Rahim 
Khan and Lieutenant General Tikka Khan, Commander Eastern Command was 
replaced by Lieutenant General Amir Abdullah Khan (A A K) Niazi who arrived in 
East Pakistan in first week of April 1971, assuming command on 10 April 1971. As 
the troops arrived from West Pakistan and started moving to reach borders in 
different directions from Dacca they did not find the people who deserved to be 
killed as explained above.  
Large scale killing of non Bengalis, mostly the people who had migrated from 
India to East Pakistan and the West Pakistanis working in East Pakistan was done 
by Bengali rebels joined by criminal elements during the months of Jan to April 
1971 when the government had no control over the situation. Another spree of 
large scale killings and atrocities on non Bengalis was unleashed after 16 
December 1971 by Bengali armed gangs; like Qadir Bahini in Tangail area north of 
Dacca. The Indian occupation Army took some time to control such bands of 
criminals operating in other areas where non Bengali population was still left 
ultimately confined to ghettos in Dacca. 
The scale of this killing can be determined from the numbers of non Bengali 
population residing in East Pakistan in January 1971 and those left after the war. 
These people were killed in thousands during that period of about four months 
from January to end April 1971 which was of complete lawlessness in the whole 
country. Criminal gangs in the garb of Awami League activists indulged in 
unspeakable atrocities. The hapless non Bengalis would be collected at one place, 
their women were gang raped and then killed. As the Army columns were 
advancing towards borders on different routes on foot, the bridges and culverts 
on the roads having been blown, progress of move was slow and predictable