80 

We reached 4 Frontier Force (FF) Battalion HQ located at a small village, rather 
few hutments named Chattni. Here I was briefed by Brigadier Hassan that there 
was a possibility of an Indian attack on 14th August, our Independence Day. Since 
Hilly offered the shortest approach to Indians in reaching Road Rangpur – Bogra, 
main communication artery in North Bengal, my Recce and Support (R&S) 
Company had been provided to the Brigade to strengthen 4 FF positions.  On a 
map, he indicated a track junction which was supposed to be my battle position 
and told me to reconnoiter this position before my company arrived. 
The Indian border at Hilli ran along the railway line for some distance. In fact the 
main entrance of Railway Station Building, built before partition, opened into 
India and was now blocked with the help of corrugated iron (CGI) sheets. A look at 
alignment of the border would indicate that Hilli town should have been part of 
Pakistan but it was learnt that an influential Hindu family owning a factory on that 
side got the alignment changed resulting in a very unusual demarcation of the 
border. There were some other such travesties in deciding border demarcation in 
the northern part of Bengal where some ‘enclaves’ inside Pakistan were Indian 
Territory and vice versa.  
I did my reconnaissance in heavy rain and on very difficult slushy ‘kachha’ tracks. 
The two small American Jeeps, M-38 A1, which I had with me, helped me to 
negotiate the torturous terrain. After two days my company started arriving from 
Thakurgaon area in groups by train disembarking at Hilli Railway Station. I had 
two officers, Captain Afreen and Lieutenant Muhammad Saeed Tariq 
commanding two platoons and Subedar Aziz Khan, an experienced, mature JCO, 
commanding the third platoon.  
The composition of my R&S Company was one anti tank platoon comprising 
twelve 106 mm Recoilless Rifles (an anti tank weapon), another platoon with six 
Medium Machine Guns and third platoon with twelve Light Machine Guns. All 
these weapons were mounted/carried on the jeeps.  On reaching East Pakistan 
the number of anti tank guns was reduced from twelve to six in a Company, 
considering that the area was not much suitable for use of tanks so there was 
lesser need of anti tank weapons. This premise proved wrong particularly in North 
Bengal where the Indians used tanks during the winters as area was suitable for