271 

District Governments 
Basic unit of governance should be the present DISTRICTS. The district 
governments should function according to Local Governments Ordinance 2001 
removing some anomalies and laying down clear responsibilities for meeting basic 
needs of a citizen like food, shelter, education, health, security and justice at the 
local level. The Union Councils, provided with resources should be made 
responsible for ‘Human Resource Development’, the district providing physical 
infrastructure and technical input. Provision of timely justice should be ensured to 
maintain order and counter extremism in the society. Senior judges placed at the 
Union Council level, with their offices open twenty four hours, investigating teams 
under command and police on call, should be made responsible to dispense 
justice instead of acquitting the accused persons because of inadequate or 
nonexistent evidence. For this, the rules of business need to be changed, the 
judge reaching out to the victim rather than the victim struggling to get justice.  
The Provinces 
Smaller provinces should be formed named after principal cities that would 
eliminate chances of fanning ethnic and parochial biases and concerns.These 
provinces would be almost equal in size of geographical expanse with limited role 
of providing support to the district governments. In these provinces there is no 
need of provincial assemblies, the ministers, advisors and chief ministers. The 
provinces should be headed by governors assigned with a limited, clearly 
specified role of supporting the district government in maintaining law and order 
and provision of justice. For this purpose, the governors assisted by a small staff 
team should select, enroll, train and provide police and judicial staff to the 
districts. The laws are made by the National parliament. There is no need to make 
laws at different tiers increasing the number of law makers, a class of parasites 
devouring national resources.  
The Central Government 
The central government should retain ten to twelve ministries responsible to 
formulate and implement national level policies, rest all the responsibilities being 
passed on to the provinces and district governments.