243 

The Fallacy of Army’s Rule 
Pakistan Army remains under criticism for its role in assuming power in Pakistan, 
not allowing political governments to function, disrupting political process. The 
term ‘Army’s Rule’ though is grossly misleading. It does not reflect true 
disposition of the governance structure when Army Chiefs assume power and 
their inspiration to do so. Decisions to remove civilian governments by Army 
Chiefs were personal, incited, goaded and facilitated by politicians and welcomed 
by general public at the times when these decisions have been taken during the 
past. Role of Army as institution in governance of the country under Army 
generals who assumed power at different times in the country was very limited at 
the initial stages of these take over’s; a small force used to occupy a few buildings 
in the Capital. The Generals soon consolidated their position; getting 
overwhelmingly positive response from public, politicians, bureaucracy and the 
judiciary.  
A general impression among the public which has considerable weight is that our 
rulers, civilians or military are appointed by the US to facilitate implementation of 
their policies in the region. The examples of picking up a quasi fundamentalist 
General Zia ul Haq to confront Godless Russians and later ‘liberal’ General 
Musharraf to dismantle Jihadist network formed to fight against the Russians 
illustrates the point. The latest example is that of 2008 elections, when name of 
Mr. Yusuf Raza Gilani was finalised during meetings at the US Embassy in 
Islamabad, ignoring much expected Mr. Amin Fahim then heading Pakistan 
People’s Party. So it would be more appropriate to say that civilians or military, 
our rulers are appointed by the US, rather the Global Capitalists Establishment. 
In the presence of retired Lieutenant General  Hamid Gul who was well versed 
with the influence of external forces in our State affairs because of his experience 
as head of our premier spy agency, I uttered the words about the period of 
‘General’s rule’. He promptly corrected me that it is American Agent’s rule not 
General’s rule. If any proof was ever required, one can refer to Lieutenant 
General Shahid Aziz’s book where he narrates American’s methods to cultivate 
officers detailed on career courses in USA.  So the Army’s rule is a gross 
misnomer. Civilians or Military, we are actually being ruled by the agents of