220 

also joined ‘Mujahideen’ fighting against the Russians who were forced to vacate 
Afghanistan after about ten years of their occupation, paying very heavy price as 
this war resulted in disintegration of the USSR. General Zia was disposed of on 17 
August 1988 when his very safe and stable American made military aircraft, a C-
130 crashed near Bahawalpur. He died along with the American Ambassador and 
a number of senior military officers including General Akhtar Abdul Rahman the 
ex ISI boss responsible to conduct the war against Russians.  
Pakistan, under firm rule of General Ziaul haq blunted USSR’s thrust towards 
Arabian Sea that could have further disintegrated Pakistan by Russian occupation 
of Balochistan where the Russians had their agents working since decades. This 
was a major achievement. However for want of sound policies and plans during 
his long rule, the internal situation of the country worsened in terms of sectarian 
tensions, spread of narcotics and illegal sophisticated weapons. Over five million 
Afghans crossed over to Pakistan, some of them were provided shelter in the 
camps established for them but there was no control of their movement. This 
caused enormous multifaceted problems which continue to aggravate our 
internal security situation to this day.  
Ten Years of Musical Chairs 
After Zia’s death Pakistan went through political instability as no civilian 
government could complete their normal tenure. Benazir’s and Nawaz Sharif’s 
governments were removed twice in turn on charges of corruption and misrule in 
a decade of civilian rule. The American and Saudi Ambassadors were deeply 
involved in making and breaking the governments.  
While my assessment of Mr Nawaz Sharif as a leader follows in succeeding 
paragraphs, about late Benazir Bhutto less said the better. Her actions to 
sabotage national interests like increased Indian involvement and ethnic cleansing 
from Sindh as mentioned in a previous chapter and her husband’s collecting 
commissions in deals at the State’s expense were obvious reasons for removal of 
her government. Her judgment of people is manifest in her selecting Asif Ali 
Zardari as her husband. Before marriage Asif Zardari was involved in petty 
financial crimes to make a living. To escape arrest in some cases, he left Pakistan.