38 

“This writer is a personal witness to the unfolding of this tragedy as I had the 
honour to command our Army's Corps de elite, the Special Service Group (SSG) at 
this critical juncture. In late May 1965, I was directed by the Vice Chief of General 
Staff, (late Major General Abid Bilgrami) to go to Murree and see GOC 12 Division, 
Akhtar Hussian Malik. The GOC's briefing of the outline plan of Gibraltar operation 
left me stunned. The plan was so childish, so bizarre as to be unacceptable to 
logical, competent, professionally sound military persons anywhere in the world. 
I frankly told General Akhtar Malik that the Operation was a non starter and that I 
would render the same advice to the Chief and Vice Chief of General Staff. At GHQ, 
the same day I briefed the CGS and VCGS, who listened to me patiently. The result 
of my presentation however was barren of the result. Major General Malik Sher 
Bahadur (The CGS) posed only one question. You (Mehdi) say that operation 
Gibraltar as planned stands no chance of succeeding, but Akhtar Malik (COG 12 
Division) feels confident of its success. My reply to the Chief of the General Staff 
was that, the conflicting view point of Mehdi and Akhtar Malik notwithstanding, 
as Chief of General Staff of Pakistan Army, he should also have an opinion on this 
important matter as we were not playing a peace time war game, but with the 
destiny of Pakistan itself. To this date I remember the reaction of the CGS. He went 
red right up to his ears, and after a painful pause got up, extended his hand to 
shake and brought the interview to an end with the remarks that it is always 
interesting to listen to you!!” 
He further writes that; 
“The simple truth emerging from the narrative is, that neither the C-in-C Army nor 
General Staff had the guts to stand up to the President, Field Marshal Ayub Khan, 
and tell him that his advisers in the ministry of Foreign Affairs supported by GOC 
12 Division, Akhtar Malik were taking him on a long ride commencing with 
Gibraltar, leading to his downfall via Tashkent, as it eventually proved! The loser 
in the final analysis was Pakistan, described so feelingly by General K.M. Arif in an 
analysis carried by daily Dawn', 6th September 1990. How and why Pakistan 
blundered into war..........