136 

how a small group with support from outside powers could achieve objectives far 
beyond their capabilities as it had led to break up of Pakistan. The solution I 
contemplated was to replace large unequal provinces of Pakistan with about 
thirty almost equal size provinces named after principal cities. 
In about eight years of duty in the province of Balochistan at different times 
between the years 1967 to 1990, I had the chance of traversing whole length and 
breadth of this vast land. My observation is that Pashtuns, living in areas east and 
northeast of Quetta have utilised the land and available water resources to the 
optimum level because of their hard work. The areas inhabited by non Pashtun 
communities and  tribes are vast tracts of unutilised lands except some pockets 
like Mastung, Qalat, Khuzdar and Panjgur/ Turbat, the later known for very good 
quality dates. The Province is wrongly named if ethnicity is the consideration of 
naming it. Pushtunes, Brahavis, Mekranis, Iranians, Jats, Hazaras combined are 
much more in numbers than Balochs living in the Province.  There are more 
Balochs in Punjab and Sindh than in Balochistan. The province itself is populated 
by tribes and communities other than Balochs in Balochistan. Brahavis are 
concentrated in Kalat plateau, Medes (like Nausherwanis having affinity with 
Siestan in Iran) mainly inhabiting Kharan, Jats and Lassi living in Las Bela and 
surroundings and people of Arab and African origin in coastal areas of  Makran. 
Population in all these areas would not total up to be more than three million 
people. The hinterland is devoid of population, the habitations mainly 
concentrated in small towns. 
In April 1975, 53 Punjab was ordered to move back to Kharian as it had come 
under a scheme where its manpower had to be shed to other units, keeping only 
a skeleton staff as an economy measure.  
53 Punjab, later re-designated as 18 Sind, had very well trained and competent 
junior leaders, the JCOs and NCOs. Raised by Lieutenant Colonel Hafeez Ur 
Rahman, my CO in East Pakistan in earlier part of 1971, this unit was now being 
commanded by Major Jamil Masud (later Brigadier) as an officiating CO. The unit 
performed assigned tasks most successfully without suffering casualties except 
four people wounded in a road accident. The unit used to provide food to poor 
people from its unit cook houses wherever it moved and established its camps.