169 

Defense Day. The meal was arranged for all the Punjab Battalions stationed at 
Lahore Cantonment which at that time were six in number, making a fairly large 
gathering. Just before start of the evening, I was informed that the Governor of 
Punjab, Makhdoom Sajjad Hussain Qureshi was also to join on the occasion. 
During get together at Garrison Club in the afternoon, the Governor had been 
invited by Punjab Regiment’s senior retired officers, who among others included 
redoubtable Lieutenant General Azam Khan, former Governor of East Pakistan to 
attend the function. The function lasted till quite late in the evening, everyone 
enjoying the occasion. I was greatly impressed with pleasant small talk by the 
Governor in his chaste Seraeki, music to the ears. 
Quetta, once again  
By end of 1987, I received posting order as officiating Colonel Staff of 19 Division 
at Mangla. Before I could move out, this order was cancelled and instead I was to 
move to 41 Division located at Quetta on the same appointment. Brigadier Bilal 
Ahmad, FF, who was Chief of Staff 4 Corps at Lahore, was posted on promotion to 
command the newly raised 41 Division. He had known me in command of 27 
Punjab at Lahore and wanted me to be his principal staff officer. He got my 
posting to Mangla cancelled and instead I had to move to Quetta. 
I reached Quetta and assumed new responsibilities. The Division was in its raising 
process. Basically the HQ and some of supporting arms and service units were 
being newly raised. Two existing brigades and some artillery units were placed 
under command of the Division and later a new Brigade HQ was raised. The 
Division was lodged in the accommodation vacated by 16 Division that moved to a 
newly established cantonment at Pano Aqil. Soon our new Division was to 
participate in the largest exercise with troops held by the Army under General 
Aslam Beg. The exercise named ‘Zarb e Momin’ was held during winter months of 
1989 in Thal desert, area between Rivers Indus and Jhelum. A few months after 
the exercise, the Division was again moved to upper Sindh for a special task 
assigned by the Army. Within a span of about eight months the Division had to 
move through Bolan Pass thrice which is a very taxing exercise for staff in 
coordinating those moves.