227 

Karachi and Hyderabad joining Sindh Government initially but soon both Parties 
fell apart. Pakistan Tehrik e Insaaf (PTI) formed government is KPK with support 
from Jamat e Islami. In Balochistan the nationalist parties formed the government 
with Dr Abdul Malik as Chief Minister, to be replaced after two and a half years by 
a PML (N) man according to an agreement between the concerned parties.   
Sit-in (Dharna) at Islamabad 
Simmering discontent against the rigged elections surfaced in a massive agitation 
organized by Imran Khan’s Party in the form of sit-in (Dharna) opposite 
Parliament building in Islamabad that lasted for over four months during summers 
of 2014. The sit in was joined by Dr Tahir ul Qadri with his followers. Dr Qadri, a 
religious scholar based in Canada gave a strong call for change outlining his 
programme that addresses some basic issues and need of restructuring the 
present administrative and judicial systems. Before he arrived in Pakistan from 
Canada, Just a few weeks before sit- in at Islamabad, Punjab Police opened fire on 
his unarmed followers outside his house in Model Town Lahore killing about 
fourteen persons including a pregnant woman and injuring about eighty people. 
This was done in broad day light, the event covered by the TV channels, senior 
police officers present on the scene and embracing a character called ‘Gullu But’ 
who with a stick undertook the operation of breaking cars windscreens and 
damaging the vehicles parked outside Dr Qadri’s home. The sit-in ended when 
terrorists attack in Peshawar caused death to about one hundred and fifty staff 
and students forcing the county’s political leadership to get together to deal with 
the terrorists menace in earnest.   
Imran Khan, due to his charisma and appeal to the masses is a man on the 
country’s political scene who has the potential to lead our nation back to path of 
progress and stability if he understands his limitations and can correct course. He 
has some very able persons from different fields ready to work with him. He 
needs to organize his party making best use of available assets. His success would 
lie in taking bold decisions on some fundamental issues like restructuring judicial 
system, delegating power, resources and responsibilities to the local 
governments, taking up question of replacing present unequal provinces with 
smaller almost equal size administrative units, integrating tribal areas into