236 

'Tourist' or Terrorist 
The understanding by Mullah Omar of the world around him can be judged from 
an interesting quote by Lieutenant General Zia ud Din during a TV interview on a 
private Pakistani channel. According to the General when he, as head of ISI, the 
premier Pakistani Intelligence Agency met Mullah Omar on the eve of impending 
US invasion of Afghanistan, Mullah Omar told him that the western media was 
calling him ‘Tourist’. The General then clarified that they were calling him 
‘Terrorist’ which was very dangerous and derogatory.  
Mullah Omar’s government which came to be known as The Taliban Government 
was recognised by only three countries i.e. Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and UAE. 
Pakistan had done so; rather it could not have done otherwise, because of its long 
and porous border with Afghanistan. Pakistan had recognised every government 
in Kabul, starting with that of King Zahir Shah, precisely for this reason because 
the country could not afford disputes on its western borders when its long 
eastern border with India was not secure. Afghanistan under Zahir Shah was the 
only country that opposed Pakistan’s entry into the United Nation Organisation. 
Pakistan however remained focused to maintain workable relations with Kabul.   
‘Taliban’ Government brought a semblance of order eliminating infighting among 
numerous warlords, effective drug control and end of crime through harsh and 
deterrent punishments. They were being cultivated by the Americans to allow oil 
and gas pipelines to pass through Afghanistan, giving contracts to a group of 
companies led by UNOCAL. For this the US authorities hosted some Taliban 
leaders in Washington but the deal could not get through due to intransigent 
attitude of the Afghan leaders. Apprehending failure to exploit energy resources 
due to Taliban government in Kabul, alternative plans to remove them were 
initiated which resulted in US occupation of Afghanistan. It was failure of Taliban 
leaders to understand the implications of denying capitalist’s interests which 
caused turmoil in our region resulting in widespread destruction. Had they 
accommodated the demands of western oil cartels, we could have been saved of 
our present travails. But Taliban leaders were men with very limited abilities who 
lacked understanding of the consequences of their intransigence.