59 

tree lines and our troops on the road was about hundred fifty yards apart. 
Because of miscalculation, all the four shells landed on our own positions. First 
shell landed directly on a LMG being fired by Second Lieutenant Abdul Ghafoor 
killing him instantly. Second shell landed near the CO injuring Subedar Major Alam 
Badshah, the third wounded Captain Saleem, the artillery observer who had 
called for fire and the fourth one also killed and wounded some men. In all, there 
were four dead and five wounded from this volley of our own fire. 
As I reported to the CO on wireless set that I had taken up position as ordered, he 
told me to come behind the enemy positions from a flank. I started to move 
keeping about one thousand yards distance from small arms fire that was 
ineffective, the bullets landing near us which did not stop our move. As my 
company reached behind enemy positions from a flank, darkness of the night had 
taken over.  Firing had stopped and the rebels, taking advantage of the darkness 
and cover available to them from the woods withdrew towards Narsinghdi. I 
established contact with the unit and then learnt of casualties suffered by the unit 
that day. 
Next morning i.e. on 12th April we resumed advance towards Narsinghdi. On 
reaching a small stream we found the road bridge demolished. The troops had to 
wade through water. By afternoon we approached the town where we saw a 
number of people lined up on road, some wearing Jinnah caps and carrying 
Pakistan flags raising slogans ‘Pakistan Zindabad’. They informed that the 
miscreants had fled (Malaun log bhag gia). 
After a day‘s stay at Narsighdi, the unit was ordered to prepare for move further 
north towards Bhairab Bazar where rebels were entrenched across Meghna River 
at Ashuganj rail/road Bridge blocking movement towards Brahmanbaria in the 
east. The position was very difficult to approach and a brigade size operation of 
considerable complexity was reportedly being planned. It was to approach the 
rebel positions from three directions i.e. frontally over the bridge, through the 
river using river craft and from behind the positions landing some Special Services 
Group (SSG) troops using few available helicopters. The operation, however, got 
swiftly completed when SSG troops commanded by the legendry TM, Major Tariq 
Mahmud (later Brigadier who lost his life during a practice para jump in