54 

THE EXPERIENCE 
Part – II 
Move to East Pakistan 
My unit was required to move to East Pakistan in April 1971 to replace 27 Baluch, 
a unit of similar composition, according to orders issued by the General 
Headquarters in their annual movement/rotation plans for the units. I, a Captain 
then, was doing Martial Law Duties as a member of Special Military Court at 
Lyallpur (later renamed Faisalabad). Late one evening I got a message to move 
back as the unit was to move in emergency to East Pakistan. 9 Division from 
Kharian had been ordered to move immediately. Another division, the 16th 
Division from Quetta had also been ordered to move as a consequence of Army 
action of 25 March 1971 to overcome unrest in East Pakistan. Before moving 
these two divisions, there was only one infantry division; the 14th Division of 
Pakistan Army located in East Pakistan. This Division had four brigades instead of 
normal three, each brigade comprising three infantry battalions. Out of the total 
twelve infantry battalions in these brigades, seven battalions were from the East 
Bengal Regiment.9 These units and about thirteen thousand troops of para 
military East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) revolted. Bengali troops in the remaining units’ 
which were up to thirty percent in some of these units had also to be disarmed. 
14 Division was thus virtually ineffective till reinforcements arrived from West 
Pakistan. 
The two divisions moving to East Pakistan were not to take their complete 
elements i.e. Armour Regiments, full complement of Artillery, Engineers, Signal 
and service units etc. Authorised strength of an infantry division was then about 
fifteen thousand persons. Practically these two Divisions moved just with their 

9Seven regular army Bengali infantry battalions of East Bengal Regiments (EBR) were present in East 
Pakistan in March 1971. The 1st EB was in Jessore, attached to the 107th Brigade. The 2nd EB was in 
Joydevpur north of Dacca, attached to the 57th Brigade. The 3rd EB was in Saidpur with the 23rd 
Brigade, and the 4th EB was in Comilla with the 53rd Brigade. The 8th EB was preparing to ship to West 
Pakistan and was at 75% strength in Chittagong. The East Bengal Regimental Center (EBRC) in 
Chittagong housed 2,000 Bengali troops including the newly raised 9th EB. The 10th EB, a training unit, 
was in the Dacca cantonment attached to the 14th Division. Bengali officers commanded the 1st, 2nd 
and the 10th EB, while the rest were under West Pakistani officers.