193 

was no need to keep a separate set up. The point was taken up at appropriate 
forums and the clerical corps, a legacy of the British Indian Army was disbanded.  
I finally retired from the Army on 1 August 1994 after completing age and service 
limits, fifty two years and twenty eight years respectively. Looking back it seemed 
a long journey covering mostly hard and difficult times.  But overall it was a great 
life of adventure lived by an infantry officer of the Pakistan Army in turbulent 
times with zest and a sense of satisfaction to have done one’s duty with 
dedication and honour. 
Experience with MES 
Just before retirement I applied for jobs in the Army administered organizations 
according to laid down procedures but found that the jobs were not easy to get. 
After remaining without some job for over a year, I landed up getting a contract 
from Military Engineering Service (MES) for construction of a building at Shinkiari. 
This project, which was a block of family quarters for soldiers, resulted in 
considerable financial loss to me apart from wasting two years in extensive travel 
between Rawalpindi and Shinkiari. On completion, the local SDO of MES in charge 
of that project asked me that ‘Colonel were you not aware of such matters? Did 
those who were giving you this contract not know what they were doing to you?’ 
The contract was given at low rates and my inexperience compounded the loss.  
Dealing with the MES gave insight into deep routed corruption in the department. 
Every paper had to go through about nine hands and all were to be given 
envelopes containing their share of commission on payment of bills. The amount 
was between fifteen to thirty percent of the total contract amount depending on 
type of contracts, the maintenance contracts paying more commission/ bribe. 
While interacting with the department I found that yearly budget for pay and 
allowances of the staff of Garrison Engineer (GE) Abbottabad was more than 
annual maintenance budget. This was a huge wastage of funds at the cost of 
maintenance.   
In early eighties a study was carried out at the Army level asking comments from 
formations about MES department. Almost every field formation recommended 
doing away with the department, but nothing changed. The system at that time