120 

 It was a political problem for which military action was no solution. The 
military commander in East Pakistan, Lieutenant General Sahibzada Yaqoob 
Khan refused to undertake the operation. He was removed and replaced by 
Lieutenant General Tikka Khan who was willing to act on orders. 
 In East Pakistan there was one Infantry Division comprising four brigades, 
instead of normal three brigades of Pakistan Army. Authorized strength of a 
Division in those times was about fifteen thousand all ranks. Seven infantry 
battalions of this Division were from the East Bengal Regiment (EBR) who 
joined the rebels. EBR Training Centre located at Chittagong had about 
twothousand people who revolted. About thirteen thousand men of the 
para military East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) had also revolted. Bengali soldiers 
who were part of other units, substantial in numbers had to be disarmed, 
downgrading effectiveness of units located in East Pakistan at the start of 
the crisis.  
 Troops of the Division were scattered all over East Pakistan confined to 
their locations since the start of non-cooperation movement in 1st week of 
February 1971. Their supplies had been cut off and they were virtually 
prisoners living in great tension and hardship. At Rangpur an officer of 29 
Cavalry with escort of Bengali troops of his unit was sent to get some fresh 
rations from Bazar for the unit. He was killed by the mob, his escort 
deprived of weapons returned to unit. 
  When military action was ordered, the troops from Dacca Cantonment 
started with indiscriminate firing in the city of Dacca on night 25/26 March 
1971. This caused unnecessary casualties. Over three hundred people were 
reported killed, about half of them in the Dacca University campus. The 
General Officers, Tikka Khan and Khadim Raja responsible for this action 
were relieved of command; their place taken over by Amir Abdullah Khan 
Niazi and M Rahim Khan respectively. However later, when Bhutto came to 
power Tikka Khan and Khadim Raja were rewarded in his ‘new’ Pakistan, 
making Tikka Khan the Army Chief and after retirement Secretary General 
of his Party. Khadim Raja was given diplomatic assignments.