202 

Shangla, Kohistan and four districts i.e. Muzaffarabad, Neelum, Bagh and 
Rawalakot in AJ&K.  
An area roughly 30,000 Sq Km was affected leaving 73,338 people dead and 
128,304 severely injured. Three million people were rendered homeless and 
about 600,000 houses destroyed. Road infrastructure, educational and health 
facilities and government buildings were extensively damaged. As immediate 
response, the Pakistan Army was inducted into the area to start relief operations. 
The people of Pakistan, overawed with the scale of this tragedy responded with 
overwhelming support, eager to help in whatever way they could, reaching out to 
the area to help the Army busy in recovery and relief work. Pakistan, at the time 
was providing vital assistance to the US and NATO countries in their war in 
Afghanistan. It was mainly for this reason that the country got prompt response 
from international community to deal with calamity. Loads of materials, expert 
teams and fleets of helicopters started arriving to help organise the relief work. 
Although an organisation at the national level, the National Disaster Management 
Authority (NDMA) existed, a new organisation Earthquake Reconstruction and 
Rehabilitation Authority (ERRA) was established to deal with consequences of the 
disaster.  
ERRA developed into a very elaborate organisation. Work was divided into 
different sectors categorised into clusters like direct outreach to the 
communities (Rural Housing, Livelihood and Social Protection sectors) Social 
Services (Health, Education and Water and Sanitation sectors) Public 
Infrastructure (Governance, Power, Telecommunications, Transport andTourism 
sectors)and Cross Cutting Themes (Disaster Risk Reduction,Environmental 
Safeguards and Gender Equality). A total of nearly 13000 (thirteen thousand) 
projects were identified to be repaired and rebuilt. 
The manpower was gathered from the government departments, the Army and 
mostly from the private sector. A large number of consultants, both local and 
international, were hired at exorbitant remunerations to assist in working out 
strategies and provide technical assistance to the organisation. Apart from the 
organisation at the national level, similar organisations were created at the