192 

Retirement and Post Retirement Years 
A Year at GHQ  
At the time of posting to GHQ that I joined in the first week of August 1994, I was 
expecting three years tenure at the last leg of my military service. This was for the 
first time in my service that I had been posted in Rawalpindi. It was an unpleasant 
surprise when I received a letter that I will be retiring within one year because the 
relaxation of two years in service previously granted to officers of my rank had 
been withdrawn. Working in the Personal Administration Directorate (PA Dte) in 
the Adjutant General Branch as Deputy Director Personnel Administration, the 
year was mostly spent in visiting some Recruiting Offices and the Records Offices 
for their periodic inspections.  
It was interesting to have a glimpse of working in the GHQ. Notes and summaries 
for major decisions could be initiated from the lowest level. I came to know from 
the old civilian staff working since long in the Directorate that they were 
instrumental in scrapping short term induction scheme which was introduced 
after the 1965 war. In this scheme soldiers in General Duty trades in the Army 
were enrolled for four years after which some selected men were retained and 
the rest were discharged. This was an excellent scheme which provided the Army 
with young manpower. After some years it would have reduced pension budget 
to a great extent. The flimsy reason given by the staff at GHQ was that they were 
faced with lot of paper work in regularizing cases which occurred due to oversight 
at the regimental centers and needed GHQ approval. This scheme which had 
tremendous benefits in educating and grooming young men at the national level, 
creating jobs, a young looking army and many overall benefits for the society 
ended for very petty reasons. 
I also initiated a proposal that the Army Corps of Clerks (ACC) should be 
disbanded. A large number of postings of the personal assistants of senior officers 
ordered by the Directorate were not being implemented. My reason for doing 
away with a separate organization was that personal assistants (PAs) could be 
provided by respective Regiments and Corps to their senior officers; hence there