130 

THE EXPERIENCE 
Part – III 
Back Home to a ‘New’ Pakistan 
The process of repatriation of prisoners started in September 1973 and was 
spread over a period of eight months concluding in April 1974. Prisoners were 
picked up from different camps to form a train for repatriation on a certain date. 
Announcements of names of prisoners who were to be part of next train taking 
the prisoners home was keenly awaited. Not being included was cause of 
disappointment and I felt this many times as my name came in the second last 
train in April 1974. Our journey was planned in a manner that travel through 
Indian Punjab was during night reaching Attari by early morning. The train 
compartment’s windows were also kept shut so that we could not see the 
countryside during day part of the journey. De-training at Attari and move to 
Wahga border post was arranged in the mornings. Elaborate reception 
arrangements were laid out at Wahga by Pakistan Army, Corps Commander 
Lahore receiving returning prisoners.   
I landed on the soil of ‘New’ Pakistan one morning in second week of April 1974. 
On crossing the border I got strange feelings of being in a different world. After 
having suffered hardships and humiliation for so long, a sudden change of being 
liberated and welcomed was rather difficult to absorb. After spending about three 
days at reception camp in Lahore Cantonment I, like others, was given leave for 
two months. On reaching home in the village, people there and from surrounding 
areas kept visiting to congratulate on my safe return. They seemed genuinely 
happy and showed lot of love and affection. This continued for a couple of days.  
All those who returned home were given very affectionate welcome, people 
gathering at bus stands hours before expected arrival of returning prisoners. The 
respect and affection shown by people of the area may seem strange to readers 
of younger generations, fed with false picture of the tragic happenings by rulers 
of ‘New’ Pakistan. Despite false propaganda against the troops trapped in East 
Pakistan people at that time understood the role played by rulers who had put a 
small force in an untenable position. In spite of acts of unparalleled gallantry at