103 

reached them, forcing them to disperse and move helter-skelter reaching Bogra in 
disarray. 
I drove back to Panjbibi where my company was waiting for me. I told them about 
the new situation and started moving towards 13 FF positions about 30 
kilometres away towards west, part of the track passing very close to the Indian 
border from where we received fire while passing through that area.  
By late afternoon on 13 December, we reached 13 FF positions on the border in 
Patnitola area. Their CO, Lieutenant Colonel Amir Nawaz Khan and his Adjutant 
Captain Akram Panwar were waiting for my company. Fortunately, a bridge in 
Jaipur Hat area, prepared for demolition, was not blown up by 13 FF Company 
that had crossed it in order to rejoin the unit before me, otherwise I could not 
have reached their positions that day. The next two days were without much 
activity. 13 FF positions had been prepared with great foresight. Bunkers were 
very well sited, covering entire area turning it to an ideal killing ground for enemy 
approaching those positions. However, Indians did not approach these positions 
as their focus was to reach the main communication artery i.e. Rangpur-Bogra 
road. 
Lieutenant Muhammad Saeed Tariq, hailing from Sahiwal City had lost his father 
as a child. He and his sister were brought up by their mother. He was far mature 
than his years, a wise man amongst us. In early June when we had taken over the 
Thakurgaon area from 8 Baloch and my Company was deployed in Ranishankail 
area, Lieutenant Tariq’s assessment was that we had landed up in a Vietnam like 
situation and it would be difficult to get out from here. Captain Afreen and I, due 
to lack of understanding and maturity scolded him on his pessimism but his words 
were prophetic. He would say that if something happened to him, his mother 
would not be able to bear it. He died of bullets fired at close range by Indians. 
When Light Machine Gun (LMG) position on his Platoon’s extreme left stopped 
firing, he first sent his Platoon JCO, Naib Subedar Abdul Aziz to find out. As the 
JCO did not return for some time, he himself moved out of his trench in that 
direction. Ensuing moments are a tale of unmatched courage demonstrated by 
Sepoy Muhammad Durez.  Hailing from some village near Chakwal he had 
rejoined the company on night 11/12 Dec after withdrawal from 4 FF positions.