204 

I worked in the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Wing of the Authority for over 
two years (June 2008 – Sep 2010) in the social survey group measuring the 
outcomes and impact of ERRA’s interventions in the affected area. During the 
period I along with our group, attended two short courses; one for five days and 
another for three days at Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS) 
concerning the M&E processes and technical report writing. Results of surveys 
conducted by survey teams were reflected in the periodic/ annual reports and the 
impact assessment reports. It was a very good experience to learn about the 
working in the development sector.  
Frequent travel by the international community experts and the US Helicopter’s 
extensive flying was good familiarization experience with the area for them. This 
perhaps helped the US aviators in conducting successful navigation and operation 
deep inside Pakistan during the night on 2 May 2011 reaching Abbottabad to raid 
a house supposed to be Osama bin Laden’s hideout.  
One very obvious fact was that the reconstruction and rehabilitation work which 
should have been done through the normal working procedures of the respective 
provincial, state and district governments, a new organization was created 
substantially increasing overhead expenditure. It was duplication of efforts and 
expenses. In addition a large number of consultants, including international 
consultants were hired at very high remunerations who only contributed in 
writing voluminous reports portraying rosy picture of various interventions 
although results on ground were not as good as reflected except for the rural 
housing programme. 
Another aspect which came to light was that work of non government 
organisations (NGOs) was below par, most of them doing sub standard work and 
leaving the projects incomplete.  
About foreign consultants I had an observation earlier. Some years back I had 
invested money with a contractor responsible to carry out some repair work on 
Sohawa-Chakwal road. The contract was worth 2.5 million rupees to repair small 
patches of the road. To identify those small patches for repair a foreign consultant 
was working with his office located in a house in Islamabad. He had further hired