134 

which demanded some hard work. They were content on grazing goats and sheep 
which did not demand labour and they had ample time for playing some musical 
instrument and asking Hal Ahwal, with anyone passing through the area. 
According to their custom, this Hal Ahwal had an elaborate procedure. The men 
had to narrate all the happenings which they had gone through or heard about 
since their last meeting with each other which could be after a long time. 
Obviously there was a lot to talk about and they had ample time at their disposal 
to spend on such activities. I had observed that the population was very sparse 
and their living and requirements were very simple. Despite availability of water 
in some streams which could be harnessed, vast tracts of cultivable lands were 
lying unutilised except for grazing purposes.  
We undertook search adequate operations deep into mountains following Sartaf 
Nullah in Marri tribe’s area north east of Kahan. Here also we found some 
perennial streams but the water was not utilised for irrigating the fertile virgin 
lands.  
Bugti tribe had seven sub-tribes headed by their ‘Waderas’. Nawab Akbar Bugti 
was from Raheja branch settled in and around Dera Bugti. One of the sub tribes, 
the Massuri’s did not accept Akbar Bugti as their tribal head; they had differences 
since the time of his father. Another sub tribe, the Kalpars settled around Sui 
were also not under any influence of Nawab Bugti, mainly because they had jobs 
with the Sui Gas installations thus becoming economically independent and 
getting out of shackles of tribal system. In fact at that time (1973-74) it was only 
about forty households supporting the Nawab that would obey his commands. 
His position got strengthened when successive governments gave large amounts 
of royalty for the newly developed Pir Koh Gas field, the money which he never 
used for welfare of his tribe. Earlier, the royalty from Sui gas fields was also used 
by Bugti brothers in patronizing vibrant night life of Karachi in fifties and sixties.  
Akbar Bugti, who claimed to have killed his first man at the age of twelve, died a 
violent death in a cave in Marri tribal area in August 2006. Proclaimed as 
Commander-in-Chief of a terrorist group known as Balochistan Liberation Army, 
waging war against the State of Pakistan, his force was firing rockets on gas 
installations and carrying out sabotage activities like blowing up railway and