304 

Annex B 
EXCERPTS FROM 
An informal account by Air Marshal Inam-ul-Haque Khan (Retd), HJ, Former Air 
Officer Commanding East Pakistan, 
Saga of PAF in East Pakistan – 197114 
"President Yahya Khan held fair and free elections in December, 1970 in which 
Awami League of Shaikh Mujibur Rahman won a majority largely due to his Six-
Point manifesto. National Assembly was to hold its first session in Dacca on 2nd 
March, 1971. It was, however, sabotaged by vested interests of West Pakistani 
establishment and some leading politicians, who were not willing to accept a 
Bengali-led government. Postponement of National Assembly strengthened the 
secessionist movement in East Pakistan, duly supported by India. Violent civil 
disobedience ensued throughout East Pakistan immediately, resulting in 
casualties including death of students in a Dacca hostel due to shelling. Army was 
forced to retreat to cantonments for avoiding bloodshed. The situation was bad 
demanding careful and intelligent handling. After about a week, when the 
disobedience had simmered down, Yahya and advisors reached Dacca and held 
final talks with Mujib on around 20th March for a couple of days. It was then 
agreed that Yahya will retain the Presidency and, honouring the outcome of 
election, he will transfer power to Mujib. Yahya, vacillating as ever, swayed by the 
ill-advice of leading politicians of West Pakistan and his own military junta, to ‘sort 
out these bloody Bengalis’, resorted to use force in starting on 25th March, 1971, 
instead of implementing political solution reached with Awami League – a 
complete betrayal of trust. 
After the war, the Government of Pakistan established a Commission headed by 
Chief Justice of Supreme Court of Pakistan Mr Hamood-ur-Rahman with just and 
truly needed Terms of Reference to look into political, economic, social, 
administrative, bureaucratic, military, etc, causes and factors which led to the 
debacle. Later, the government of the day and civil establishment, apprehending 

14Available at http://imranhkhan.com/2009/11/17/saga-of-paf-in-east-pakistan-1971/