68 

peace in a very vast area, countering Indian sponsored terrorism and finally 
fighting the Indians. At all stages his towering personality was source of strength, 
contributing to successful outcome of the assigned tasks. 
The ‘Governor’ would get hold of Maulvi Tameez ud Din, a local Jamaat Islami 
Amir almost every morning and start his tour of the area addressing people 
covering different villages according to a systematic plan. His focus was to explain 
to the people as to what caused this tragedy and that the army was for their 
service and was there to help them. His efforts and that of rest of the officers and 
men succeeded in denying sanctuaries to Mukti Bahini formed by Indians in the 
vast area of our responsibility. Their attempts remained confined to cross border 
activity mainly in laying mines on different tracks in the area near borders which 
caused some casualties to our officers and men. In our efforts to reach out to the 
people in our areas of responsibility, workers of Jamaat Islami were great help in 
organizing meetings with the villagers to restore their confidence, remove fear 
and seek help in denying rebel sanctuaries. They were most reliable, honest and 
truthful people who later suffered political victimization and continue to do so at 
the hands of Sheikh Mujib’s followers.   
During one such patrolling mission along the border Lieutenant Abdul Waheed 
embraced Shahadat due to Indian mortar fire. Naib Subedar Abbas got his leg 
amputated due to mine laid on a track. The CO’s priority was so focused on 
continuous touring the area that one day when Commander Eastern Command 
Lieutenant General AmirAbdullah Khan (A A K) Niazi landed at the Battalion 
Headquarters at Thakurgaon; the CO was out on his normal tour. There was some 
lack of coordination between the Brigade Headquarters and the unit, as our 
Adjutant, Captain Javed Anwar Cheema claimed ignorance about the visit while 
Brigade Major Abdul Haq Mirza insisted that he had informed the unit Adjutant 
on telephone. Such incidents further aggravated relations between the unit and 
its immediate higher formation. This was one factor because of which no one 
from our unit got any gallantry award because the citations for awards forwarded 
to Brigade were not processed as it transpired later; although performance of the 
officers in some actions merited highest gallantry awards.