78 

(Captain Akbar Niazi) took up position to engage the rebels from front, Capt 
Afreen with his commandos surprised the rebels by reaching their position from 
the rear by a meticulously planned move. It was a swift raid on a well prepared 
rebel’s defensive position across a stream opposite Jagdal Hat, a small village 
between Amar Khana and Pachagarh. The raid resulted in over sixty rebels killed 
and many more injured at a cost of only one of our soldier losing life and four 
young soldiers getting injured. The rebels suffered injuries while withdrawing and 
fleeing in the open, subjected to our artillery fire using special fuse (high explosive 
air burst) which made the shell burst at some height above ground. These shells 
would cause great damage to exposed persons who were not under cover in 
trenches. Captain Cheema from Artillery, accompanying raiding party told that he 
had personally counted fifty five bodies but there were still more in the area 
where Lieutenant Qaswar Naseer’s section had gone closer to the Indian border. 
The party had to quickly withdraw before any Indian reaction. This raid was classic 
combination of audacity, meticulous planning and preparation by Capt Afreen 
which was hallmark of all his actions during the prolonged struggle. In at least 
three such actions he deserved the highest gallantry awards but as explained 
earlier we were not working for worldly honours because of our peculiar 
circumstances and attitudes. 
A few days’ stay at Thakurgaon was a great relief. Here the Battalion 
Headquarters were located in the old East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) Wing’s 
accommodation. At the entrance of this complex two Bengal tigers were kept in 
cages at the main gate by EPR people. Our unit inherited these from 8 Baluch and 
continued to look after these wild animals. As transpired later, most obnoxious 
stories were invented of putting people into tiger’s cages. Dr. Sarmila Bose in her 
book gives account of those making such allegations which she found false as 
explained in her narrative. During her visits to Pakistan during her research work 
for her book ‘Dead Reckoning, Memories of the 1971 Bangladesh War’, she 
interviewed our then CO, Brigadier Amir Muhammad Khan in connection with this 
story. 
The Battalion Officer’s Mess was located a little away in a Rest House. ‘Chacha’ 
Jahan Dad, the head waiter looked after officers with his peculiar patronizing