117 

his agony. One of his sons, Shah Nawaz, died in mysterious circumstances in 
France. The whole family had gathered there and all of them were present in the 
house where they found Shah Nawaz dead in a room. Bhutto’s elder son Murtaza 
was killed by police in front of his house in Karachi when his sister Benazir was 
prime minister of Pakistan. Benazir, twice removed from the office of prime 
minister on charges of corruption, got killed causing so many deaths first in 
Karachi blast which she survived and then in Rawalpindi when she was aspiring to 
assume power once more. In Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujib was brutally murdered by 
his own Army along with his entire family except one daughter in his Dacca home. 
In India, Mrs Indira Gandhi had to bear the pain of her son Sanjey’s death in a 
plane crash, and then she herself as prime minister was murdered by her own 
guards. Later her other son Rajiv, as prime minister while visiting Tamil Nadu 
province, was assassinated in a blast by a female suicide bomber.  
Some people in Pakistan keep demanding official apology from the Government 
of Pakistan to the people of Bangladesh for atrocities committed by Pakistan 
Army in 1971. Such demands reinforce the lies created and propagated by 
Pakistan’s enemies. At one time Mr. Imran Khan, our cricketer hero of yester 
years also asked for similar apology. In his statement he said that while in England 
in 1971 he was ‘told’ by his friends about the atrocities of Pakistan Army but 
when he went to Bangladesh in 1989 he experienced love and affection of 
Bangladeshis. That is the reality. One must believe what one experiences and not 
necessarily what one is told. If anyone is interested to know about atrocities 
committed during 1971, he should start with finding out the number of non 
Bengalis living in East Pakistan on 1 Jan 1971, how many were left after one year 
i.e. on 01 Jan 1972 and what happened to the rest. Pakistan Army, tasked to 
restore normalcy, was too disciplined a force to have committed atrocities. In her 
book titled ‘DEAD RECKONING, Memories of the 1971 Bangladesh War’ published 
in 2011 Dr. Sarmila Bose, a Bengali Hindu scholar has explored the facts by 
adopting credible research methodology. Earlier in one of her articles titled “The 
Courageous Pakistan Army Stand on the Eastern Front: An Untold Story of 1971 
Indo-Pak War” (annex ‘D’) she exposed falsity of Indo-Bangladesh narrative. In her 
book she refutes that narrative completely and most convincingly.