125 

pension was part of the plot to put entire blame on him and the Army by 
Mr Bhutto and his team. The man who had restored State’s control over 
the country in just three weeks of taking command of troops in April 1971, 
creating conditions to resume political process was held responsible for 
horrendous crimes of Yahya –Bhutto combine, who were the real culprits.  
 The Indian invasion came through our deployment for the counter 
insurgency operations, our troops scattered in penny packets all over East 
Pakistan. Like water flows through terrain avoiding high ground, the 
Indians, containing our positions where confronted, bypassed these 
positions and reached undefended Dacca. Eastern Command plans to fight 
from ‘strong points’ and ‘fortresses’ did not materialise as readjustment of 
positions to occupy and convert towns and cities into defensive positions 
could not be carried out. 
 The Indians had complete mastery of the skies which facilitated their move 
to a great extent.  
 Indians mostly avoided fighting to clear defensive positions wherever they 
came across, bypassing such positions to continue with their move. 
Wherever they tried to fight through the defensive positions, they suffered 
heavy casualties and failed to overcome resistance. I have given example of 
34 Punjab positions south of Birganj on Thakurgaon – Dinajpur road and 
that of fighting in the area of 205 Brigade in Hilli sector which I know of and 
was a participant.  
 The doctrine that defence of East Pakistan laid in West Pakistan never 
materialised. The offensive planned from West Pakistan to capture vital 
space in Indian Punjab, thus relieving pressure on East Pakistan was never 
launched. 
 Had the positions of available troops in East Pakistan been adjusted to 
counter Indian invasion, Dacca could have been strongly defended by 
taking up positions north of it between the two rivers. Besides that, 
Chittagong area could also be effectively defended because of its layout, its 
long border with Burma and the mountainous tribal areas inhabited by