272 

The Tribal Areas, AzadKashmir and Northern Areas                     
The Tribal Areas should be integrated into the new system as districts, eliminating 
their status of tribal agencies. Azad Kashmir and Northern Areas should also 
function on similar pattern that is the Union Councils as hub of development 
activity and the Districts responsible for effective management and provision of 
services to the people.  
The Parliament 
The National Assembly and the Senate should concentrate on their job of 
legislation, deliberate on national issues to help the government in formulating 
and implementing sound, well considered policies. They must not be involved in 
development work by providing them funds which is cause of corruption and their 
interference with functioning of local governments. 
Role of the President 
The President as Head of State is guardian of the State’s establishment. While the 
Governments keep changing, it is the State’s establishment that provides 
ownership of state’s policies and continuity in functioning of State. The 
governments of the time decide polices that are implemented by State’s 
institutions, the ‘establishment’.  State functionaries working according to rules 
and regulations are effective check on any mismanagement, misappropriation or 
misuse of State’s resources. The President has to ensure that all State institutions 
work according to rules, are provided with job security and protected against 
pressures to commit illegal acts from Government bodies.  
The Parliament should elect a suitable person as the President whose main 
responsibility is to ensure that State’s establishment works effectively according 
to rules and regulations; appropriate judicial structure in the country is in place 
and functions effectively providing timely justice to the citizens. He should 
appoint suitable persons as judges at different tiers and supervise their 
performance. His chain of functioning will be through the provincial governors 
appointed by him with limited role as defined in preceding paragraphs.