269 

country but that was not done. Those people who had no mandate to draw upa 
constitution and were guilty of contributing to break up of Pakistan produced a 
flawed document that left many things undecided for the future in the form of 
concurrent list etc. Numerous amendments have further distorted it. According to 
some people Mr. Z A Bhutto wanted to change it into presidential form for which 
he went into early elections to get two third majority in the parliament. His 
scheme failed due to rigging and the consequences. Now this document is only 
good for unending debate on its interpretations. 
The Problem 
The 1973 constitution did not provide solution to the genuine concerns on the 
inequality of the size of provinces and other problems posed by different 
nationalist groups within the country. The political government formed in 1973 
soon clashed with two provinces, the NWFP (now KPK) and Baluchistan, dissolving 
provincial governments and imposing governor’s rule in these provinces. This was 
followed by an armed uprising by Marri and Mengal tribes in two small parts of 
Baluchistan. The central government was ultimately overthrown by the Army in 
1977. The constitution could not prevent successive martial laws nor could it save 
its initiator from the gallows despite its article 6. 
If we study the systems of other developed and developing countries of the 
world, we will find that we are unique in maintaining a governance system which 
can only lead to misrule. It is a system designed for paralysis which we are 
experiencing. No country, roughly equal to Pakistan in geographical and 
population size throughout the world, has so large provinces with such a large 
number of legislators, ministers, advisers, chief ministers, governors etc, creating 
a class of oligarchs, who rule for personal gains at the cost of common citizen’s 
interests. 
The Solution 
Whereas large unequal provinces provide a cause to secessionist elements 
facilitating their work in fragmenting the Country, small size provinces, like in 
Afghanistan, Iran, Turkey and other medium size countries of the world; would 
effectively eliminate the threat of further disintegration of Pakistan. Nigeria,