115 

Indians got few boxers to give some punches to this group attempting escape, 
Yousuf kept his one hand at his head and kept reciting Quranic verse  ‘Ayat ul 
Kursi’ inaudible to tormentors. While others got their share of punches, he was 
not touched. Remaining in this group were Captains Anwar Alam, Artillery, 
Zulfiqar, 8 Punjab and Parvez Akmal, Engineers. All of them were given 28 days 
rigorous imprisonment and put in small dungeons in solitary confinement for that 
period. After completing punishment they rejoined the camp. Parvez Akmal in 
due course reached the rank of a two star General, holding important 
assignments including about three years as Managing Director of Oil and Gas 
Development Company Limited (OGDCL) enjoying reputation of an honest, 
upright and visionary leader. Married to his sister soon after repatriation from 
India, I have enjoyed a pleasant personal relationship with him during all these 
years. Thus Camp 25 left lasting imprint on my life.  
Some notable visitors who came to visit us in our camp were Mr. Younus Khan 
'special' advisor to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.This man from Charsadda was 
related to our Sarhadi Gandhi, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan. He tried to talk to us on 
relations between our countries but we were not prepared to listen to him and he 
had to leave without giving us his lecture. Another visitor was Major General Shah 
Beg Singh, who being in charge of the Mukti Bahini force was responsible to 
organise, train and launch that force into East Pakistan. He, after retirement, had 
associated himself with Sanat Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale and was killed by Indian 
Army that he had served during storming of the Golden Temple by the Indian 
Army.  
Repatriation of prisoners, started in September 1973 spread over a period of 
eight months, was completed by April 1974. About fifty persons would be taken 
from one camp and equal number from other camps in the area forming a train of 
about three hundred people. A great hype was created in Pakistan by Bhutto’s 
government about its achievement in getting the prisoners released. This 
repatriation was delayed to help Mr Bhutto in consolidating his hold in New 
Pakistan and it was deliberately and unnecessarily spread over eight months. This 
was part of grand deception to project that a very large number of Army persons 
were made prisoners that took great effort on Bhutto’s part to bring them home.