163 

General Officers. The Army was being commanded by Brigadier Zaheer 
Nejad, a retired and recalled officer. Under the GHQ were divisions 
commanded by officers of the rank of Colonels. The importance given to 
our contingent can be gauged from the fact that two officers of the rank of 
Colonels remained with us during our travel through Iran in our onwards as 
well as on return journey. Col Ali Larejani senior of the two was a very 
energetic and pleasant person.  
In Iran, as a routine the contingent on arrival at the destinations for the night stay 
was first addressed by the local authority figures; mostly religious leaders. Their 
main thrust was the justification of their cause to fight Iraqi aggression. Our 
leader, Brig Akram in his reply would always dilate upon the need of stopping the 
fight between the two brotherly Muslim countries. This stance of not condemning 
the Iraqi aggression was somewhat frustrating to our hosts but that was 
Pakistan’s official line.  
Went to Bazar for a short while but it was mostly closed because of their weekly 
off day. The shopkeepers of the few shops which were open did not seem to like 
us as was evident from their attitude. In the evening we were taken to witness a 
demonstration about the war. This was arranged by the ‘Pasdaran’ who are real 
strength of the Iranian Revolution. At the site of demonstration a model of the 
battle of ‘Majnun’ island was depicted which the Iranians had taken back from 
Iraqis recently. It was very impressive demonstration of use of fire power and 
skills to overcome different kinds of obstacles. 
 26 September 84 – From Tehran to Isfahan. Night stay comfortable 
especially after Tehran. 
 27 September 84 – From Isfahan to Kirman the longest leg of journey, 
about 700 kilometers. Reached late in the evening after long lunch break 
and a ‘Pistachio’ buying break at Rafsanjan where some people went to 
Bazaar and rest of us waited in the buses. This area is famous for growing 
‘Pistachios’. Felt like nearing home, Quetta being four nights away. 
 28 September 84 – Stay in Kirman. Friday prayers offered in the city’s 
Jamia Mosque after having visited an exhibition and Kunj e Ali Museum, a