278 

Local Governments and Community Development 
Our major political parties have never been interested in forming effective and 
empowered local governments. The political party leaders enjoy their powers 
through highly centralised and personalised dispensation of these parties. They 
are fearful of losing their influence when problems of people are addressed at the 
local governments’ level. It is for this reason that the local bodies have functioned 
under the much maligned dictatorial rule, starting with President Ayub Khan’s 
Basic Democracy to Zia ul Haq’s Local Bodies and Musharraf’s Local Government 
Ordinance 2001. 
Since every new government scrapped old systems instead of building upon them, 
there was no continuity to consolidate the local government system. The latest 
effort, the Local Government Ordinance 2001 introduced during Gen Musharraf’s 
regime produced mixed results. In those districts where the Nazims worked with 
some degree of honesty, there was visible improvement in the area. Since the 
programme was discontinued soon as the political government took over, the full 
benefits of this system could not be realised nor its results correctly measured.  
Effective Local Governments 
To carry the process forward, there is need to build upon the Local Government 
Ordinance 2001. A major shortcoming in this ordinance is lack of laying down 
clear responsibilities to meet essential needs of the people. Building upon the 
existing system, the present Union Councils should be provided with adequate 
resources, say annual non lapsable grant of Rupees 100 million to start with (2015 
currency value)for catering to basic l needs of the people by adopting ‘Community 
Development Methodologies’. These governments must ensure; 
Provision of Sustainable Livelihoods. No citizen should die of hunger, not forced to 
sell children or commit suicide. Although every citizen is responsible to earn 
livelihood for himself and his dependents, when a person finds it difficult to meet 
his responsibilities he needs help. Widows, orphans, old people unable to work 
and persons with disabilities must be helped to meet their essential needs of life.