189 

free to enjoy their leisure time, the musicians playing their instruments, a morale 
booster for the troops relaxing after day’s work. 
Polo is played in Northern Area with its own rules which are different from the 
rules applied elsewhere. This game of kings and king of games is a passion in 
those areas. The game lasts for one hour divided into two equal halves with a 
short break. There are six players on each side who cannot be replaced. Gilgit had 
a polo ground, known as Shahi Polo Ground on western end of the main bazaar. 
At that time three departments were patronizing this expensive game in Gilgit. 
They were NLI Centre which had two teams, the seniors and the juniors, the 
Police and the Northern Areas Public Works Department (NAPWD). Every year 
two tournaments were organized by the local administration. During my stay at 
Gilgit the NLI senior team remained unbeaten. Our players like Bulbul Jan were 
heroes in the areas. Polo tournament at Shandhur between Gilgit and Chitral 
teams started during that period. In this tournament Gilgit Team remained winner 
during the initial years. Playing polo at that high altitude would sometime result in 
death of horses during play. 
In early 1991, when my family was lodged in Gilgit Mess upon arrival there, my 
sons decided to do some horse riding. They went to stables and asked for the 
ride. The attendants, without realizing that the boys could be novices, allowed the 
eldest, Ahmed Yaman to ride a horse called Lahori, the naughtiest of all. As soon 
as Yaman took the seat, the horse went into gallop jumping over the wall. Yaman 
hit a tree and fell down with bruises on his face and arms. However this did not 
deter the boys and they later enjoyed the facility learning to control horses.  
In 1991, the Centre had only few barracks in the training wing to accommodate 
about four hundred recruits against the authorization of twelve hundred. These 
barracks were also constructed on self help basis. Due to procedural impediments 
the budget allocation for construction would lapse because the paper work like 
project estimates etc by concerned offices at HQ FCNA Gilgit would not be 
completed and approved in time. For two years I had to send an officer to 
Defence Ministry in the last week of June to save lapse of funds, getting special 
permission to carry forward the allocations. These efforts initiated the process of 
construction which continued after I left. Mechanical transport was also a