41 

General Yahya Khan’s Rule 
President Ayub Khan handed over power to the Army Chief General Yahya Khan in 
March 1969 after agitations against his rule initiated by Mr. Bhutto and also 
because of his sickness. There were reports at that time that the President was 
forced to hand over power to the Army Chief instead of the Speaker National 
Assembly according to the 1962 Constitution. Yahya Khan announced general 
elections which were held in December 1970. The results of elections were 
against calculation of the President and his team who expected a split mandate in 
both East and West Pakistan. According to results Awami League led by Sheikh 
Mujib Ur Rahman swept elections in East Pakistan based on his six point formula 
demanding provincial autonomy. Only two seats were won by others. In West 
Pakistan Mr. Bhutto’s PPP won majority of seats in the provinces of Punjab and 
Sind. The provinces of Frontier (now KPK) and Baluchistan voted for the 
nationalist and religious elements. 
General Yahya is credited with holding fair elections in the country but that can 
only be said about West Pakistan. In East Pakistan the elections were won by 
Awami League because of massive rigging, intimidation and violence. The 
opponents of the Awami league were prevented to go to the polling stations. The 
government machinery in the province was totally ineffective and could not 
prevent Awami League workers who controlled the polling process denying other 
parties to exercise vote. 
A major decision by General Yahya before the polls was to break up 'One Unit' 
which had been formed by amalgamating the existing provinces, states and tribal 
areas into one Province of West Pakistan according to the first constitution 
adopted in 1956. This arrangement was not changed in the second constitution 
adopted in 1962. The decision to do away with One Unit was reportedly taken on 
behest of Mr. Wali Khan who contacted Yahya's brother Agha Muhammad Ali, a 
Police officer to ask his brother to dismantle One Unit. This was not a public 
demand at that time. The public demand was adult franchise, one man one vote, 
to replace the system of Union Council members electing the President according 
to 1962 Constitution. This was granted in the Legal Framework Order formulated 
by Yahya Khan's government and elections were held accordingly.