241 

Communist/Socialist system of economy. Soviet Union, Warsaw Pact countries, 
China and India were out of the Capitalists hold. This has changed with the 
demise of Soviet Union, China opening up to corporate influences and India 
converting from Socialist to Capitalist mode.  
Pakistan’s role in facilitating contacts between US and China during General 
Yahya’s brief rule and then joining to fight war against Soviet Union in Afghanistan 
was pivotal in enabling Capitalists global control to create the 'New World Order'. 
Having expanded their operations into China, India and Russia, the Wall Street 
Establishment is now in a position to influence policies in China and India, the 
most populous countries of the world and Russia the dominant power on Eurasian 
scene. For their operations, energy and trade corridors will be needed between 
Russia, Central Asia, China, Indian Sub Continent and emerging markets of the 
African Continent. 
Pakistan with its present boundaries facilitates movement in all directions. If 
Pakistan Government formulates and pursues a policy of providing energy and 
trade corridors through its territory, the country will get ready support from the 
interested powers to stabilize and overcome unrest. Plans to create ‘international 
strategic corridor’ through Baloch inhabited areas of Balochistan would be one 
dimensional venture leaving Indian Sub Continent out of the loop of rail and road 
links. Any effort to further dismember Pakistan will thus obstruct inter region 
movement creating conflicts and impediments in conducting global businesses 
which the interested powers would want to avert. 
Pakistan is in a very strong position to benefit from emerging global and regional 
situation by facilitating inter region and global trade. Vital economic interests of 
the global and regional powers will help in resolving conflicts between countries 
of our region like Kashmir dispute between Pakistan and India to facilitate smooth 
operations of trade routes and protection of energy pipelines from Central Asia to 
India.  
Pakistan, a nuclear armed state, the sixth largest country in size of population in 
the worldthat is more than combined population of Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, 
Arabian Peninsula and the Gulf Statesto its west,should not continue to be a