15. Conclusion
In 1971, two celebrated geopolitical theorists operated from the
White House, but the more successful practitioners of geopolitics
were to be found in New Delhi’s Central Secretariat. Nixon and
Kissinger 
produced 
elaborate, 
if 
unconvincing, 
geopolitical
justifications for their South Asia policy. Mrs Gandhi and her principal
aide, Haksar, could not match the theoretical sophistication of their
American counterparts. Yet, they had a clear vision of the challenges
that confronted India and the available options; and it was they who,
in the final reckoning, achieved success.
The Awami League’s victory in the Pakistani general elections in
December 1970 gave rise to hope as well as apprehension in New
Delhi. Indian policymakers hoped that the Awami League, which had
won an absolute majority of parliamentary seats in the Pakistan
parliament, would be allowed to form the federal government. They
believed this offered the only hope of a breakthrough in India–
Pakistan relations. A transfer of power from the army and its allies in
the West Pakistani political establishment to a democratic, East
Bengal–based political party would open the doors to mutually
beneficial trade and cultural exchanges, together with constructive
engagement on the difficult Kashmir issue. On the other hand, they
were apprehensive that a prolonged civil war would break out if the
Pakistan army decided to thwart the transition to democracy by
crushing the East Bengal ‘rebels’. New Delhi feared that a long-
drawn-out guerrilla war would pass under the control of extremist
elements linked to China and India’s own Naxalites. West Bengal
had been devastated by Naxalite violence in the 1960s, and the
insurrectionary movement had only recently been brought under
control. Anarchy in East Bengal could not for long be confined within
its borders; it posed a potential threat to peace and security in
eastern India.
Yahya’s decision to crush Bengali aspirations by unleashing a reign
of terror in East Bengal delivered the final death blow to Pakistan’s