that it had become more necessary than ever before to finalize the
treaty as a deterrent against Chinese, Pakistani or American designs
against India.23 Kaul needed no persuasion. On 17 July, he made
out a powerful case for the treaty in a note submitted to the foreign
minister and prime minister.
In light of the continued supply of American arms to Pakistan, the secret
visit of Kissinger to Peking from Pakistan and the possibilities of
normalization of relations between USA [and] the People’s Republic of
China and the likely entry of PRC into UN in the forthcoming session of the
General Assembly, the close alliance between Iran, Turkey and Pakistan,
and the support given by Algeria, Saudi Arabia and some other Muslim
countries to Pakistan on Bangladesh and the possibility of Pakistan
provoking a conflict with us in August or September, I would suggest that
we give immediate consideration to the Document and finalize it by the
15th August, if not earlier.24
The last straw came in the form of the Jha telegram, reporting
Kissinger’s warning that ‘[a] danger when we would be unable to
help you against China is that of an Indo-Pakistan conflict in which
China comes to Pakistan’s support’.25
After intensive discussions, a broad consensus emerged in New
Delhi. This was captured in a memorandum prepared by Kaul.
We had been stalling this idea [the proposed treaty] so far by prolonging
informal discussions between our Ambassador and the Soviet Government
. . . [O]ur Ambassador in USA has reported that there is every possibility of
America increasing arms supplies to Pakistan. Dr. Kissinger told him after
his return from Peking that America would not intervene in any conflict
between India and Pakistan even if China did so. This has changed the
whole perspective in which the Soviet proposal has to be considered . . .
[I]f the Sino-American detente works out successfully, there is no other
alternative left to us but to have a reliable friend in case of necessity. The
charge that non-alignment has left us friendless would be disproved. The
present Treaty does not conflict with our concept of non-alignment and
reaffirms the Soviet Government’s respect for our policy of non-alignment.
Non-alignment does not mean that if one’s security and territorial integrity
are threatened we cannot enter into any arrangements we may consider
necessary to meet and avert such a threat.26
On Mrs Gandhi’s instructions, the Indian draft underwent a 
final revision. It was handed over to the Soviet side on 2 August by