Teliapara, near the Indian border, and had resolved to form a central
command for conducting the war of liberation. The rebel officers also
called upon political leaders to immediately form a government.
Tajuddin’s total dedication to the cause of an independent
Bangladesh made a deep impression on the Indian prime minister.
She gave an assurance to Tajuddin that India would provide asylum
to the freedom fighters and that they could operate without let or
hindrance from Indian soil. She also offered a general assurance of
broader assistance, but did not specify its nature or scale, and she
made no reference to military support. However, Tajuddin surmised
that her initial assurances would grow to encompass comprehensive
political and military support if Pakistan refused to end the
crackdown and if the liberation war was properly directed.5 The
Awami League leader had correctly read Mrs Gandhi’s mind.
The historic importance of the talks between Tajuddin and Indira
Gandhi can hardly be overestimated. By early April, the Indian
government had shed all vestigial hopes of a transition to democracy
in Pakistan. It was clear that the Pakistani military was determined to
persist with its policy of brutal subjugation of the people of East
Bengal and that the latter were resolved to take up arms to achieve
an independent Bangladesh. It was of vital importance to India that
the liberation war should achieve success in a short duration, before
control of the armed struggle passed into the hands of extreme leftist
groups linked to China or the Indian Naxalites. Tajuddin impressed
his interlocutors with his unshakeable dedication to the Bangladesh
cause, displaying also the leadership qualities required to guide the
liberation struggle in the absence of the Bangabandhu.
As promised by Mrs Gandhi, Tajuddin was enabled to run his
operations from ‘Mujibnagar’ (actually Kolkata). Premises for a
secretariat were provided in No. 8, Theatre Road (now Shakespeare
Sarani), together with the necessary financial and logistics support.
A radio transmitter was provided for broadcasts from Swadhin
Bangla Betar Kendra (Radio Free Bangladesh). RAW helped
establish clandestine contacts between Mujibnagar and Bengali
personnel in Pakistani diplomatic missions, generating an impressive