an institutional platform for regular interaction between the chiefs of
staff and the principal civilian officers in the foreign, home and
finance ministries. These institutional deficiencies were partly
surmounted in 1971 through improvisation and informal coordination.
Manekshaw represented the service chiefs at the meetings chaired
by D.P. Dhar. The prime minister’s closest advisers, including Dhar,
Haksar and Kaul, also maintained regular informal contacts with
Manekshaw, who, in turn, kept the other service chiefs informed of
political developments.16 
The defence ministry highlighted these interactions in its annual
report for 1971–72.
The interaction between the civil and military leaderships was continuous
and informal . . . As time passed, international, political and strategic
factors, the evaluation of which called for careful analysis, had an
increasingly important bearing on the choice of options open to us.
Consequently, the scale, pattern and timing of our defence preparedness
were, of necessity, to be coordinated with a number of external
developments.17
Coordination 
between 
the 
three 
services 
also 
reached
unprecedented levels. The defence ministry’s annual report stated:
The coordination among the Chiefs of Staff was reflected at the command
level and below. Based on our experience of 1965 operations, liaison
officers from the Air Force were stationed at the command level with
effective communication links with air formations and the operational
Command structure to enable effective operational coordination. Similar
coordination was achieved between the two Naval Commands and the
concerned Air Commands.18
Air Chief Marshal P.C. Lal confirms that the IAF ensured close
coordination with the army by locating an Advance Headquarters of
the 
Western 
and 
Eastern 
Air 
Commands 
alongside 
the
corresponding Army Command; a tactical Air Centre with each
Corps HQ; and Forward Air Controllers further down the field.19
Likewise, Vice Admiral Kohli, who headed the Western Naval
Command in 1971, has recorded the following:
A special feature of the preparatory stages was that, for the first time ever,
the Chiefs of Staff of the three services jointly examined in the minutest
detail the plans of the various commands of the three services. Like the