The officials met later in the day. Aziz Ahmed led off with a skilful
presentation of the Pakistani case for immediate repatriation of all
POWs and withdrawal of troops from occupied territories.
Complaining about India’s insistence that Mujib must be a party to
any decision regarding repatriation of POWs who had surrendered in
the eastern front, he posed a direct question to D.P. Dhar. If
agreement could be reached on the ‘elements of durable peace’,
would India be in a position to make a declaration about repatriation
of POWs without reference to Mujib? Dhar replied that the POWs
who had surrendered on the western front could be released. Aziz
Ahmed had already dismissed this as insignificant, since it involved
only some 600 men, against the 93,000 Pakistanis who had
surrendered on the eastern front. He emphasized that Bhutto could
not possibly return with only a peace settlement, without POW
repatriation and troop withdrawals. There would be little merit in
continuing a discussion that showed no visible progress on Pakistani
concerns.16 In short, at the outset of the conference, Aziz Ahmed
explored the possibility of driving a wedge between India and
Bangladesh by hinting at accommodating Indian concerns in return
for India’s agreeing to repatriate all POWs without reference to
Bangladesh. Dhar made it clear that this was a non-starter.
Day 2
On 29 June, the two delegations exchanged initial drafts on the
outcome document of the summit. The Pakistani draft took the form
of a short ‘Joint Statement on Basic Principles of Relations between
India and Pakistan’.17 This called for settlement of disputes between
the two countries through ‘bilateral negotiations or mediation and,
should these methods fail, by arbitration or judicial settlement’. An
arbitral or judicial tribunal would be set up if requested by either
party, and its award would be binding on both countries. The draft
joint statement was a mere recapitulation of the traditional Pakistani
position on a ‘self-executing mechanism’ for resolving the Kashmir
issue.
D.P. Dhar spelled out his objections to departing from a bilateral