using the Farman Ali proposals as a starting point.51 They agreed
that a third party might be encouraged to present a resolution in the
Security Council based on the following elements: peaceful transfer
of power in Bangladesh/East Pakistan to the elected representatives
of the people headed by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman; a temporary
ceasefire for seventy-two hours; withdrawal of Pakistani armed
forces to designated places in Bangladesh/East Pakistan for the
purpose of their evacuation 
from the eastern theatre; evacuation under UN supervision of West
Pakistan civil personnel and other persons wishing to return to 
West Pakistan, and similar evacuation of Bangladesh personnel from
West Pakistan; ceasefire to become permanent on commencement
of preceding steps; and, recognizing the principle that territorial gains
acquired through application of force may not be retained, India and
Pakistan to commence negotiations to apply this principle to the
western sector.
In presenting this proposal to the Political Affairs Committee of the
cabinet, Haksar explained the political and tactical advantages of the
move: ‘. . . [w]e shall gain time. We would not appear negative and
intransigent and . . . we would be able to say that we are ready to
respond to anything which is reasonable.’ India would be free to
seek elucidation and propose amendments.52 A draft resolution on
these lines was tabled by Poland on 14 December.53
By the time Poland presented its resolution in the Security Council,
the Pakistani position in the eastern theatre was on the verge of total
collapse. On the evening of 13 December, Lt Gen. Niazi reported to
Rawalpindi:
All fortresses under heavy pressure. No replenishment even of
ammunition. Rebels have already surrounded the city. Indians also
advancing. Situation serious. Promised [Chinese] assistance must take
practical shape by December 14. Will be effective in Siliguri not NEFA and
by engaging enemy air bases.54
On 14 December, the civil administration in ‘East Pakistan’ ceased
to exist. Acting on the basis of an intercepted signal, the Indian Air
Force launched a rocket attack on the Governor’s House in Dhaka
while a cabinet meeting was in progress. The panic-stricken