and for turning to methods of a peaceful political settlement’.
Podgorny said that the Soviet Union was guided by the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and concern for the ‘friendly people of
Pakistan’.8 Significantly, the draft of the letter was shared with India
before its dispatch and its text was made public immediately after its
delivery to Islamabad.
India also received unexpected support from two states with which
it had yet to establish diplomatic ties – the German Democratic
Republic (GDR) and Israel. India maintained trade and consular ties
with GDR but had refrained from establishing diplomatic relations,
mindful of the sensitivities of the larger and more prosperous Federal
Republic of Germany (FRG). Under the Hallstein Doctrine, the FRG
proclaimed that it would regard recognition of the GDR by any
foreign state (other than the ‘occupying power’, USSR) as an
‘unfriendly act’, with the implied threat of terminating diplomatic ties
with that state. The GDR perceived an opportunity for expediting
diplomatic ties with India (and establishing ties with a new
Bangladesh state) in the South Asian crisis. Thus, in May, it
extended an invitation to the foreign minister of the Bangladesh
government-in-exile and received him with full protocol honours. 
India had not established diplomatic ties with Israel, apprehensive
of Arab reactions. However, India had extended formal recognition to
the state of Israel as early as in 1950, whereas Pakistan had not.
Unlike Pakistan, which questioned the right of existence of the
Jewish state, India bore no animosity towards Israel, and the two
countries occasionally cooperated with each other through
clandestine channels. In 1962 and 1965, India had used these
channels to secure certain military supplies from Israel.
Towards the end of June, Israel issued a strongly worded
condemnation of the Pakistani ‘genocide’ in ‘East Bengal’. Speaking
in the Knesset, Foreign Minister Abba Eban condemned the ‘terrible
acts perpetrated by the Pakistani army in East Bengal’, which had
resulted in a ‘human tragedy amounting to genocide’. ‘The Jewish
people, which has suffered much sorrow and misery in its history,’ he
said, ‘must be especially aware of and sympathetic to human