causes us serious concern which we cannot tolerate. Naxalites on
our side have taken advantage of the situation.’ Referring to the
1938 Munich Agreement with Hitler, she observed that no lasting
solution could be found by ‘buying peace’. ‘We feel that had the
world community taken greater interest in matters as they
developed, they could have helped to bring the situation under
control, but its failure to take positive action only made matters
worse.’ When the British foreign secretary raised the question of a
dialogue, Mrs Gandhi replied that a dialogue could take place only
between Yahya and the Bangladesh leaders.5
Following these candid discussions, Foreign Secretary T.N. Kaul
and his counterpart, Sir Dennis Greenhill, met to analyse the
implications of the talks that had taken place at the higher political
levels. Greenhill said that some of Mrs Gandhi’s statements
indicated that war was perhaps now inevitable. He asked what role
India expected third countries to play in the event of hostilities and
what position India would take on any intervention by the United
Nations. To the first question, Kaul gave the guarded reply that India
did not want war, but that if it was attacked India would be compelled
to fight. He was blunt in his answers to the other questions. If war
broke out, India would not be in a position to accept a return to the
status quo in East Bengal. India saw no reason why other countries
should get involved. ‘We would also react very strongly against any
attempt to equate India and Pakistan. We hope that the British
government would not react in the manner it did in 1965,’ he
observed pointedly.6 (This was a reference to Prime Minister
Wilson’s pro-Pakistan tilt during the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war, which
he later acknowledged was a misstep.)
These candid discussions proved fruitful. Heath wrote to Yahya
Khan on 9 November asking him to consider releasing Mujib and
holding negotiations with the Awami League. (Yahya rejected the
appeal, stating that it was impossible for him to negotiate with Mujib.)
At the end of the month, Heath told members of the Cabinet
Committee on Defence and Overseas Policy that ‘. . . in the long run
our interest probably lay more with India than Pakistan’, adding, ‘. . .