the People’s Republic’ failed to induce Chinese military intervention.
The Enterprise-led naval task force was scheduled to pass through
the Straits of Malacca that day, but Nixon and Kissinger decided to
hold up the movement for twenty-four hours. In his memoirs,
Kissinger says that the delay was intended to give Moscow more
time to respond to a hotline message concerning coordinated action
in the Security Council. This may have been a factor, but the records
show that the White House was once again assailed by fears
concerning US public reaction. On 13 December, Kissinger cabled
Haig from the Azores: ‘As for the fleet, I am weighing [the] advantage
of moving it against [the] risk of [it] being called off prematurely by
public pressure . . . in any event, [the] fleet should go into [the] Indian
Ocean, not [the] Bay of Bengal.’35 Thus, the Enterprise headed
towards Colombo, not Chittagong.
The appearance of Task Force 74 in the Indian Ocean failed to
‘scare off’ the Indians. New Delhi was well aware of the constraints
imposed on the White House by Congressional and public opinion in
the United States. Addressing a massive rally in New Delhi, Indira
Gandhi delivered a message intended for both an Indian and
American audience. Playing on the rift in Washington between the
White House and its opponents in the Congress and media, she
declared:
A foreign power has threatened us. It has told us that it is bound by certain
treaty alliances with Pakistan. We were aware of these alliances. There
were many Pacts and as far as I am aware, they were intended to contain
Communism. The object of these alliances was certainly not to fight
democracy, or to suppress justice or the voice of the oppressed.
For the Indian public, she struck a note of defiance:
However weak we may be [compared with that foreign power] . . . the
Indian spirit is indomitable – indomitable because we follow the path of
truth and justice. We shall show the world that despite the opposition of all
those forces, there is no power on earth that can bend us.36
While the deployment of the Enterprise failed to deter India, it
produced a last flicker of hope in Pakistan. On 13 December,
Ambassador Raza conveyed an urgent appeal from his president.
Yahya requested that the US Seventh Fleet be tasked to keep the