struggle in East Pakistan be brought to an end as soon as possible.
Dhar was instructed to sound out the Soviet leadership on two
questions. Was there any possibility of a joint Soviet–US initiative to
bring the East Pakistan conflict to an early conclusion? If this was
not possible, were the Soviets prepared to share with India the
burden of sustaining the freedom struggle in East Pakistan?7
The Soviet response, delivered by its ambassador in Delhi, Nikolai
Pegov, simply ignored the suggestion of a joint Soviet–US initiative.
It expressed high appreciation for the ‘friendly sincerity’ of Mrs
Gandhi’s message and commended her for resisting domestic
pressures for according diplomatic recognition to Bangladesh. It
asserted that ‘there are still some possibilities for inducing the
military administration in Pakistan to abandon the use of arms in
East Pakistan’. Moscow shared with New Delhi the draft of another
appeal from Podgorny to Yahya Khan, and invited Indira Gandhi to
offer suggestions regarding the text. Referring indirectly to India’s
concerns about China, Moscow stated that it was ‘extremely
important not to allow the development of a situation in which the
events in East Pakistan would expand beyond the territory of
Pakistan, harm the interests of peace in the region and lead to
interference of third countries’. Finally, Moscow expressed its great
satisfaction with the development of Indo–Soviet relations, adding
cryptically 
that 
‘there 
are 
unused 
possibilities’ 
for 
further
strengthening these ties.
New Delhi was disappointed with this enigmatic reply and did not
quite know what to make of it.8 Though friendly in tone, it ignored the
suggestion of a joint initiative by the two superpowers. Neither did it
offer any reassurance of support against Chinese designs. Indian
officials failed to read the hint in ‘unused possibilities’ for raising the
level of bilateral ties. Moscow was referring to a proposal it had
made in 1969 for a treaty of mutual cooperation between the USSR
and India.
On 27 March, just before the last flicker of hope for a united,
democratic Pakistan was extinguished, Foreign Secretary T.N. Kaul
shared with US Ambassador Kenneth Keating his profound concern