He would continue to say that he stands for the principle of self-
determination but would take no action to back the statement in any
manner.28
A comparison of the Simla Agreement (Annexure 4) with the text of
the final Indian draft (Annexure 3) reveals the give and take in the
negotiations on the last night. The only significant amendments are
to be found in subparas (ii), (iii) and (iv) of Article 4.
Subpara (ii) of the Indian draft set out India’s core position. It read:
In Jammu & Kashmir, the line of control resulting from the cease-fire of
December 17, 1971, shall henceforth be respected by both sides, as a line
of peace. Neither side shall seek to alter it unilaterally, irrespective of
mutual differences and legal interpretations. Both sides further undertake
to refrain from the threat or the use of force in violation of this line.
The phrase ‘without prejudice to the recognised position of either
side’ was inserted at the end of the first sentence, on Pakistan’s
request. The author of the amendment was the lawyer, Rafi Raza,
who advised Bhutto that Pakistan could accept the Indian draft with
the insertion of this phrase. This presented no problem to the Indian
side, since it also applied to India’s claim to the entire territory of
Jammu & Kashmir. The phrase ‘line of peace’ – originally a Pakistani
formulation – was also dropped from the sentence.
Subparas (iii) and (iv) relating to minor adjustments to the Line of
Control by mutual agreement, and to a joint supervisory body, were
also deleted. The deletion of the provision concerning minor
territorial modifications by mutual agreement was not, in itself, of
much consequence. In a sense, it was superfluous. Despite deletion
of the clause, India and Pakistan did, in fact, negotiate minor
adjustments to the Line of Control in the wake of the Simla
Agreement. By contrast, deletion of the provision for a supervisory
body had material consequences. As Abdul Sattar points out, by
persuading the Indian side to drop this clause, Pakistan ‘checkmated
India’s move’ to withdraw the UN Military Observers Group in India
and Pakistan (UNMOGIP).29 Agreement to set up a bilateral
supervisory body would have implied acknowledgement of the fact
that the UNMOGIP had become redundant. After the Simla
Agreement, India declared that the UNMOGIP no longer had a role