from the earlier position that talks could be held only after Beijing’s
acceptance of the Colombo Proposals advanced by a group of non-
aligned countries in 1963.1 Mrs Gandhi’s offer elicited no response
from China, and relations between the two countries continued to be
tense. The Chinese threat loomed large, especially against the
background of a growing Sino-Pakistani military relationship.
At the same time, however, India was deeply concerned about a
recent development in Soviet policy towards Pakistan. In 1968, the
USSR agreed to supply arms to Pakistan, in an attempt to wean it
away from China. It became a major aim of Indian policy to seek
restoration of its position as the exclusive recipient of Soviet arms in
South Asia. Moscow, on the other hand, sought to deepen its ties
with both India and Pakistan, with the aim of drawing them into some
sort of an Asian collective security system.
This became clear when Indian Ambassador to Moscow D.P. Dhar
called on Marshal Grechko at the end of March 1969 to seek further
elucidation of the Soviet proposal of a treaty. Referring to Grechko’s
assurance of Soviet support in the event of a Chinese attack, the
ambassador inquired about the concrete shape of cooperation in the
political and other fields. Dhar also dwelt on India’s apprehensions of
a Pakistani invasion, referring pointedly to the Sino-Pakistani
collusion during the 1965 war. Grechko replied that Indo-Soviet
cooperation in the military and political fields should be given a more
concrete shape. ‘Thinking aloud’, he wondered if such cooperation
could not be translated, as a first step, into a treaty of friendship and
cooperation. At the next stage, the two countries could think in terms
of closer military cooperation. Turning to Pakistan, the marshal said
that he did not think Pakistan could pose a threat to India since it
was weak and divided. However, if Pakistan did commit aggression,
the Soviet Union would be on India’s side. Moscow would side with
the victim of aggression.2
The same message was conveyed by the Soviet ambassador to
India, Pegov, who informed Romesh Bhandari, Dhar’s second-in-
command, that a major Soviet objective was to promote friendship
between India and Pakistan so that they could jointly tackle China.