Raja consulted other senior officers in Dhaka about the feasibility of
conducting Operation Blitz in the prevailing situation. He records,
‘Each one of them was of the opinion that it would be sheer “lunacy”
to conduct the operation at that time as the whole basis, and all the
prerequisites for attempting it had been knocked out with one
blow.’25
The futility of military repression in the face of massive public
resistance was clear also to the author of Operation Blitz, Lt Gen.
Yaqub Khan. An intelligent and perceptive analyst, Yaqub Khan
followed Ahsan in cabling his resignation to Yahya. He explained:
Only solution to present crisis is a purely political one . . . I am convinced
there is no military solution which can make sense in present situation. I
am consequently unable to accept the responsibility for implementing a
mission, namely military solution, which would mean civil war and large-
scale killings of unarmed civilians and achieve no sane aim.26
Undeterred by the warnings of his two seniormost colleagues in the
eastern wing, Yahya decided to replace them with an officer with a
reputation for carrying out operations against civilians with
unquestioning brutality. Lt Gen. Tikka Khan, famed as the ‘Butcher of
Baluchistan’, was appointed governor and martial law administrator
of East Pakistan, in succession to Lt Gen. Yaqub.
Lt Gen. Tikka Khan soon discovered the ground realities in Dhaka.
Arriving at the governor’s house, he found that all the Bengali staff
had disappeared! The governor was obliged to move to the
cantonment as Maj. Gen. Raja’s guest.27 A little later, he was to
discover that none of the judges of the Dhaka High Court was
prepared to swear him in as governor of the province. Non-
cooperation extended to the judiciary too.
Developments in the eastern wing rapidly gained momentum.
Student and youth groups, in particular, were pressing Mujib to make
a formal declaration of independence in his scheduled speech on 7
March. Kamal Hossain recalls that by 7 March, ‘anything less [than
independence] would not be acceptable to the students, the younger
elements, and indeed large sections of politically conscious
people’.28 However, Mujib had also to contend with the fact that an
immediate declaration of independence would precipitate a massive