Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea open to Pakistani shipping and to
prevent India from attacking Pakistani ports. This was followed up
the next day by a personal message from Yahya to Nixon:
The time has come for the United States to go beyond warnings and
demarches if its determination to punish aggression across international
borders is to have any effect on the Soviet Union and India. The Seventh
Fleet does not only have to come to our shores but also to relieve certain
pressures which we by ourselves are not in a position to cope with.37
The desperate appeal fell on deaf ears.
With the approach of the Enterprise, the Soviet navy too signalled
its presence in the Indian Ocean. The USSR had quietly reinforced
its modest presence in the Indian Ocean right at the beginning of the
war. On 3 December, the Soviet presence consisted of a destroyer, a
conventional F-Class submarine, a minesweeper and a tank landing
ship. These ships were nearing completion of their six-month
deployment period. A relief force consisting of a destroyer and a
minesweeper arrived in the Indian Ocean through the Straits of
Malacca on 5 December. Moscow decided to retain the original
contingent; thus, the newly arrived ships became a reinforcement,
instead of a replacement. A second Soviet task force was sighted by
the Japanese as it passed through the Straits of Tsushima on 9
December. It must therefore have left Vladivostok on 6 December or
7 December, soon after the outbreak of the war – and before the US
decision to send the Enterprise. These deployments reflect Soviet
contingency planning in the context of the Indo-Soviet Treaty before
the movement of the US task force. Yet another Soviet task force
was dispatched after the US deployment of Task Force 74. It was
first sighted by the Japanese when it passed through the Straits of
Tsushima on 15 December. Though it arrived in the Indian Ocean
only on 18 December, the Americans were aware that it was on the
way. When the USS Enterprise arrived in the Indian Ocean, Soviet
submarines in the area announced their presence by surfacing, as
Soviet and American ships warily watched each other.38
The superpower naval minuet in the Indian Ocean was
accompanied by an exchange of messages between Washington
and Moscow and between Moscow and New Delhi, as the White