In the presidential elections held in 1964, Ayub defeated his rival,
Fatima Jinnah, sister of the revered founding father of Pakistan. The
outcome was a foregone conclusion, given the dependence of the
Basic Democrats on official patronage.
The centralization of power in the hands of the president, Field
Marshal Ayub Khan, deprived the Bengalis of even the modest
degree of political influence they were able to exercise earlier
through directly elected legislators. Through their representatives in
the legislature, the Bengalis had been able to exercise a modicum of
influence in national affairs, even though the power balance was
heavily tilted against the eastern wing. By giving himself a virtual
monopoly of state power and by reducing the role of the legislature
to insignificance, Ayub deprived the Bengalis of the only toehold they
had in the policymaking process and unwittingly contributed to a
sharpening of regional Bengali demands. In the words of the political
scientist Rounaq Jahan, ‘. . . political movements in East Pakistan
changed from competitive participation in the national system to
radical provincial autonomy movements’.16
Furthermore, by virtually extinguishing hopes of redressal of
Bengali grievances through the political process, the martial law
regime created ripe conditions for clandestine revolutionary
activities. In 1961, a group of student leaders formed a secret
organization, the Swadhin Bangla Biplobi Parishad (Revolutionary
Council for Independent Bengal). Separately, a few Bengali military
and civilian officials set up an outfit called Bengal Liberation Force
under Lt Cmdr Moazzem Hossain. The patron of these secret cells
was the rising star of the Awami League, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.17
A follower of Suhrawardy since his student days in pre-
Independence India, Sheikh Mujib was deeply involved in the
language movement in the early years of Pakistan. He became the
general secretary of the East Bengal Awami League in 1953, at the
age of thirty-three. A charismatic orator, he soon emerged as
Suhrawardy’s right-hand man and political successor.
After the imposition of the martial law regime, Mujib would follow a
dual strategy in his struggle for the rights of East Bengal. He called