approach to resolving outstanding issues. If bilateral talks did not
yield results, he pointed out, the two sides could always decide, by
mutual agreement, to approach a judicial tribunal.18 His presented a
counter-proposal in the form of a ‘Treaty for Reconciliation, Good
Neighbourliness and Durable Peace’.19 This ruled out the threat or
use of force and committed the two countries to settle all issues
‘bilaterally and exclusively by peaceful means’. It also called for
cessation of hostile propaganda; promotion of economic and cultural
ties; and facilitation of travel between the two countries.
The Indian and Pakistani drafts both dealt with the modalities of a
final settlement of the Kashmir issue. The final settlement itself was
reserved for future discussions. This was specifically reflected in a
note appended to the Indian draft, which stated that the ‘question of
Jammu and Kashmir will be discussed separately . . . [and] the
Agreement reached at such discussion shall be incorporated’ in the
treaty. Aziz Ahmed, predictably, rejected the Indian draft. The Indian
draft failed to provide for a ‘self-executing machinery’ for dispute
settlement, which, he said, was an essential prerequisite for any
agreement on non-use 
of force.20
Day 3
Pakistan presented its second draft, bearing the title ‘Agreement on
Bilateral Relations’.21 This incorporated some steps for progressive
normalization of relations (such as cessation of hostile propaganda,
opening of border posts, and even resumption of trade ‘as far as
possible’), but made no concession on the basic principle of
resolving outstanding issues on an exclusively bilateral basis.
Moreover, it called for implementation of the UN Security Council
resolution of 21 December 1971 (concerning troop withdrawals to
the 1949 ceasefire line and repatriation of POWs) and expressly
stipulated that Pakistan would ratify the agreement only after this
clause had been implemented. The draft thus reflected the Pakistani
position that reaffirmation of 
the 1949 ceasefire line, troop withdrawals to that line, as well as