The request raised complex issues for Indian officials. Was the
break-up of Pakistan in India’s interests? How would Pakistan react
if India were to get involved? Would it retaliate across the Kashmir
ceasefire line? Should Indian assistance be preceded by recognition
of Bangladesh as an independent state? How would the international
community react to Indian intervention in a Pakistani civil war?
Would China come to Pakistan’s assistance? Under the prime
minister’s instructions, a committee headed by the cabinet secretary
was formed to examine these questions. The committee included
Secretary to the Prime Minister P.N. Haksar, Foreign Secretary T.N.
Kaul, Home Secretary Govind Narain, and RAW chief R.N. Kao.
Kao, who had long anticipated the separation of Bangladesh,
emphatically pressed for a positive response:
. . . the longer the liberation struggle takes to achieve success, the greater
are the chances of its control passing into the hands of extremists and pro-
China communists . . . Therefore, it would be in our own interest to give
aid, adequate and quick enough to ensure the early success of the
liberation of Bangladesh.32
Tajuddin Ahmed followed up the request in a meeting with Deputy
High Commissioner K.C. Sen Gupta in the first week of March. The
Awami League general secretary inquired whether India would offer
political asylum and other support in the event of a Pakistani
crackdown.33
While Indian officials grappled with the complex questions raised
by these requests, Mujib was impatient for an immediate response.
A few days after Tajuddin’s meeting with Sen Gupta, Mujib sent
another emissary, Capt. Sujat Ali, to convey to the deputy high
commissioner his dissatisfaction over India’s failure to make a
definite response to his appeal. To goad India into prompt action,
Mujib’s emissary spun a yarn about an American offer to assist the
liberation movement in exchange for a naval base facility in the Bay
of Bengal! Capt. Sujat Ali also communicated Mujib’s concern over
the withdrawal of some Indian troops from the West Pakistan border.
(These troops had been sent to the border in the wake of the
hijacking incident in January.) Mujib felt that the withdrawal had
made it easier for Pakistan to transfer troops to the eastern wing. He,