intransigence against India and his love for communist China. It was
essential to establish good relations with India and reopen traditional
trade routes. Mujib said that he did not want separation, but rather a
form of confederation. Mujib sounded out the ambassador regarding
Washington’s policy at this critical juncture. Pointing to the leverage
provided by US economic aid it extended Pakistan, he appealed to
the United States to exert its influence with the Pakistani army in
order to ensure a peaceful resolution of the crisis. Following
instructions, Farland ‘. . . in no way conveyed a sense of concern
regarding Pakistan’s future in such a manner as to suggest an
unalterable U.S. opposition to Bangla aspirations’.40
On 1 March, the massive and spontaneous Bengali reaction
against Yahya’s decision to postpone the National Assembly session
created a powerful impression in Washington. Archer Blood’s
assessment that it signalled the ‘beginning of the end of a united
Pakistan’ was broadly accepted in the capital. Kissinger’s staff
alerted him: ‘Events in Pakistan today took a major step toward a
possible early move by East Pakistan for independence.’ They
raised two questions. Should the US hedge its bets with East
Pakistan against its possible secession? Should the US try to avoid
bloodshed in the event of secession?41
On Kissinger’s instructions, the National Security Council (NSC)
staff prepared a contingency study in early March on the East
Pakistan situation. Its cautious recommendation was: ‘Unless and
until separation is certain, any shift in our position would be against
our continuing interest in seeing Pakistan remain unified.’ The stance
bore a certain similarity to that adopted by the external affairs
ministry in New Delhi. As in New Delhi, the US intelligence agency,
the CIA, advocated a more proactive role. The CIA pointed out that a
split would bring the pro-Chinese Bhutto into power in West
Pakistan. A loose confederation would be preferable, since it would
check Bhutto’s pro-Chinese and anti-India policies. The CIA
therefore argued that Washington should urge Yahya to reach an
accommodation with Mujib, but ‘if separation becomes imminent, but
before it is announced, we should . . . let East Pakistani leaders