Hossain found his leader engaged in deep discussion with Awami
League secretary general Tajuddin Ahmed. Mujib informed his
constitutional adviser that it would not be expedient, in view of the
popular mood, for the Awami League to take over power at the
Centre; it should only insist on an immediate transfer of power at the
provincial level. This was a significant change in the party’s position.
The student leaders in particular were arguing forcefully that the
Awami League might find itself compelled to accept compromises on
the Six-Point Demand if it were to form a government at the Centre.
To avoid this, the party should assume office only in the eastern
wing. An Awami League provincial government, free of central
entanglements, would also be able to build up the paramilitary East
Pakistan Rifles (EPR) and the police force to prepare for the
contingency of armed confrontation.
Thus, on the morning of 21 March, Mujib and his team held an
unscheduled meeting with Yahya and presented their revised
proposals. These called for: (i) immediate appointment of an East
Pakistan governor selected by the Awami League; (ii) martial law to
be lifted totally, as soon the governor assumed office; (iii) an interim
constitution based on the 1962 constitution, with amendments
incorporating the Six Points; and (iv) continuation of the president in
office at the Centre. The Awami League hoped that the last provision
would make the package palatable to Yahya.
The significance of the shift in Mujib’s position was not lost on the
president’s advisers. It deepened Cornelius’s fears that even a brief
‘constitutional vacuum’ might be exploited by the Bengalis to declare
independence. But Yahya, who had already set in motion steps
towards another ‘solution’, instructed Cornelius to proceed with the
drafting exercise. As in the earlier talks in January, Yahya’s tactics
were to affect the posture of a neutral referee, counting on Bhutto to
shoot down the Awami League proposals.
Bhutto arrived in Dhaka on 21 March, and on the following day
Yahya had separate meetings with Mujib and Bhutto. Bhutto also
had an informal conversation with Mujib outside the conference
room. After the president had briefed Bhutto about the Awami
League proposals, Bhutto predictably opposed them, warning that