House sought to impress upon the Kremlin the ‘linkage’ between
detente and Soviet policy in the Indo-Pakistan war.
‘Linkage’: Detente and a regional war
In parallel with its moves in the United Nations, the White House
invoked the doctrine of ‘linkage’ to bring pressure to bear on
Moscow. Early in the crisis, on 6 December, Nixon complained to
Brezhnev that the Soviet position in the South Asian crisis was
inconsistent with progress towards detente:
It had been my understanding . . . that we were entering a new period in
our relations which would be marked by mutual restraint and in which
neither you nor we would act in crises to seek unilateral advantages 
. . . [However,] what is happening now in South Asia, where you are
supporting the Indian Government’s open use of force against the
independence and integrity of Pakistan . . . runs counter to the recent
encouraging trends in international relations.
Nixon called upon Brezhnev to use his ‘great Influence’ in New
Delhi to bring about a ceasefire and restore the territorial integrity of
Pakistan. If India was allowed to achieve its objectives by military
action, it would ‘long complicate the international situation and
undermine the confidence that we and you have worked hard to
establish’. Nixon concluded pointedly that the spirit in which the two
leaders had agreed to meet in Moscow in May required ‘most urgent
action to end the conflict and restore territorial integrity in the
Subcontinent’.39
Brezhnev replied that he agreed with Nixon’s understanding that
neither party should seek unilateral advantages in a crisis. He also
agreed on the need for an immediate ceasefire. However, the
ceasefire would have to be ‘connected with a simultaneous decision
for a political settlement based on the recognition of the will of the
East Pakistani population. Otherwise, it is impossible to ensure the
respect for the lawful rights and interests of the people of East
Pakistan and to create conditions for the return of the millions of
refugees.’ Without these conditions, a cease-fire would not be stable.
Brezhnev proposed that negotiations between the Pakistan
government and the leaders of East Pakistan should be resumed