Afghanistan, Pakistan and the rest of South Asia. Yahya Khan, not
the most astute among statesmen, initially accepted the proposal,
but retracted later when his military colleagues and the foreign
ministry forcefully drew his attention to the implications for Pakistan’s
trade policy vis-à-vis India, as well as for Sino-Pakistani relations.16
Yahya paid a reciprocal visit to Moscow in the following month.
When he raised the question of additional military supplies, Kosygin
seized the opportunity to inform him in blunt terms that Pakistan
could not be on friendly terms with both China and the Soviet
Union.17 Yahya remained unmoved. These exchanges brought home
to Moscow the lack of realism in its policy of dangling arms sales in
the hope of drawing Pakistan away from its intimate military and
political ties with China.
Thus, by October 1969, the Soviet Union was ready to meet the
Indian request regarding arms supplies to Pakistan. Kosygin at last
offered a categorical assurance regarding cessation of arms supplies
to Pakistan. The assurance was repeated by Marshal Grechko and
Firyubin. An indication was also received that action would be taken
on the question of revising Soviet maps depicting India. In a ‘Strictly
Personal & Top Secret’ letter to Foreign Minister Dinesh Singh in
November 1969, the Indian charge d’affaires in Moscow, Romesh
Bhandari, pressed for immediate finalization of the treaty. ‘I would
now submit that the time has come for us to arrive [at] a decision on
this matter. Any delay in doing so would cause doubts in the minds
of the Soviet leadership regarding our sincerity. This could in turn
lead to a rethinking on their part in respect of the assurances they
have now given.’18
Bhandari’s letter was shown to Indira Gandhi, but she had no 
intention of concluding the agreement. She valued the Soviet
assurance of support in the event of Chinese or Pakistani aggression
against India; however, India did not face an immediate threat. She
was concerned also about domestic and international perceptions
regarding the compatibility of the treaty with non-alignment. Her
government enjoyed only a small majority in parliament, and inside
her own party she faced a mounting challenge from the right wing.