permanent control over some areas. If this came to pass, the hawks
in Pakistan might treat it as justification for launching a war against
India. Intelligence reports indicated that the Pakistani junta was
thinking in terms of a war of two to three weeks’ duration. They had
stopped all leave to armed forces’ personnel, recalled their reservists
and had set up anti-aircraft defences around their airbases in West
Punjab. Information had also been received about the presence of
around 1,20,000 Chinese troops along the India–China border.
Swaran Singh said that in this situation, India expected the Soviet
Union to make prompt deliveries of required military supplies. India
also required assured supplies of oil and certain non-ferrous
materials needed by the defence industries. Iran had informed India
that it would cut off oil supplies to India in case of an Indo-Pakistan
conflict; other Gulf countries might follow suit. Since the Soviet Union
was buying Iraqi oil, it could easily ship this oil to India. Second,
Swaran Singh strongly urged Moscow to consider how it could
counteract Chinese military pressure on India’s borders. He
suggested this might perhaps be achieved by exerting countervailing
pressure on the Xinjiang border. This was particularly important,
since information had been received that the Chinese had diverted
three divisions from Inner Mongolia to Tibet. Swaran Singh also
proposed closer cooperation between the Indian and Soviet
intelligence agencies. Lists of Indian requirements for military
equipment, petroleum products and non-ferrous metals were handed
over to the Soviet side.2
In the final round of talks on 11 August, Swaran Singh went to the
heart of the problem. Taking Gromyko into confidence about India’s
contacts with Mujibnagar, he revealed that the latter felt they could
take control of substantial areas in the north and north-east of the
country by the end of August or, at the latest, by September. When
Gromyko inquired about the extent of the territories under Mukti
Bahini control, Swaran Singh pointed out certain areas on the map,
adding that some areas west of the Padma River might also come
under the control of the freedom fighters. The Soviet foreign minister
sought more details about the percentage of East Pakistan territory