was not in a position to make the situation easier for him. Yahya’s
latest proposal to hold farcical elections in East Bengal would have
no impact whatsoever. ‘We are not going to listen to advice that
weakens us.’ Mrs Gandhi stated that she did not know how to tell the
Indian people that they must continue to wait. ‘I can’t hold it,’ she
said. Keating reported that Mrs Gandhi spoke with ‘clarity and more
grimness’ than on any previous occasion. The ambassador drew the
conclusion that ‘in the absence of some major development toward a
meaningful political accommodation, India will assure that the efforts
of the Mukti Bahini to liberate East Pakistan do not fail’.15
On 1 December, the United States imposed an immediate cut-off of
military sales to India.16 This was largely a symbolic act, since India
was not seriously dependent on US military supplies, but it was a
clear signal of the US position on the war that was about to break
out.
The Soviet Union
While providing strong support to India, the Soviet Union had also
been urging New Delhi not to get directly involved in a Pakistani civil
war. As we saw earlier, there was a partial but significant
modification of the Soviet assessment of the crisis during Indira
Gandhi’s Moscow visit. The Soviet leaders accepted that ‘in some
respects’ the Mukti Bahini’s struggle was a ‘war of national
liberation’. After Yahya’s rebuff to Podgorny at Persepolis, the Soviet
Union was compelled to abandon its hopes for a peaceful resolution
of the civil war. The escalation of the conflict in November brought
home to Moscow the inevitability of a war. Before the end of the
month, the Soviet Union came to accept that the conflict in East
Pakistan involved the principle of self-determination. Finally, at the
end of November, Moscow offered India unambiguous assurances of
support in the diplomatic battles that lay ahead in the United Nations.
With the approach of war, the Soviet Union closely coordinated its
positions with India. Ambassador Pegov met daily with Indian
policymakers to keep abreast with developments. On the morning of
27 November, he met twice with D.P. Dhar. In the first meeting, Dhar