from destruction, two things are needed – maximum intimidation of
the Indians and, to some extent, the Soviets. Secondly, maximum
pressure for the ceasefire.’33
Two days later, Huang Hua requested an urgent meeting. This sent
Kissinger into a tizzy of excitement. ‘They’re going to move. No
question, they are going to move,’ he told the president. His dreams
were shattered when the message was delivered. Huang Hua had
been instructed to convey China’s support for the latest US-
sponsored Security Council resolution calling for an immediate
ceasefire and withdrawal of forces. This put at rest hopes in the
White House of inducing China to make a military move against
India.
Kissinger’s strategy reflected a flawed understanding of Chinese
policy. It was unrealistic to expect that the promise of an American
security umbrella would induce China to embark on a risky military
adventure. In January 1972, Kissinger’s deputy, Alexander Haig,
discussed the December war with Chinese Premier Zhou En-lai
when he visited Beijing to prepare for the Nixon visit. Haig unwittingly
offended his hosts when he said that the United States had a
fundamental interest in the maintenance of ‘China’s viability’ and that
Nixon and Kissinger were concerned on this account during the
recent South Asia crisis. When Zhou En-lai reported the
conversation to Mao, the chairman commented: ‘Why should our
viability become America’s concern . . . If China’s independence and
viability should be protected by the Americans, it is very dangerous
[for us].’ Zhou later told Haig that he was ‘greatly surprised’ by the
US leaders’ concern for ‘protecting China’s independence and
viability’. China firmly believed that ‘no country should depend upon
a foreign power in maintaining its own independence and viability’.
Otherwise, the dependent country would become a ‘subordinate or
colony’.34
By 12 December, when Huang Hua’s message was received, the
primary argument for deploying the nuclear carrier Enterprise in the
Indian Ocean had been proved false. Kissinger’s promise that the
United States ‘. . . would oppose the efforts of others to interfere with