secretary in the MEA, it bore the title ‘Treaty of Peace, Friendship
and Cooperation’. The problematic Article 6 of the Soviet draft was
replaced with a new formulation that read:
Each High Contracting Party undertakes to abstain from providing any
assistance to any third Parties that engage in conflict with the other High
Contracting Party. In the event of either High Contracting Party being
subjected to an attack or a threat thereof by a third Party, the two High
Contracting Parties shall immediately enter into mutual consultations.
The first part of the new article was fashioned in the context of
Soviet military sales to Pakistan. The latter part was a truncated
version of the Soviet Article 6. It dropped the reference to
‘appropriate effective measures to ensure peace and security’ in
order to distance the treaty from a military pact. As a ‘peace’
agreement, it included a pledge to ‘respect the boundaries,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of each other and
to refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of the other party’. It
even included an undertaking to refrain from entering into any
military alliance directed against the other signatory and to ‘abstain
from any aggression against the other High Contracting Party’!
Furthermore, with the aim of giving the treaty the appearance of a
general agreement on cooperation, a mass of new provisions was
introduced, covering cooperation in such diverse spheres as the
economy, science and technology, art, literature and education.
Finally, the reference to India’s policy of non-alignment was retained,
with the addition of a reciprocal expression of India’s respect for the
Soviet policy of promoting detente.
In seeking ministerial approval, Kaul emphasized that the draft
treaty was in full conformity with non-alignment. Like the Soviet draft,
it specifically recognized India’s non-alignment and eschewed any
provision that permitted the presence of foreign troops or bases on
Indian soil. Second, it could be construed as a non-aggression
treaty; this was consistent with non-alignment. India could offer to
sign similar treaties with any other country. The treaty would meet
India’s immediate objective of halting Soviet arms supplies to
Pakistan. The deletion of the reference in the Soviet draft to the
object and outcome of the consultations would enable the Indian