whether in practice it would serve a useful purpose in facilitating the
process of repatriation [of refugees]’. India rejected the proposal,
pointing out that UNHCR officials based in New Delhi were provided
every facility for visiting the refugee camps. The proposed induction
of UNHCR representatives on the Indian side of the border would
therefore serve no purpose and would only deflect attention from the
urgent need to restore normalcy in East Bengal.40  
The secretary general himself had few illusions about the
effectiveness of the proposal. He did not share Sadruddin’s bias and
he recognized that the root cause of the problem lay in the failure of
the Pakistan government to seek a political reconciliation with the
Awami League. U Thant had become deeply concerned about the
resultant threat to international peace. However, he felt bound by
Article 2(7) of the UN Charter, which debarred the United Nations
from intervening in ‘matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any state’. Hence, on 20 July – the day after he
suggested to India and Pakistan the stationing of UNHCR
representatives on both sides of the border – he sent a
memorandum to the president of the Security Council, drawing his
attention to the international security dimension of the issue. It was
unusual for the secretary general to address the Security Council on
a subject that did not figure on its agenda, but U Thant explained
that he had ‘reluctantly come to the conclusion that the time is past
when the international community can continue to stand by, watching
the situation deteriorate and hoping the relief programmes,
humanitarian efforts and good intentions will be enough to turn the
tide of human misery and potential disaster’. He drew attention to the
‘lack of substantial progress toward a political reconciliation and the
consequent effect on law and order and public administration in East
Pakistan’. U Thant pointed out that the ‘conflict between the
principles of territorial integrity of States and of self-determination
has often before in history given rise to fratricidal strife . . . In the
present case there is an additional element of danger for the crisis is
unfolding in the context of the long-standing and unresolved
differences between India and Pakistan.’41