Mukti Bahini (July –September)
The first batch of 110 newly trained guerrillas was infiltrated into
Bangladesh in July.15 As planned, Indian troops provided artillery
cover to facilitate this infiltration of the freedom fighters. According to
an Indian estimate, almost 50 per cent of the Pakistani border
outposts were neutralized by the end of July.16 In the same month,
Maj. Gen. (later Lt Gen.) B.N. Sarkar, an officer known for his fervent
espousal of the Bangladesh cause, was appointed director of military
operations (DMO), Eastern Command, and assigned the task of
coordination with Bangladesh Forces Headquarters. Sarkar’s
appointment helped alleviate the personality conflicts between
Osmani and Aurora. Tactful by nature and able to communicate with
his Bangladeshi colleagues in their common mother tongue, Sarkar
was able to develop a rapport with the Mukti Bahini leadership. The
Bangladesh Forces Headquarters had not so far issued specific
operational directives to the sector forces. In August, Sarkar
instituted a system of regular meetings with the concerned
Bangladeshi officers to jointly draw up monthly targets for Mukti
Bahini operations. These targets were then circulated to the
Bangladeshi sector commanders by Col. Osmani and to the
concerned Indian officers by the Eastern Command.17
The initial guerrilla operations in July produced indifferent results.
The Pakistan army’s confidence about the success of its
‘pacification’ drive remained unshaken. It expected to resolve the
internal security problem and to restore road, rail and riverine
communications well before India was able to position itself to launch
a military offensive.18 However, after a shaky start, the guerrilla
operations gradually gathered tempo, and by September Osmani
was able to claim some spectacular successes. Culverts and bridges
were blown up, disrupting Pakistani communications, and ambushes
were carried out successfully. According to Lt Gen. Jacob, these
operations were beginning to have an effect on Pakistani morale. In
Manekshaw’s assessment, by September the principal aim of the
guerrilla operations – that is ‘the creation of conditions in BANGLA
DESH whereby operations by regular troops would be facilitated’ –