based on the expectation that India would forthwith order its army to
march towards Dhaka? If so, he wished to dispel any such
expectation. These blunt words offered little comfort to the doubters
in the audience.7
Tajuddin’s assumption of the post of prime minister was resented
not only by prominent Awami League members who had not found a
cabinet berth (such as Mizanur Rahman Chowdhury) but also by his
senior cabinet colleagues, Khondaker Mushtaque Ahmed and
Kamaruzzaman. Hossain Towfiq Imam, who had had a ringside view
of developments as cabinet secretary to the Mujibnagar government,
says that both Khondaker (who had served as co-president of the
Pakistan Awami League) and Kamaruzzaman (former general
secretary of the Pakistan Awami League) had claims to seniority
over Tajuddin in the party hierarchy. The mutual distrust between the
government-in-exile’s prime minister, Tajuddin, and its foreign
minister, Khondaker Mushtaque Ahmed, ran so deep that the foreign
minister chose to operate from a separate location in the city.
Khondaker was kept out of most of Tajuddin’s important meetings
with the Indian prime minister and senior officials.8 The foreign
minister, on his part, had misgivings about Tajuddin’s policies,
including, in particular, his support for the Indo-Soviet Treaty.
Incredible though it may seem, Khondaker and his foreign secretary
believed that the treaty had adversely affected Soviet attitudes
towards Mujibnagar! As we shall see below, Khondaker established
links with US officials behind his prime minister’s back.
There were deep differences also between the cabinet and the
student leaders. The latter, as we saw earlier, were among the first to
raise the demand for full independence in early 1971. They had tried
hard to persuade Mujib to make an unambiguous declaration of
independence on 7 March. On 23 March, they had marched in
procession to Mujib’s residence to raise the Bangladesh flag. They
functioned as an autonomous power centre, reporting directly to
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. In April, the student leaders, led by Mujib’s
nephew Sheikh Fazlul Huq Moni, opposed the formation of the
government-in-exile. They demanded that the government be