strengthened the military; it therefore amounted to interference in its
internal affairs. Swaran Singh urged the US to ‘postpone’ economic
aid to Pakistan until Islamabad had taken corrective political action.
Summing up the discussions, Assistant Secretary of State Sisco
observed that the US and Indian views were ‘very close’. The US
would help India to cope with the refugee problem, while recognizing
that this was only a palliative and that the real answer was a political
accommodation.
Later, when discussions continued over a working lunch, Sisco
mentioned that the US had been very careful about economic aid to
Pakistan and there had been a substantial holding operation in this
respect. During the conversation at the table, Swaran Singh briefly
alluded to the possibility of an alternative track. He said that though
India was pursuing the international diplomatic route, he feared a
situation might be created necessitating some other means of
persuasion. This was his only reference to a possible armed conflict.
The Indian foreign minister created a favourable impression of
restraint and sobriety on his State Department interlocutors.34
If the discussions between Rogers and Swaran Singh were marked
by relative candour, the same cannot be said for the latter’s meeting
with Nixon. Briefing Nixon before the meeting, Kissinger told the
president, ‘I am just trying to keep them [the Indians] from attacking
for 3 months’ (presumably because the Pakistani channel to China
would become redundant by then). He advised Nixon to give the
Indians a pleasant surprise by announcing a major new contribution
to refugee relief and to assure Swaran Singh that he was working on
Yahya in his own way to encourage a political resolution, but overt
US pressure would be counterproductive. ‘It’s a little duplicitous,’
explained Kissinger, ‘but these bastards understand that.’35
Concealing his ‘tilt’ towards Pakistan, Nixon listened to the Indian
foreign minister’s presentation with feigned sympathy. He said he
was ‘keenly aware’ of the problem and the ‘enormous agony’ it had
caused. Public pressure on Pakistan would be counterproductive,
but other methods were also available. He asked the foreign minister
to convey to Mrs Gandhi ‘on a completely off-the-record basis’ that ‘I