eastern wing. When serving in the 1st East Bengal Regiment, he not
only introduced Bengali marching tunes, including Tagore songs, but
insisted that the daily situation reports be submitted in Bengali. This
enthusiasm for a secular Bengali culture did not endear him to his
West Pakistani superiors. After retiring from service, Osmani joined
the Awami League in 1970 and was elected to the National
Assembly at the end of the year. As the constitutional crisis
deepened in March 1971, Osmani acted as a channel of
communication between Bengali officers and Mujib.
Osmani was not easily recognizable in Teliapara. He had been
obliged to remove his signature handlebar moustache in order to
escape detection by the Pakistani army when he left Dhaka! Under
his guidance, the assembled officers drew up the Teliapara
Document, which outlined their initial plans for the liberation war.
This envisaged the raising of a large guerrilla force which would be
tasked with destroying Pakistani communications facilities, engage in
hit-and-run operations against isolated enemy outposts and convoys,
and also liquidate ‘collaborators’ of the enemy. Regular forces would
secure a ‘lodgement area’ or base, provide cover to the guerrillas
and launch direct attacks on Pakistani forces as soon as possible.
The size of the regular force would be raised partly by training new
recruits and partly by inducting the best elements of the paramilitary
and guerrilla forces. Indian assistance would be sought for the
liberation war.1
Shortly afterwards, the Mujibnagar government formally appointed
Osmani as the commander-in-chief of the liberation army, with the
rank of cabinet minister. The appointment, in effect, fixed an official
seal of approval on the Teliapara action programme. On 18 April, the
Mujibnagar cabinet formally ‘. . . decided that adequate arrangement
[sic] should be made by the C-in-C in conjunction with the supporting
[Indian] authorities for training of students and youth for various
operational tasks in Bangladesh’.2
Operation Jackpot
On arriving at the border, rebel EBR and EPR officers approached