June 1971, he proposed establishing a United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) presence in the border areas
– in some of the refugee camps on the Indian side as well as in
some refugee reception centres on the Pakistan side. Sadruddin
asserted that a UNHCR presence at the border would help facilitate
repatriation of the refugees. Pakistan agreed to accept the presence
of a few UN officials in Dhaka, but not outside the provincial capital,
fearing that the officials might witness scenes of oppression and
brutality. New Delhi rejected the proposal outright, since it was
unclear how the presence of these officials in the Indian border
areas could facilitate repatriation. Indeed, the proposal seemed to
imply that India was obstructing the refugees from returning home!
India pointed out that New Delhi–based UNHCR officials were in any
case permitted to visit the camps.
Sadruddin took great pains in his public statements to affect the
neutral posture appropriate to a UN official, but he revealed his bias
in favour of West Pakistan during a visit to Washington at the end of
June. In a meeting with Secretary of State Rogers, Sadruddin said
that India was providing full support to the ‘Mukti Fauj’ (Mukti Bahini)
and insisting that a political solution involving Mujibur Rahman was a
necessary condition for the voluntary return of the refugees. He
urged applying pressure on India to moderate its position on the
need for a prior political settlement, to force it to control and crack
down on the Bangladesh elements, and stop infiltration of the Mukti
Bahini across the border. He surmised that India’s desire to protect
this infiltration from foreign eyes explained the country’s rejection of
his proposal to station his officers in the border camps. He said he
was not discouraged by the Pakistani response; Pakistan, he said,
would agree to his proposal if India agreed to accept UNHCR
personnel on its side of the border.39
Despite India’s outright rejection of Sadruddin’s suggestion, his
proposal was revived in a modified form by the UN secretary
general. On 19 July, U Thant suggested to India and Pakistan that
UNHCR representatives be accepted on a trial basis in two or three
selected areas on each side of the border, in order to ‘ascertain