compilation of the items suggested by each party. Dhar’s contribution
accorded pride of place to the elements of ‘durable peace’, including
‘inviolability of the frontier/boundary between India and Pakistan’.
Dhar left his Pakistani interlocutors in no doubt that the elements of
‘durable peace’ included a new Line of Control in Kashmir. Aziz
Ahmed, on his part, placed repatriation of POWs and withdrawal of
forces at the top of his list of priorities.
Just when the road to the Simla summit seemed to have been
cleared, Bhutto made a serious faux pas. Playing on his vanity, the
Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci drew him into making some
unflattering comments on Mrs Gandhi. Bhutto described her as a
‘diligent drudge . . . devoid of initiative and imagination’ and as a
‘mediocre woman with a mediocre mind’12. This provoked an angry
reaction in India, jeopardizing the prospects of the summit. Bhutto
wriggled out of this awkward situation by issuing a categorical denial
of the reported remarks.
At this point, we may pause briefly to take note of Mrs Gandhi’s
own perception of Bhutto. One of the hardy perennials in popular
accounts of the Simla summit is that a gullible Indira Gandhi was
fooled by a wily Bhutto. The actual record shows that she deeply
distrusted Bhutto, not only because of his history of adopting
virulently anti-India postures but also because she had information
about the steps he had begun to take in 1972 to build up Pakistan’s
military strength. Mrs Gandhi felt it was important for India to retain a
certain margin of military superiority in order to deter a new Pakistani
military adventure. The Soviet Union was duly approached for the
required arms, but Moscow, which had responded to earlier requests
with exemplary promptitude, chose to maintain silence on this
occasion. Swaran Singh pressed the case with Soviet leaders in
April 1972 during his Moscow visit, but failed to elicit a positive
response. Mrs Gandhi herself wrote to Brezhnev on 26 April to
explain her misgivings about Bhutto and the justification for the
requested weapons. About Bhutto, she wrote:
. . . he is a leader whose career so far . . . casts doubt on his goodwill
towards India and his devotion to peace. It may be that recent events have
infused in him a genuine desire to turn his back on the past and make a