nation-building tasks could now be taken up more effectively.
Reconstruction of the war-devastated economy posed an immense
challenge. Bridges and railway lines had to be repaired on a massive
scale; power generation and distribution had to be restored; the
major port of Chittagong had to be cleared of mines; scarcities of
essential goods had to be addressed. On 17 January, India agreed
to supply Bangladesh a list of essential commodities, including
consumer items such as sugar, salt and baby food; medicines and
drugs; oilseeds and cotton yarn for rural industries; cement, steel
and steel products; power generation and transmission equipment;
and transport vehicles.5 Chittagong port was cleared with Indian
assistance. India helped to rehabilitate the railway network in
Bangladesh. In the immediate post-liberation period, the burden of
foreign aid was mainly shouldered by India. This changed only after
the major traditional donor countries extended diplomatic recognition
to Bangladesh.
With their country freed from Pakistani occupation, the millions of
refugees returned speedily to their homes. Nearly 7 million refugees
were repatriated within six weeks of the liberation of Bangladesh.6
By 25 March 1972, all but a handful of the nearly 10 million refugees
had returned to their homeland. The massive task of providing
transportation to the refugees and resettling them in their homes
could not have been accomplished in so short a time but for detailed
advance planning by the Indian and Mujibnagar authorities.
Less than a month after his return to Bangladesh, Mujib visited
Kolkata to express his gratitude to the ‘Government and people of
India, especially to the neighbouring States of West Bengal, Tripura,
Meghalaya and Assam, for the assistance and hospitality given to
millions of Bangladesh citizens and for the moral and material
support given by the Government and people of India to the struggle
for liberation’.7 The visit afforded an opportunity for extensive
discussions between Mujib and Indira Gandhi on the potential for
cooperation in diverse fields – industry, agriculture, communications,
development and utilization of water and power resources, as well as
cooperation in the fields of culture, science and technology. An