idea was acceptable; however, her impression was that the Pakistani
rulers had alienated these people so completely that it would be
difficult to persuade them to accept a federation.9
The leaders met again later in the day in a restricted session,
where the only officials present were Foreign Secretary Kaul on the
Indian side and two Russian interpreters. This permitted a freer
discussion. 
Mrs Gandhi now said she greatly feared that in spite of all her efforts,
India might be drawn into a conflict. The country had to be fully
prepared to face the situation. This led Brezhnev to observe, ‘. . . we
have a more grave picture before us than we had before’. An
important point that had emerged from her observations was that the
‘provisional Government of Bangladesh’ would not accept anything
less than independence. Brezhnev, who seemed to be the most
sympathetic of the troika, conceded that the conflict in East Pakistan
‘may be, in some respects, a war of national liberation’, but he added
that since the Soviet Union recognized Pakistan as a single entity, it
could only view the conflict as a civil war. Kosygin urged that India
should not get involved in the Pakistani civil war. The East
Pakistanis, he warned, wanted to ‘shove on’ to India’s shoulders
their national conflict.
When Mrs Gandhi referred to the increasing domestic pressure on
her to recognize the provisional government of Bangladesh, each
member of the troika cautioned her against taking this step.
Brezhnev said that ‘rendering practical assistance to the guerrillas is
quite another question’, but extending formal recognition would close
the door to a political or negotiated solution. The reactions of
Pakistan, China, the US and other western countries had to be
considered. Formal recognition would precipitate a war and cause an
increase in the influx of refugees. Podgorny added that recognition
would not be timely if the freedom fighters were not in a position to
ensure their independence. Kosygin warned, ‘. . . once you are
drawn into it, it will be difficult to get out of such a conflict.’ He
proposed an alternative course of action: Soviet and Indian
diplomats could jointly work out measures to put pressure on