confessed as much.
. . . a doubt which had existed in my mind, and also in the minds of others,
as to what the objectives of the 1971 war were . . . It was clear from the
beginning that that our government did not intend, at any time, to destroy
the power of Pakistan in the West . . . We did intend, however, that the
people of East Pakistan should determine their own future to the extent
possible. The possibility that the Pakistani forces in East Pakistan would
collapse altogether, as they did, that Dhaka would fall and that the whole
country would be available to the freedom movement in East Pakistan, was
not considered something that was likely to happen.3
Jacob questions whether there was a clear political aim. ‘The
concept of total victory was only evolved by Army Headquarters just
prior to hostilities,’ he wrote to Manekshaw after the war. ‘What was
the political aim? If the political aim was the independence of
Bangladesh, that meant the occupation of the whole country
including Dacca.’4
‘Total victory’, for Jacob, meant total military occupation. He 
remained unconvinced by Manekshaw’s explanation that liberation of
the greater part of Bangladesh, occupation of the entry ports and
isolation of the Pakistani forces in Dhaka and a few other garrisons
that were cut off from supplies and reinforcement, would inevitably
lead to the liberation of the entire territory of Bangladesh. Jacob was
not informed about the unqualified assurance of support in the
Security Council offered by Moscow on the eve of the war, or that
this was a factor that prompted issue of the new instructions to free
the whole of Bangladesh from Pakistani occupation. In Jacob’s view,
the Polish resolution of 14 December would have been ‘disastrous’
had it been adopted, since it called for withdrawal of Indian forces
from Bangladesh.5 He was unaware of the fact that the resolution
was drafted in close consultation with India; he was also unable to
parse the complex diplomatic document which did indeed call for an
Indian withdrawal, but only after transfer of power to the Awami
League and withdrawal of Pakistani troops from Bangladesh. Such
were the limitations of a system that allowed for little interaction
between soldiers and diplomats.
•