Advance praise for the book
‘This book is a tour de force of contemporary history. Dasgupta examines in
one succinct and readable volume how domestic politics in Pakistan, Indian
grand strategy, diplomacy, broader geopolitical shifts and military strategy led
to the birth of Bangladesh. That it was done within fifty years of the events it
describes makes it an even more remarkable achievement. Judicious and
sober in its judgements, this is how history should be written, driven by
evidence, logic and facts. Dasgupta’s own experience and knowledge
illuminate this brilliant book that will be indispensable for scholars, diplomats,
political scientists and anyone interested in the formation of the modern Indian
subcontinent.’ Shivshankar Menon
‘In India and the Bangladesh Liberation War, Chandrashekhar Dasgupta
focuses a sharp eye on India’s role in the era-defining conflict that led to the
creation of Bangladesh. Rich in detail and primary research, this insightful
book weaves a compelling narrative. Highly recommended – not just for
military buffs, but for anyone seeking to understand India’s role on the world
stage in that tumultuous period of history.’ Shashi Tharoor
‘Ambassador Dasgupta is amongst the most scholarly of Indian diplomats with
a passion for archival research. Here is another masterpiece of his in which he
debunks a couple of powerful myths that surround the historic events of 1971.
He unravels India’s “grand strategy” in the political and diplomatic spheres that
guided military actions that year and that remade subcontinental geography.’
Jairam Ramesh
‘There are very few diplomats who research the subjects they write on with
such diligence and analytical skill as Chandrashekhar Dasgupta. This book,
like his earlier book War and Diplomacy in Kashmir 1947–48, is truly eye-
opening, revealing aspects of the subject that were unknown. It not only tells
an untold story but will lead to new interpretations and conclusions that will
change the way we view the history of that period.’ Karan Thapar
‘This is one of the finest political histories of recent times, and confirms
Ambassador Dasgupta’s reputation as a scholar whose meticulous research
and rigorous analysis are unparalleled. It provides us with an insider’s view of
the complex and rapidly evolving geopolitical backdrop against which the
dramatic saga of the birth of a nation took place. Above all, its value lies in
demonstrating the importance of an overall national strategy to deal with the
extraordinary challenge, where objectives were achieved, inspired – as the
author says – by “a common clearly defined overarching national aim”.’
Shyam Saran