Pakistan, the new Soviet draft called upon ‘all parties’ to observe an
immediate ceasefire, linking this with a simultaneous ‘political
settlement in East Pakistan, giving immediate recognition to the will
of the East Pakistan population as expressed in the elections of
December 1970’.19 The new resolution implicitly recognized that
there was a third party in the conflict, even as it continued to speak
of ‘East Pakistan’.
Blocked by the Soviet veto, the eleven members of the Security
Council that supported the US resolution moved to refer the matter
to the General Assembly under a procedure known as ‘Uniting for
Peace’. (While the General Assembly has no enforcement powers, it
may submit recommendations for such measures to the Security
Council, if invited to do so, under the provisions of the ‘Uniting for
Peace’ resolution adopted in 1950 during the Korean War.) Since
this was a procedural resolution, it could not be vetoed. The
resolution was carried by a majority of eleven votes in favour, none
against, with four abstentions (France, Poland, the USSR and the
UK). 
The outcome of the General Assembly debate was a foregone
conclusion. As Haksar had presciently noted right at the beginning of
the crisis, the principles of territorial integrity and non-interference in
domestic matters were at the time deeply entrenched in international
law and practice. The newly independent countries of Asia and
Africa were particularly attached to these principles. Indeed, many of
them experienced tribal or ethnic conflicts in their own countries.
Many Latin American countries, living under the shadow of the
United States, placed a premium on such protection as was
available under international law relating to state sovereignty and
non-interference in internal matters.
Ambassador Sen battled on bravely in the General Assembly,
resolutely supported by his Soviet colleague, but met with little
success. Guided by the United States, no less than thirty-four
countries – drawn mostly from Latin America and Africa – jointly
sponsored a resolution calling upon India and Pakistan to observe
an immediate ceasefire and withdraw their forces to their own side of