Dhar’s report on this conversation caused consternation in New
Delhi. The foreign minister, Dinesh Singh, minuted, ‘I am afraid the
Ambassador has gone too far on the treaty. I have also ascertained
with P.M. [prime minister] he did not have the authority to [go?] to
this length.’8 New Delhi ignored Kosygin’s hint linking the treaty to
cessation of Soviet military supplies to Pakistan. India was prepared 
to carry on a general discussion on an Indo-Soviet agreement but
not to accept a treaty which might be construed as a deviation from
the path of non-alignment. Dhar made a course correction as
instructed, during a meeting with Deputy Foreign Minister Firyubin,
and was congratulated by the foreign secretary ‘for the skilful
manner in which you carried on the discussions without making any
commitments’.9
The problematic article
Meanwhile, the Soviet proposal had acquired greater clarity when
Ambassador Pegov handed over to Dinesh Singh on 22 April 1969 a
draft Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation. The ambassador
emphasized that the document was a ‘very preliminary’ draft that
could serve as a basis for discussion. The core of the Soviet draft lay
in Article 6, which had this provision:
In case either of the Parties is subjected to an attack or a threat thereof,
the Parties will immediately initiate mutual consultations with a view to
arriving at agreement on, and implementing, appropriate effective
measures to ensure peace and security of their peoples.
Moscow was mindful of India’s attachment to non-alignment. With
this in mind, Article 4 stated:
The Soviet Union respects the policy of non-alignment with military
groupings pursued by India, a policy that constitutes an important factor in
the struggle for universal peace and international security.10
This was a welcome reassurance, but it did not still New Delhi’s
misgivings about Article 6 and its compatibility with non-alignment.
The prime minister candidly mentioned her reservations to Kosygin
when he visited India in May. She said that she was mainly
concerned about two issues regarding the draft treaty: first, that it
should contain no phraseology that might be misunderstood as a