raised by Nixon.
There were no further discussions on the East Bengal crisis
between Mrs Gandhi and Nixon. As previously agreed, the agenda
for the final session meeting on 5 November dealt with global
developments, including the US opening with China, Vietnam, the
Middle East and US–USSR relations. However, officials of the two
sides, led by Kaul and Undersecretary of State Irwin, met to seek
further clarification of each other’s positions. Mrs Gandhi had chosen
not to respond to Nixon’s suggestion regarding talks between
Islamabad and ‘cleared’ Awami League representatives. Irwin
explored with Kaul the possibility of a dialogue between Islamabad
and an Awami League representative. When Kaul inquired which
Awami League leader Irwin had in mind, a State Department official
replied that Khondaker Mushtaque Ahmed might fit the role. Kaul
dismissed the suggestion, saying that he doubted whether
Mushtaque had the authority to negotiate on behalf of Bangladesh.
Kaul showed greater interest in a dialogue between nominees of
President Yahya and Sheikh Mujib, though he emphasized that only
the Bangladesh government-in-exile could take a decision on this
question. India could not speak for the people of Bangladesh. The
Bangladesh government insisted that Sheikh Mujib must be released
from prison. Kaul inquired whether Mujib’s nominee would be
allowed to meet the incarcerated Bangladesh leader. What faith
could the Bangladesh authorities have in negotiations, he asked,
when Islamabad had announced that fresh – and obviously
fraudulent – elections would be held in December to replace the
freely elected representatives of the people of East Bengal? (Since
Kaul had not rejected the proposal for talks between nominees of
Yahya and Mujib, the State Department instructed US ambassador
to Pakistan Farland to explore the proposal with the Pakistani
president. Farland reported on 18 November that Yahya had rejected
the proposal.19) Kaul, on his part, sought clarification on a point of
critical interest to India. Stressing the urgency of a political
settlement, he inquired about the time frame Washington had in
mind. Irwin replied, ‘We have no time schedule in mind.’20