to a Pakistani account, ‘reliable estimates’ indicated that by October
the guerrillas had set off 497 explosions, attacking 188 government
offices and godowns (warehouses) and 281 police stations; 231
bridges had been destroyed or damaged, as well as 90 power
installations. There were frequent raids and ambushes on Pakistani
patrols and small bodies of troops.24
In his monthly report for October, Manekshaw noted with
satisfaction:
[The] tempo of guerrilla operations has picked up considerably . . . the
concentration of our regular troops on the India–BANGLA DESH border
has compelled the PAKISTAN army to move out from the interior . . . to the
border opposite us: this action of theirs has denuded the heartland of
BANGLA DESH of regular troops. This . . . will give the Freedom Fighters,
of whom an increasingly large number are being inducted, an excellent
opportunity to move about freely and hit targets wherever they should
choose to do so.25
As Mukti Bahini raids, sabotage actions and ambushes gathered
strength, the Pakistani army responded with artillery fire against the
guerrillas, often causing destruction on the Indian side of the border.
As a preventive measure, the Indian army was authorized in
September to respond with cross-border fire and to occupy border
areas from where the firing originated.26 With the intensification of
Mukti Bahini operations in October, the scale and intensity of the
Pakistani response registered a corresponding increase. With
increased shelling of Indian border posts by the Pakistani army,
Indian forces were permitted in November to go into Bangladesh
territory up to a distance of ten miles in order to silence Pakistani
artillery. In carrying out these instructions, the Indian army also took
care to secure specific positions that would improve its offensive
posture, with an eye on the impending war.27
This led in many cases to major conventional battles between
Indian and Pakistani troops, with the Mukti Bahini guerrillas playing a
supportive role. Thus, on 20 November 1971, Indian forces launched
a preliminary operation in the Boyra area, during the course of which
Pakistan lost fourteen tanks and three aircraft, apart from losses of
men. On orders from Manekshaw, an attack on the Pakistani