western democracies issued an open condemnation of Pakistan, lest
it should be construed as interference in Pakistan’s internal affairs.
Even in Britain where, due to historical connections and the
presence of a large Bangladeshi immigrant community, public
sympathy for East Bengal was very strong, the government refrained
from public censure, contenting itself with appeals in confidential
communications for an end to the bloodshed and a return to
negotiations. On 7 April, Prime Minister Edward Heath wrote to Gen.
Yahya Khan, ‘There must be an end to bloodshed and the use of
force as soon as possible and a resumption of discussions. Political
leaders, who received such massive support, must at some stage
participate in these discussions.’5 Australia and New Zealand were
prepared to go one step further by voicing their views in public. Jack
Marshall, the acting prime minister of New Zealand, issued a
statement on 14 April, expressing his ‘earnest hope that the present
bloodshed in East Pakistan will soon cease and that with goodwill on
all sides Pakistan’s political and military leaders can renew their
attempt to reach agreement by negotiation and compromise’.6
Australia went further than any other western country, stopping just
short of an open condemnation that might be construed as
‘intervention’. Speaking in the Australian House of Representatives
on 22 April, Prime Minister McMahon expressed the ‘view’ that ‘ . . .
there should be no more loss of life’ and that ‘the leaders of the
Awami League should be given full authority civilly to represent their
people in the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan’.7
The Soviet Union was the only major power to respond positively to
India’s appeal in April. Though its message was couched in terms of
human rights, the Soviet position was primarily based on political
calculation. Hoping to draw India into a closer relationship, Moscow
had decided in 1970 to end its earlier policy of balancing its
presence in India and Pakistan. Thus, when the South Asian crisis
erupted in 1971, Moscow immediately threw its weight behind India.
On 2 April, President Podgorny wrote to Yahya Khan as a ‘true
friend’, to make an ‘insistent appeal’ for an immediate halt of the
‘bloodshed and repression against the population in East Pakistan