assemblies – elected from East Bengal in 1970. The suggestion met
with Tajuddin’s approval. The first assembly of the elected
representatives of the people of Bangladesh was convened in the
town of Siliguri in West Bengal in early July.12
The Siliguri conference was held at a time when the fortunes of the
liberation war were still at a low ebb. A vast guerrilla army was being
raised, but major operations would be launched only after the
monsoons. Thus, at the Siliguri meeting, Tajuddin’s competence was
questioned and the Awami League general secretary, Mizanur
Rahman Chowdhury, called for his resignation. Col. Osmani came
under attack for the reverses suffered by the Mukti Bahini. Questions
were raised about India’s intentions, its failure to accord diplomatic
recognition to Bangladesh, and doubts were expressed as to its
continuing support. Foreign Minister Khondaker Mushtaque Ahmed
seized the opportunity to fan discontent over Tajuddin’s performance
and at India’s intentions. Acting President Syed Nazrul Islam and
Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmed rose to the challenge. Calling for
patience and fortitude, the acting president stated that he firmly
believed in the assurances received from India. He drew attention to
India’s help in organizing the massive Mukti Bahini training
programme, which had already commenced. Calling for patience, he
assured the audience that the results would become apparent in
three or four months. In another moving speech, Tajuddin
emphasized that the prerequisite for liberation was a capacity for
prolonged struggle and sacrifice. Dispelling doubts about the
outcome of the liberation war, he assured his audience that victory
was certain. His inspirational speech was received with thunderous
applause. The final outcome was an affirmation of confidence in the
government-in-exile.13
The United Front and Moscow
The government-in-exile formed in April was a single-party regime
composed exclusively of Awami League members. Indeed, all the
elected representatives of the people present on Indian soil
belonged to this party. However, all the major political parties in East