report notes prepared by the different departments. The defence
ministry confirmed: ‘As soon as a decision is taken, the Defence
Services are in a position to secure the defeat and surrender of the
occupying forces in East Bengal in the shortest possible time.’ The
home ministry reported: ‘All the States and particularly the border
States have confirmed that necessary measures for maintenance of
internal security have been taken . . . The need for utmost vigilance
to maintain communal peace has been impressed upon the State
Governments.’ While calling for ‘effective action’ to liberate
Bangladesh ‘at the earliest date possible’, the foreign ministry
suggested, ‘. . . we should provoke Pakistan into starting a war
against us by granting de jure recognition to Bangla Desh’. On
economic preparations, the cabinet secretary announced: ‘. . . our
foreign exchange reserves are in a fairly comfortable position and no
serious situation is likely to emerge in the short term.’21
The question of recognition
India did not intend to fire the first shot in an all-out war. New Delhi
planned to extend formal recognition to Bangladesh on 4 December,
expecting Pakistan to respond by starting the war. In the event,
Pakistan launched its offensive across India’s western border on 3
December itself, thus providing legal justification for a declaration of
war by India. New Delhi therefore decided to delay recognition of
Bangladesh till 6 December, in order to de-link the declaration of war
from the act of recognition of Bangladesh. Asoke Ray, head of the
Indian liaison office in Kolkata, reported the reaction of the
Bangladesh leaders when they were informed of the act of
recognition on the morning of 6 December. Acting President Syed
Nazrul Islam and Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmed ‘were so deeply
moved when we informed them of “recognition” that they could
hardly speak. The Prime Minister was almost in tears and after a
long silence said that his conviction, which dates from his first
meeting with our Prime Minister, had proved to be absolutely
correct.’22