Mrs Gandhi’s visit, Brandt issued orders for resumption of arms
deliveries to India, while keeping in place the embargo against
Pakistan.11
Austria and Belgium
The visits to Vienna and Brussels were of less consequence. The
Austrian president and chancellor both expressed great sympathy
and understanding the Indian position, but pleaded their inability to
take a public position in view of their former Foreign Minister Kurt
Waldheim’s candidature for the post of UN secretary general.12 In
Brussels, Mrs Gandhi’s talks with Prime Minister Gaston Eyskens
commenced on unexpected lines. Eyskens, a former economics
professor, launched on a lengthy discourse on international
economic issues, taking up most of the available time. This was not
the subject at the top of the Indian prime minister’s agenda, but she
took the opportunity to seek and obtain Belgian support for
expediting a pending economic and commercial agreement between
India and the European Economic Community (EEC). Finally,
Eyskens turned to what he described as the ‘refugee problem’. This
gave Mrs Gandhi an opportunity to explain that, apart from the
economic burden of coping with the refugee influx, the continued
presence of millions of refugees imposed unbearable social and
political stresses on India. ‘I am sitting on a volcano,’ she said. She
gave a negative reply when the Belgian premier asked about the
possibility of the UN organizing repatriation of the refugees. This led
Eyskens to reflect that the ‘only way out is to grant greater autonomy
but, of course, this is an internal problem of Pakistan’. When Mrs
Gandhi pointed out the implications for India’s security, Eyskens
modified his position, and said, ‘Although theoretically it is an internal
problem for Pakistan, there have been examples where the UN has
intervened in similar circumstances, as for example, in Angola,
Mozambique, the Portuguese colonies and South Africa. Perhaps
the UN can consider some action.’13 The Belgian prime minister’s
observations on East Bengal ended on that erratic and inconclusive
note.