were transferred to the Eastern Fleet.8 The Indian Air Force aimed to
achieve total air supremacy in the eastern theatre, while maintaining
sufficient reserves to meet a possible threat from China. The air
force was given the new task of accelerating the army’s advance by
providing transport aircraft and helicopters, particularly for major
river-crossing operations. Deficiencies in military equipment were
identified and steps were taken to obtain the requirements from the
Soviet Union in a timely manner. Transportation and military
infrastructure was strengthened on an impressive scale to facilitate
military operations.
An updated master plan was ready by October 1971. Its overall
aims were: (i) to assist the Mukti Bahini to liberate a part of East
Pakistan where the refugees could return to live under an
independent Bangladesh government; (b) to conduct offensive-
defensive operations in the western theatre to prevent Pakistan from
capturing Indian territory; and (c) to defend the northern border in the
event of Chinese intervention.9
The plan anticipated a powerful Pakistani attack on the western
front. It expected Pakistan to launch a concentrated attack on
Poonch and to attempt to disrupt the line of communication between
Pathankot and Jammu. Adequate forces were provided to meet the
first contingency. To counter the second move, the plan provided for
an Indian advance along two thrust lines – between the rivers
Basantar and Beas in the north, and from Thakurpur on the river
Ravi in the south. Further, with a view to consolidating India’s
defence positions, limited attacks were planned in Ladakh’s Shyok
valley and Kargil, and in the area lying west of Dera Baba Nanak
Bridge in Punjab. In the secondary southern sector, stretching from
Ganganagar in Rajasthan to the Arabian Sea, thrusts were planned
towards Rahim Yar Khan in the south of Pakistan’s Punjab province
and Naya Chor in Sind.
The primary targets, of course, lay on the eastern front, where the
aim was to liberate a major part of Bangladesh through a rapid
advance bypassing Pakistani strongholds, while ensuring their
isolation by seizing control of major communication centres. The