launched jointly by Suhrawardy, Sarat Bose and other prominent
provincial politicians was more than just a historical footnote.
There was general agreement in the meeting about the danger of a
drawn-out guerrilla war passing into the hands of the extreme left,
with the attendant dangers to India’s security. However, Kao
disagreed with Acharya and Banerji on the prospects of a
constitutional compromise. He insisted that the West Pakistan
establishment would never accept a dominant role for the eastern
wing. The RAW assessment was that the Pakistani army would
reject any fundamental shift in the existing power structure. Kao also
emphasized that Mujib’s own hands were tied and that he could not
afford to accept a compromise. If he deviated from the Six-Point
programme, he would be swept aside by popular sentiment. Kao
added that he had received information that Mujib himself viewed
secession as a distinct possibility and was preparing for such an
eventuality. He argued (as he had done earlier, in 1969) that India
should have the capacity to offer the assistance that the Awami
League might require if it launched an independence movement. An
independence struggle would have to progress on a multi-directional
front, encompassing a political movement to maintain continuing
popular support, and the raising of a volunteer army to reinforce the
Bengali regulars declaring for independence. Among the MEA
officials present, only the head of the Pakistan division, Asoke Ray,
agreed with Kao. (Ray, it will be recalled, had direct contacts with
Mujibur Rahman in 1965–66.)
Thus, the divergence between the MEA and RAW perspectives,
visible even in 1969, remained unresolved. The MEA view remained
dominant in official circles. As we shall see further, it was shared by 
the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) at its highest level, right up to 
25 March 1971.
In retrospect, it is clear that the RAW anticipated events correctly,
but as of early January, none of the major protagonists – Mujib,
Yahya and Bhutto – had ruled out the possibility of reaching an
agreement on the constitution, even though each of them was also
preparing for a breakdown in the talks. (Indeed, as we shall see
below, both Mujib and Bhutto were to explore the possibility of a