be trained to lead these operations inside Bangladesh.
In Stage 3, the culminating stage of the campaign, the guerrillas
would function as formed bodies of troops in the event of a war with
Pakistan. This stage would see an intensification of sabotage
operations targeted specifically at installations located in the major
towns of Jessore, Rajshahi, Dhaka, Mymensingh, Sylhet, Rangpur
and Dinajpur.4
The Indian army had originally envisaged training around 8,000
guerrillas through a three-month course. An additional period of
specialized training was envisaged for the leaders. However, the
Mujibnagar authorities pressed for a far larger force; they felt that a
short three-week training course would meet the requirement.5 Thus,
the strength of the guerrilla force was placed at 20,000,6 subject to
expansion as required. In view of the emergent situation, the training
period had to be limited to a mere four weeks. In the event, due to
pressing demands from Mujibnagar, the intake was stepped up in
July to 12,000 per month, and increased further in September to
20,000 per month; and the training period was reduced to three
weeks. By the end of October, the Mukti Bahini guerrillas numbered
over 61,000, and another 6,000 had been inducted into the Mujib
Bahini commanded by the student leaders.7 Under constant
pressure from Mujibnagar, the number of Mukti Bahini – regulars and
guerrillas – trained by India rose progressively to around 1,00,000 by
the end of November. This was a considerable achievement in a six-
month period, but a price had to be paid in terms of quality, as the
training period had to be cut short. In retrospect, Manekshaw said, ‘.
. . a more careful assessment ought to have been made by me of the
numbers that could be properly trained and effectively used during
the available six months’.8
The bulk of the guerrilla force was drawn from the ranks of
students and other youth. To facilitate recruitment, youth camps were
set up separately from the main refugee camps. Recruits were
politically screened by Awami League representatives, but from late
September, volunteers cleared by the pro-Soviet parties – the
National Awami Party (M) and the Communist Party of Bangladesh –