Bengal also declared their support for the Mujibnagar government.
These included the two branches of the National Awami Party (NAM)
led, respectively, by Prof. Muzaffar Ahmed (NAP-M) and Maulana
Bhashani (NAP-B), the pro-Soviet Communist Party of Bangladesh
(CPB), and the Bangladesh Congress Party. Prof. Muzaffar Ahmed
issued a statement declaring that the Mujibnagar government was
the ‘only legally constituted government of Bangladesh’ and calling
upon all ‘democratic and progressive’ nations to recognize and assist
the new state. Maulana Bhashani appealed to world leaders to
accord immediate recognition to Bangladesh and extend all possible
help to the government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. The
CPB, aware of the Awami League’s pro-west image, made a special
effort to explain to ‘fraternal parties’ the background of the liberation
war against a ‘ruthless and barbarous enemy armed to the teeth by
the imperialists and having the support of the Maoists of China’.14
With typical foresight, Tajuddin wanted right from the outset to
involve these parties in the liberation struggle by bringing them into a
United Front. Thus, in his broadcast on Swadhin Bangla Betar
Kendra on 11 April, he invited ‘all political leaders of all political
parties of Bangla Desh to join us in a united struggle against the
aggressor. Our struggle today rises above conventional political
boundaries and must be seen as the struggle of the 75 million
people of Bangla Desh for protecting their freedom.’15
At the end of May, Tajuddin sent his emissary, Mayeedul Hasan, to
New Delhi to sound out Haksar’s views on a United Front. He had in
mind, particularly, the role the CPB could play to dispel Soviet
misperceptions about the pro-west character of the Awami League.
The Awami League had long maintained close contacts with the
Indian and American missions in Dhaka, but it had had few
interactions with the Soviet mission. Haksar was very supportive,
and he encouraged the Mujibnagar authorities to establish regular
contact with the Soviet embassy in New Delhi.16
With India’s growing involvement in the Bangladesh liberation
struggle, Haksar saw the need for regular liaison at the ministerial
level. His choice fell on Durga Prasad Dhar, the suave, charming and