up. Schools and public buildings were vacated to accommodate the
refugees. Fiscal planners had to somehow accommodate refugee
relief in an already stretched budget.
Though the military crackdown was directed against all supporters
of the Six-Point Demand, Hindus were a special target of the
Pakistan army. US Consul General Blood reported to the State
Department on 19 April 1971 that ‘. . . various members of the
American community have witnessed either burning down of Hindu
villages, Hindu enclaves in Dacca and shooting of Hindus attempting
[to] escape carnage, or have witnessed after-effects which are
visible throughout Dacca today’.13 This developed into an
undeclared military pogrom to drive out the Hindus from the
province. Bengali Muslims abhorred this slaughter, Blood reported.14
According to a CIA estimate, of the 8 million refugees who fled East
Bengal in September, as many as 6 million were Hindus.15 India was
anxious to ensure that this Pakistani provocation did not trigger
communal tensions in India. Under advice from New Delhi, state
governments and local authorities took special care to prevent
misperceptions and ensure communal peace and harmony.
Policy coordination
Under the prime minister’s instructions, a special committee of
secretaries was set up in April to monitor and coordinate policy on
these multiple political and economic fronts. The committee was
headed by Cabinet Secretary T. Swaminathan, and its core group
included Foreign Secretary T.N. Kaul, Home Secretary Govind
Narain, Defence Secretary 
K.B. Lall, Secretary to the Prime Minister P.N. Haksar and RAW
Director 
R.N. Kao. The army chief and secretaries of other ministries were
invited to attend sessions focusing on their respective jurisdictions.16
Infused with a sense of urgency, the special committee functioned
with great efficiency. The speedy decision-making and flawless inter-
departmental coordination during the 1971 crisis stood in sharp
contrast to the stately pace at which government business was