that is often overlooked by military planners – of bringing the Indian
troops back home within a specific time frame. He emphasized that
India wanted to withdraw its forces from Bangladesh as soon as
possible after its liberation, lest it should lose the goodwill it had
earned. He spelled out his question in clear terms: how soon, in the
opinion of his interlocutors, would India be able to withdraw its forces
from Bangladesh? The Mujibnagar authorities replied that the
answer depended on several factors. If Pakistan resorted to a
‘scorched earth’ policy, or if it still retained a capacity to pose a
continuing threat to an independent Bangladesh, Dhaka might
require an Indian military presence on Bangladesh for a longer
period. In the absence of these complications, it might be hoped that
the Bangladesh government would be able to cope with the situation
within three or four months. This period would be shortened if Sheikh
Mujib was freed from his Pakistani prison and allowed to return to
Bangladesh to lead his country.
Dhar’s question also led to a discussion of other formidable
problems that would confront post-liberation Bangladesh. Foremost
of these was the restoration of law and order in a country where this
had ceased to exist and which was awash with arms. A large
number of freedom fighters would have to be disarmed after
liberation and given opportunities for their absorption into nation-
building tasks. Weapons would also have to be recovered from the
criminal Razakar bands armed by the Pakistanis. Then there was the
massive problem of speedily repatriating and rehabilitating some 10
million Bangladeshi refugees from India. The communications
infrastructure – roads, bridges, railways and ports – damaged during
the liberation war would have to be made functional as soon as
possible. Distribution of foodstuff and other essential commodities
would have to be ensured. The administrative system, disrupted by
the war, would have to be restored.2 The scope and scale of the
required operations were nothing less than heroic. The speedy
restoration of normalcy in post-liberation Bangladesh was a tribute to
the foresight of the planners.
As the Mujibnagar government addressed these challenges in the