of eventual communist domination of Bengal, or would it prefer a
political solution to the crisis? Mujib was obviously hoping that
Washington would 
apply pressure on Yahya to desist from a military solution. Blood
parried the question by replying blandly that the United States hoped
for a peaceful political solution and believed that this was desired by
both Mujib and Yahya!44
In March 1971, there was nothing to indicate that the United States
would see the break-up of Pakistan as a contest between the
superpowers or as anything more than a South Asia issue. Kissinger
had dropped a broad hint about the president’s ‘tilt’ in favour of
Pakistan, but its laboured geopolitical rationalization was yet to make
an appearance.
To the brink and beyond
On 15 March, at a time when the ground realities were evolving at an
incredible speed, Yahya arrived in Dhaka, ostensibly for negotiations
with Mujib. Outside the limits of the military cantonments, the entire
province was by now effectively controlled by the Awami League.
The army was bringing in reinforcements to cope with the situation,
but movement of military supplies was being systematically
obstructed by the public, precipitating confrontations between the
military and the civilian population. Except for some fringe elements,
the entire Bengali population was united in its demand for immediate
implementation of the Six Points, now being interpreted as
independence by an ever-increasing number of people. The
emotional ties between the two wings of Pakistan had been reduced
to a mere thread by this time.
Yahya’s actions cast doubts on his stated intention of finding a
political solution. His first act on arriving in Dhaka was to convene a
meeting of senior military officers to take stock of the security
situation. On 17 March, after his initial talks with Mujib, Yahya
ordered his generals to prepare plans for a massive crackdown. On
20 March, midway through the talks, Yahya approved the new plan,
code-named ‘Operation Searchlight’.45