Henry Kissinger is unquestionably one of the most brilliant and
profound contemporary analysts of international affairs. He was not
at his best, however, in the 1971 crisis. Brushing aside all evidence
to the contrary, he maintained that India’s aim was to ‘smash’ West
Pakistan. In his memoirs, he misquotes a CIA report to justify this
assessment. He claims that the report indicated that India intended
to continue fighting on the western front after liberating Bangladesh,
in order to destroy the Pakistani army and air force, thus rendering
Pakistan defenceless.6 Views differed concerning the accuracy of
the report, and in any case the report only claimed that India
intended to destroy Pakistani ‘armoured forces’, not its army! The
CIA cable stated explicitly that the aim was to ‘destroy Pakistani
military striking power’, in other words, its offensive – not defensive –
capacity.7 Raymond Garthoff, historian of detente, points out that if
Kissinger’s aim was only to halt hostilities in the western front. ‘India
and the Soviet Union undoubtedly would have accepted this
outcome at any time in the crisis, without the acrobatics of triangular
diplomacy waged by a master geopolitician’.8 Indeed, the Soviet
resolution of 6 December called for a ceasefire on both fronts, along
with ‘effective action towards a political settlement in East Pakistan’.
‘We are standing alone against our public opinion, against our
whole bureaucracy at the very edge of legality,’ Kissinger informed
Bhutto on 11 December.9 By pursuing a policy that found little
support in the US Congress or public opinion, Nixon and Kissinger
deprived themselves of the most effective instruments of intervention
in Third World conflicts. Direct arms transfers to Pakistan were ruled
out by Congressional opinion. Economic assistance was subject to
tight controls. The threat of direct military intervention lacked
credibility, in view of US public opinion, as was evidenced in the
voyage of the USS Enterprise. Suspension of military sales and
economic aid to India had no more than a marginal impact, as had
been pointed out in advance by the State Department. What
remained was an unequalled US diplomatic influence in the United
Nations. This was demonstrated in the Security Council debates in
December, during which the United States was always able to rally