the support of the majority of the non-permanent members.
Kissinger’s geopolitical model suffered from a basic flaw. By
viewing India as a mere ‘client state’ or even a ‘proxy’ subject to
Soviet control,10 Kissinger converted a regional conflict into a global
contest between the superpowers, brushing aside the contrary views
of the State Department. Kissinger’s wild exaggeration of the degree
of Soviet influence in India led him to correspondingly overestimate
the potential for ‘linkage’ between the South Asian conflict and
progress towards detente between the superpowers. His apocalyptic
predictions of the geopolitical consequences of an Indian victory
proved to be baseless. Likewise, his expectation that deployment of
the Enterprise in the Indian Ocean would induce Chinese military
intervention turned out to be totally erroneous. His geopolitical model
was a caricature of international realities.
•
With the minor exception of the 1965 clashes in the Rann of Kutch,
the 1971 conflict was the only Indo-Pakistan war in which India’s
primary objective was not focused on Kashmir. The strategic aim of
the war was to speed up the liberation of Bangladesh, not to resolve
the Kashmir question. This fact is lost on critics, who allege that India
‘won the war but lost the peace’ in 1971 because a permanent
solution was not found for the Kashmir issue.
During the course of the war, once attainment of the basic strategic
aim was in sight, India adopted a secondary, add-on objective –
replacement of the UN-authorized 1949 ceasefire line in Jammu &
Kashmir by a bilaterally agreed Line of Control. The minor territorial
modification was less important than the underlying principle of
bilateralism. The aim was to make a permanent transition from
multilateral to bilateral forums for resolution of disagreements
between India and Pakistan. The Simla Agreement was a giant step
towards this goal. It shifted the focus from outdated UN resolutions
to bilaterally negotiated agreements for settlement of differences
between India and Pakistan. Five decades later, this contribution
continues to be relevant.