aims decided earlier in the year. It evolved during the course of the
December war. As we noted earlier, an indication of the aim was
given to the United States during Swaran Singh’s meeting with Bush
on 12 December. It was not India’s intention to impose the
adjustment on Pakistan but rather to arrive at a negotiated change.
This limited escalation in the political objective was, in a sense, a
replay of 1965. At the outset of the 1965 war, India’s aim was simply
to repulse the Pakistani assault on Kashmir, but during the course of
the war, New Delhi came to appreciate the importance of holding on
to some of the strategically significant Pakistani posts it had
occupied across the ceasefire line in the Haji Pir, Tithwal and Kargil
areas, and India declared its intention to retain these areas. At
Tashkent, however, Kosygin was able to gently persuade Lal
Bahadur Shastri to give up the demand for a readjustment of the
ceasefire line, just as he had persuaded Ayub Khan to drop the
Pakistani demand for reopening of the Kashmir issue.3 This broke
the deadlock in the talks and cleared the path for the Tashkent
Declaration.
There was a certain similarity in India’s post-war aims in 1965 and
1971, in the sense that both involved minor territorial adjustments.
However, there was also a basic difference. In 1965, India only
sought an adjustment of the 1949 ceasefire line originating from a
UN Security Council resolution. In 1971, India aimed at replacement
of the UN-ordained ceasefire line by a bilaterally negotiated Line of
Control. This involved not merely minor territorial adjustments, but a
more basic shift to managing or resolving differences through
bilateral negotiations, rather than negotiations at a multilateral forum.
The Security Council resolution of 21 December implicitly
recognized the irreversibility of the outcome of the liberation war. It
was only a matter of time before the international community
extended formal diplomatic recognition to Bangladesh. Bhutan had
joined India in recognizing the infant state on 6 December. In early
January 1972, the German Democratic Republic extended formal
recognition, followed by other members of the Soviet bloc. In
February 1972, the major West European countries, including the