under actual Mukti Bahini control. Defence Secretary K.B. Lall
clarified that though large areas were controlled by the Mukti Bahini,
continuous control of these areas had yet to be achieved by them.
The freedom fighters felt that full control would be achieved by the
end of September, but Lall himself felt that this was too optimistic an
assessment.
Swaran Singh observed that more substantial help would obviously
have to be given to the freedom fighters. This might even make it
necessary to accord recognition to Bangladesh. India’s recognition of
Bangladesh as an independent state would lead to a rupture of
diplomatic ties with Pakistan and also, perhaps, to a Pakistani attack
on India. Before taking such a step, India would like to know the
Soviet reaction. The Indian foreign minister explained that he was
raising these issues so that the two countries could carefully study
the implications of such a step and draw the necessary conclusions.
Swaran Singh emphasized the dangers of a long-drawn-out
liberation war. The longer it continued, the greater would be the
danger of power passing into the hands of pro-Chinese extremist
elements – an outcome that would not be in the interests of India,
the USSR or Bangladesh.
The Soviet foreign minister observed that this was the first time
India had presented the problem in such a frank and forthright
manner. He ‘understood’ the importance India attached to the
question, but he could not express an opinion since the question
required closer examination. Gromyko said that in order to make an
assessment of the situation, it was important to know whether the
Mukti Bahini was strong enough to prevail against the Pakistani
army. He asked some searching questions. Would the freedom
fighters be able to get control over sufficiently large areas? Would
they be able to prevent the Pakistani army from retaking these
areas? Had India sounded out friendly neighbours in South-east Asia
to ascertain whether they would support India on the question of
recognizing Bangladesh? Swaran Singh replied that India did not
want to sound out other countries without first consulting the Soviet
Union. Regarding the prospects of the Mukti Bahini, he said it was
difficult to give a detailed answer, but India believed that the 75