accept the Six-Point programme for autonomy, with each wing of
Pakistan going its own way, if he himself could be all-powerful in
West Pakistan. The differences between the Awami League and the
army were more problematical. The Pakistani army would never
accept a constitution under which it would have to depend for its
finances on subventions from the federating units. However, argued
Acharya, it could not be altogether ruled out that the Awami League
might agree to a compromise on the financial implications of the Six
Points.
Acharya and Banerji adhered to the conventional line that
secession was not in India’s interest. Even before the announcement
of the Pakistan electoral results, Acharya had spelled out this view in
a dispatch to New Delhi. While recognizing the real possibility of a
secessionist movement, he argued that the only hope of a
breakthrough in Indo-Pakistan relations lay in a transition to
democracy in Pakistan, with the Awami League forming a
government at the Centre. India’s efforts to improve relations had so
far been met with ‘unrelenting hostility from the central Pakistani
Government dominated by West Pakistanis’. 
He wrote:
Majority control of the Central Pakistan Government by East Pakistanis
seems to be our only hope for achieving our policy objectives towards
Pakistan and overcoming this stone-wall resistance of West Pakistan. In
order that this hope may become a reality, however, it is essential that
Pakistan (with its East Pakistan majority) should remain one, so that we
may pursue our policy objectives through the leaders of East Pakistan
[emphasis in original].10
Acharya also pointed out that a prolonged armed struggle in East
Pakistan was likely to pass under the control of pro-China Naxalite
elements. (In 1971, West Bengal was still in the final stages of
suppressing a prolonged and destructive Naxal insurgency.) Finally,
the high commissioner noted that a secessionist movement in
Pakistan’s eastern wing might also give rise to demands for a
‘Greater Bengal’, threatening India’s own territorial integrity. This may
seem far-fetched today, but for people of Acharya’s and Banerji’s
generation, the 1947 proposal for an independent undivided Bengal