immediate aftermath of the military crackdown there were confusing
and often contradictory reports emerging from East Pakistan; New
Delhi still clung to hopes of a transition to democracy in Pakistan
through a negotiated settlement between Yahya and Mujib.
Thus, on 27 March, Foreign Minister Swaran Singh made a bland
statement in parliament registering India’s ‘grave concern’ over the
suppression of the people of ‘East Pakistan’. He expressed the hope
that ‘even at this late stage it would be possible to resume
democratic processes leading to the fulfilment of the aspirations of
the vast majority of the people there’.
The statement failed to respond to the mood in parliament. The
respected veteran Member of Parliament Hiren Mukherjee derided it
as ‘lifeless’. Other leading parliamentarians called upon the
government to raise the issue at the UN, to extend formal recognition
to ‘Bangladesh’, and even to blockade Chittagong port to prevent
Pakistan from reinforcing its troops. Mrs Gandhi took the floor to
calm down the agitated members. She said the latest developments
had belied hopes of a ‘new situation in our neighbouring country
which would help us to get closer’. Assuring members that the
government ‘fully share the agony, the emotions of the House and
their deep concern’, she appealed to them to understand that ‘we
have to follow proper international norms’, and that ‘in a serious
moment like this, the less we, as a Government say, I think the better
it is at this moment’. Significantly, she spoke of ‘East Bengal’, in
place of ‘East Pakistan’, indicating a neutral position on the question
of its status in relation to Pakistan.3
On 29 March, parliament unanimously adopted a resolution moved
by the prime minister, expressing its ‘profound sympathy and
solidarity with the people of East Bengal in their struggle for a
democratic way of life’.4
Indira Gandhi’s observation that India’s hopes of closer ties with
Pakistan had been belied by the latest developments and her
references to East Pakistan as ‘East Bengal’, indicate that she was a
step ahead of her advisers. She had quickly grasped the fact that the
brutal military crackdown launched on 25 March had delivered the