Jamalpur was liberated the same day. Indian and Bangladeshi forces
were positioning themselves for the final march to Dhaka.
Speaking on the US resolution, Swaran Singh urged the Security
Council to accept the reality of Bangladesh. He argued that
‘International law requires that where a mother State has irrevocably
lost the allegiance of such a large section of its people . . . and
cannot bring them under its sway, conditions for the separate
existence of such a State come into being’. The Council should
recognize the right of the people of Bangladesh to be heard in the
debate and to be a party to any ceasefire arrangement. Moreover, a
political solution had to be found in accordance with the wishes of
the people of Bangladesh, as already declared by their elected
representatives. If these three ‘essential ingredients’ were accepted,
an immediate ceasefire could be adopted, together with withdrawals
of Indian and Pakistani forces from Bangladesh, as well as mutual
Indian and Pakistani withdrawals from each other’s territory ‘through
appropriate consultations’.49
Swaran Singh’s suggestions were brushed aside, even though they
addressed the stated US concern about an immediate ceasefire on
both fronts. The vote on the resolution was identical to that on the
earlier US resolution of 4 December – eleven in favour, two opposing
(Poland and the USSR) and two abstaining (France and the UK).
The resolution was blocked by the Soviet veto – the third in nine
days.
US allies Italy and Japan immediately followed up with a proposal
similar to the vetoed US resolution. Their proposal called for a
ceasefire and appointment of a Security Council committee to assist
India and Pakistan in achieving reconciliation on the basis of the
General Assembly resolution of 7 December. Like the US draft, the
proposal tabled by Italy and Japan aimed to restore Pakistani control
over Bangladesh, leaving for the future the ‘issues which have given
rise to these hostilities’50 – namely, the slaughter of hundreds of
thousands of unarmed civilians and the flight of some 10 million
refugees.
In New Delhi, Kuznetsov and Haksar worked out a counter-move,