deliveries could be arranged but, in his opinion, the operation could
not be kept secret for very long. He added that the CIA director,
Richard Helms, was not in favour of the project. When Kissinger
commented that he assumed the Indians had sufficient stocks of
small arms to meet the requirement, a CIA official explained that
India did not have the required unmarked and unattributable
weapons. Under Secretary of State John Irwin was ‘reluctant’ to
accept the Indian request, and Assistant Secretary Joseph Sisco
thought that the Indians were ‘testing’ the US. It was one thing, Sisco
said, for the US to close its eyes to clandestine Indian support for the
East Pakistan resistance movement, but quite another to actively
collude with the Indians. Kissinger brought the discussion to an end
by observing that the president would never approve the project.10
The American response to India’s appeal for support to the
refugees was more positive. Partly in order to counter Congressional
and media criticism of its political inaction, Washington supported
India’s request for UN humanitarian assistance for the refugees and
contributed to it through international relief agencies. Nixon ruled out
direct assistance to India to avoid giving offence to Pakistan.11 At the
same time, Washington instructed Ambassador Keating to warn New
Delhi that US aid for the refugees would be called into question if
reports of Indian intentions of training and equipping Bangladesh
freedom fighters on Indian soil turned out to be true. When Keating
met Foreign Minister Swaran Singh on 3 May to convey the US
decision to support international relief efforts, he also raised the
question of India’s reported involvement with the freedom fighters.
Swaran Singh dismissed the reports as ‘absolutely incorrect’.12
As we noted earlier, Mrs Gandhi had written to Nixon on 13 May,
drawing his attention to the South Asian crisis. She had pointed out
that the presence of almost 3 million refugees from ‘East Bengal’ on
Indian soil posed not only an enormous economic burden but also a
grave security risk for India. The stifling of democracy in East Bengal
would inevitably strengthen extremist political elements there, posing
the real danger of their linking up with their counterparts in West
Bengal. She had appealed to the US president to use his influence