important decision was that the withdrawal of Indian armed forces
from Bangladesh would be completed by 25 March 1972.8
Indian planners had not failed to address a question that is all too
frequently overlooked when troops are sent abroad – bringing the
troops home within a specific time frame. D.P. Dhar had driven home
this point in his discussions with the Mujibnagar authorities in
November. When Mujib passed through New Delhi in January, Mrs
Gandhi took the opportunity to emphasize that she wanted the Indian
troops in Bangladesh to return home as soon as Mujib felt they could
do so. The two prime ministers discussed this question in greater
detail during Mujib’s Kolkata visit, and, as we noted, it was mutually
agreed that the withdrawal would be completed by 25 March 1972.
Later, when it was agreed to schedule Mrs Gandhi’s return visit to
Dhaka for 17 March, she requested that the withdrawal be
completed before her arrival. Accordingly, it was agreed to bring
forward the date of withdrawal to 15 March. On 12 March,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman took the salute at the Indian
army’s spectacular farewell parade at a packed Dhaka stadium.
Indira Gandhi received a rapturous welcome when she visited
Dhaka in March 1972. Posters bearing her portrait were plastered on
city walls throughout the capital. A massive crowd assembled to hear
her public address. When she went on a cruise down the Buriganga
with Mujib and other Bangladesh leaders, tens of thousands of
people cheered her from the riverbank throughout the journey. Few
statesmen have been privileged to receive such an emotional
welcome on foreign soil. It was during this river cruise that Mujib and
Mrs Gandhi decided to enter into a Treaty of Peace and Friendship,
signalling the close ties between the two neighbouring countries.
Thus, by the end of March 1972, the aims of India’s grand strategy
had been fully achieved. The Bangladesh liberation war had been
brought to a speedy and successful conclusion, averting the
prospect of an extended guerrilla war, in which power might have
passed into the hands of pro-Naxalite and pro-Chinese extremists. A
new state, the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, had gained wide
diplomatic recognition. Millions of refugees, whose continued