minister revealed her hand to her Bangladeshi guests. She informed
them in the strictest confidence that her foreign tour was a final
attempt at persuading the international community to throw its weight
behind a peaceful and early solution to the Bangladesh problem.
She was not optimistic, however, about the outcome. Should this last
effort fail to produce the desired results, then a final solution would
have to be found through other means. This was the first
unambiguous indication given to the Mujibnagar government about
India’s ultimate intentions. New Delhi suffered some embarrassment
when the elated Nazrul Islam, unable to contain his excitement,
passed on the good news to several members of the Awami League
hierarchy!22
Joint planning for the final stage of the liberation war and post-war
reconstruction began in mid-November, after Mrs Gandhi’s return
from her tour of Europe and the United States. But before this could
be undertaken, it was necessary to deal with a security issue which
could potentially put the plans at risk.
Khondaker and the United States
New Delhi had been receiving intelligence reports for some time
concerning clandestine contacts between Khondaker Mushtaque
Ahmed and the US consulate general in Kolkata. The full details of
this shadowy affair have never been revealed, but declassified US
documents show that at the beginning of July, a man named Qazi
Zahurul Qaiyum approached a political officer of the US consulate in
Kolkata, claiming that he was acting on specific instructions from the
Bangladesh foreign minister. In two meetings with the political officer,
Qaiyum stated that some Awami League leaders feared the
devastating consequences of a war; they hoped for a peaceful
settlement, even if that meant a retreat from the demand for full
independence. He requested Washington to arrange a meeting
between representatives of the Awami League, Pakistan, the United
States and India. Qaiyum added that Mujib must be a participant in
the negotiations. Any agreement negotiated with Mujib would be
acceptable to the people of Bangladesh, even if it involved a