informed the ambassador that the ‘inexorable movement of events in
East Bengal is proceeding towards a large-scale conflict. India is no
longer in a position to prevent this’. Dhar added that he was
confident that India could count on the ‘help, understanding and
friendship’ of the Soviet Union. Pegov said that he fully understood
India’s position and assured Dhar that the Soviet Union would be a
reliable friend and ally. He suggested, in his ‘personal capacity’, that
if an escalation was imminent, it would be advisable for the Indian
prime minister to inform the Soviet leaders in the greatest
confidence; this would avoid any misunderstanding. Dhar and Pegov
met for a second time the same morning. This time, Dhar asked for
the envoy’s views regarding the timing of India’s recognition of
Bangladesh. Not surprisingly, the Soviet ambassador expressed no
clear opinion on the subject.17
On 29 November, Pegov met Foreign Secretary Kaul for a wide-
ranging discussion, covering Nixon’s letters to Mrs Gandhi and
Kosygin, the likelihood of war, the timing of India’s recognition of
Bangladesh, and Soviet support for India at the UN. Pegov (who was
to meet Prime Minister Gandhi the next day) said that the Soviet and
Indian responses to Nixon should be on identical lines. When he
observed that war seemed imminent, Kaul responded that it
depended on Pakistan. India would have preferred a peaceful
solution. However, if Pakistan continued to deny independence to
Bangladesh, it could only result in intensification of the Mukti Bahini
resistance. Pakistan might treat this as an excuse for launching a
war against India, in the expectation that this would bring the UN
Security Council into the picture. Kaul stressed that India did not
want a war on the West Pakistan front. Pegov assured Kaul that the
Soviet Union would fully support India in the UN Security Council.18
On 30 November, Ambassador Pegov met the Indian prime
minister with a message from Moscow. Referring to Nixon’s letter to
Kosygin, he said, ‘I am authorised to convey that our position on
these matters is the same as yours, and in future also we shall
proceed on the basis of mutual agreement with you . . . Our
comrades have directed me to request you for your opinion before