assistance, relieving India in the process of a massive economic
burden that it could not have borne beyond a few months. The
embassy gradually settled down to more normal working hours and,
at long last, our families were allowed to join us in Dhaka.
During these eventful years in Dhaka, I had no detailed knowledge
of the historical background of our association with the Bangladesh
freedom struggle. We received only a cursory briefing before we took
up our posts in Dhaka. This was intended to prepare us for
addressing the urgent tasks in hand, not for historical inquiry. Some
of my colleagues in the Dhaka mission provided fascinating accounts
of our links with the Bangladesh freedom fighters. I learned a great
deal about our 1971 operations from a dear friend and foreign
service colleague, Arundhati (‘Chuku’) Ghose, who had been posted
in Kolkata in our liaison office with the Bangladesh government-in-
exile. Our military attaché, Maj. Gen. (later Lt Gen.) B.N. Sarkar, was
the principal link between the Indian army and the Mukti Bahini
before the war. He was the source of many valuable insights
concerning our military operations. Another guide to these
operations was the naval attaché, Cdr M.N. Samant, who had helped
establish the naval branch of the Mukti Bahini and had led many
daring covert operations. Samant was awarded the Maha Vir Chakra
for conspicuous gallantry in the 1971 war. Quite a few of our
Bangladeshi friends told us about their clandestine contacts with our
authorities before the war. All of these were fascinating anecdotes,
but they did not add up to a complete picture. Many basic questions
remained unanswered. When and why did India decide to involve
itself in the Bangladesh freedom struggle? Did India have a plan to
break up Pakistan? What was the impact of the massive influx of
refugees fleeing from Pakistani oppression? What conclusions did
India draw from the dramatic geopolitical transformation signalled by
Kissinger’s secret trip to China midway through the Bangladesh
liberation struggle? Above all, did India react in a piecemeal manner
to challenges as they arose, or did it have a comprehensive grand
strategy early in the day?
Three decades later, after my retirement from the foreign service, I
sought answers to these questions in the archival records.