aid, though important, was no longer a critical requirement, at least
in the short term. Additionally, by 1971, the Green Revolution had
freed India of its acute dependence on US PL 480 foodgrain
deliveries. The intelligence agencies of the two countries had a
modest programme of cooperation to monitor Chinese military
movements in Tibet and nuclear tests in north-western China.
Political ties came under strain in 1970, when the Nixon
administration announced that it would provide armoured personnel
carriers and replacement aircraft to Pakistan in a ‘one-time
exception’ to its post-1965 policy of suspending arms sales to both
India and Pakistan. Nevertheless, New Delhi expected Washington 
to maintain its traditionally supportive attitude in the event of a 
Chinese attack.
Moscow showed its hand without being asked. As we noted in
Chapter 7, President Podgorny wrote to Yahya Khan on 2 April to
convey his ‘great alarm’ over the use of armed force against the
population of East Pakistan and the arrest of Mujibur Rahman and
other Awami League leaders. The Soviet president appealed to
Yahya to immediately stop the ‘bloodshed and repression’ in East
Pakistan and seek a peaceful political settlement. Significantly, the
Soviets consulted D.P. Dhar, then Indian ambassador in Moscow,
before sending the letter.
Encouraged by this development, Indira Gandhi decided to take
the Soviet leaders into confidence. Ambassador Dhar called on
Kosygin to convey an oral message from the Indian prime minister.
She was facing a ‘terrible dilemma’. She was resisting heavy
pressure from members of parliament and the general public to
accord immediate recognition to the newly proclaimed state of
Bangladesh. The leaders of the Bangladesh movement, who had
appealed to her for help, were basically nationalists, but she feared
that the leadership of the movement, with the passage of time, might
slip out of their hands and pass into the hands of pro-China factions.
China was ‘playing a double-faced game’, offering public support to
Islamabad while working clandestinely to increase its influence in
East Pakistan. India was ‘deeply concerned about what China might
do’. Thus, it was a ‘matter of the highest importance’ that the