know privately that, should East Pakistan become independent, we
would recognize the new state’.42
Kissinger chaired a meeting of senior officials on 6 March to review
the East Pakistan situation. Deputy Secretary of State Alexis
Johnson summed up the prevailing situation as follows:
While we have maintained a posture of hoping the country can be brought
together and its unity preserved, the chances of doing so now are
extremely slight. It is only a question of time and circumstances as to how
they will split, and to what degree the split is complete or may be papered
over in some vague confederal scheme . . . [In the circumstances] if Mujib
approaches us, we will have to walk a tightrope between making him think
we are giving him the cold shoulder and not encouraging him to move
toward a split if any hope remains for a compromise . . . [If Yahya were to
use force against the Bengalis, the] judgment of all of us is that . . . the
result would be a bloodbath with no hope of West Pakistan reestablishing
control over East Pakistan.
Johnson emphasized that ‘. . . this is not an East–West, or a US–
Soviet, or a US–Indian confrontation. The US, USSR and India all
have an interest in the continued unity of Pakistan and have nothing
to gain from a break-up.’
His assessment was that India would probably not intervene in the
short run in the event of a Pakistani crackdown, but if the turmoil
continued it might feel impelled to do so.
When Johnson referred to the option of discouraging Yahya from
using force in East Pakistan, Kissinger cautioned the Senior Review
Group to bear in mind Nixon’s ‘special relationship’ with Yahya. The
president would be reluctant to press Yahya to exercise restraint
and, in any case, the Pakistanis ‘wouldn’t give a damn’. Following
this intervention, the officials concluded that a policy of ‘massive
inaction’ would be appropriate in the circumstances. It was decided
to instruct Consul General Blood to simply refer the matter to
Washington if Mujib were to sound him out over a declaration of
independence.43
On 10 March, Mujib’s emissary Alamgir Rahman met Blood to
convey that the Awami League leader was anxious to arrive at a
political settlement with Yahya. Mujib’s question to Blood was: Does
the United States want to see military confrontation with the prospect