11. Indira Gandhi Visits Western Capitals
It was evident by October 1971 that the international community was
not prepared to exert the pressure required to compel Yahya Khan to
seriously address the refugee problem and come to terms with the
Awami League. The United States, the country exercising the
greatest influence in Islamabad, not only refused to press Yahya
Khan to adopt any measure that he might find unpalatable but failed
even to condemn the brutal suppression of human rights in East
Bengal. The flow of refugees into India continued unabated,
imposing intense economic and social stress in India’s eastern
provinces. In September, with the end of the rainy season, there was
a sharp rise in tensions along India’s eastern borders. Mukti Bahini
operations expanded dramatically, precipitating frequent border
clashes, while Pakistan began to strengthen its troop deployment
along India’s western borders.
On 12 October, US ambassador Kenneth Keating called on
Foreign Minister Swaran Singh to convey Washington’s concern over
the increasing risk of war between Pakistan and India. He said the
United States had specific information that 40,000 Mukti Bahini
fighters were poised to cross the border by mid-October, with
another 20,000 following at the end of the month. Mukti Bahini
operations on this scale could not be achieved without Indian
support. If this report was correct, Pakistan would make a military
response in the west. Nobody could accuse India of initiating the
problem, but India had a responsibility – of preventing it from
escalating into war. Keating warned that if war were to break out, it
would have a serious impact on Indo-US relations. Therefore, in
order to reduce the danger of an Indo-Pakistan conflict, the United
States proposed that both India and Pakistan should (a) pull back
forces from the border; and (b) place curbs on parties involved in
cross-border operations on the eastern and western borders.
Swaran Singh asked if he had understood Keating correctly to say
that Indo-US relations would be adversely affected if Pakistan were