When the two leaders commenced their discussions on 4
November, they concealed their mutual distrust behind an elaborate
screen of courtesies. Nixon addressed Mrs Gandhi as an ‘old friend’.
(He commonly described her as a ‘bitch’ in conversations with close
associates.) Indira Gandhi reciprocated with equally insincere
expressions of admiration for Nixon’s China and Vietnam initiatives.
Getting down to business, Nixon made a skilful presentation of his
Pakistan policy, emphasizing that initiation of hostilities between
India and Pakistan was ‘unacceptable’. For this very reason, he
argued, it was imperative for the United States to retain influence
with Pakistan. His policy was shaped by this factor. The US military
assistance progamme had been retained in a ‘most limited fashion’
in this context. Regarding the refugee problem, the United States
aimed to be as ‘helpful as possible without interjecting itself into the
internal affairs of the parties’.
Nixon proceeded to outline the positive impact of US initiatives.
First, in June–July, it had ‘persuaded’ Pakistan that a famine would
occur in East Pakistan unless massive preventive steps were taken.
Also, as a result of US pressure, Yahya Khan had given up his initial
opposition to an international relief presence in East Pakistan. US–
Pakistani and UN efforts had succeeded in preventing a widespread
famine, which might have further exacerbated the exodus of ‘Moslem
refugees’ and added to India’s burdens. Second, at the US urging,
Yahya had appointed a civilian governor in East Pakistan and had
announced an amnesty for persons of all creeds. Third, the US had
obtained an assurance from Yahya that Mujib would not be
executed. Fourth, at US’s urging, Yahya had agreed to pull back
some troops from India’s western border as a first step to de-
escalation. Finally, word had just been received from Yahya that he
was prepared to hold direct ‘discussions’ with ‘cleared’ Awami
League leaders, to meet a Bangladesh leader from Kolkata and to
consider the US suggestion that Mujib be allowed to designate the
representative.
Nixon said he recognized that ‘in the long run Pakistan must
acquiesce in the direction of greater autonomy for East Pakistan’, but
the US could not urge Yahya to accept policies that would result in