Operation Searchlight had resulted in massive economic disruption
in the eastern wing. Jute exports, which accounted for almost half of
Pakistan’s foreign exchange earnings, came to a near-total halt. By
the end of the month, Islamabad was obliged to declare a
moratorium on debt servicing and to request a meeting of the Aid
Consortium for Pakistan to discuss plans for long-term rescheduling
of its debts. A joint World Bank–IMF team visited Islamabad and
Dhaka in June to form an assessment. A senior Pakistani civil
servant provides a vignette of the situation prevailing in Dhaka on
the night of the governor’s dinner in honour of the team.
While drinks were being served in the drawing room . . . sounds of bomb
explosions, which did not seem to be very far off, were heard at regular
intervals . . . By the time we had moved to the dining-table, shooting had
been added to the bomb explosions and the chatter of machine-gun fire
almost drowned the polite conversation.18
Not surprisingly, the team arrived at a negative conclusion. They
found that an ‘all-pervasive fear’ and a ‘severely damaged’
infrastructure stood in the way of economic revival; that Islamabad
had ‘little understanding’ of the problems of reviving growth.19 When
the Aid Consortium met on 21 June, it declined to provide new aid to
Pakistan, except for humanitarian food aid to stave off famine in East
Pakistan.
Britain
When Mrs Gandhi’s letter of 13 May was received in London, the
Foreign Office offered the pragmatic advice that ‘our interest lies in
retaining with Mrs. Gandhi as close and satisfactory a working
relationship as we can’.20 The British government was also under
strong public and parliamentary pressure to take a strong stand
against the brutal suppression of the people of East Bengal. Britain
had already banned export of lethal military supplies to Pakistan in
April (though exports of non-lethal items continued). In June, ahead
of the Aid Consortium for Pakistan meeting, London decided to
suspend further economic aid to Pakistan. Prime Minister Heath
wrote to Gen. Yahya warning that ‘there can be no future for a united