resulting from Pakistan’s policy of ‘exporting’ its internal political
problem by driving millions of refugees into India. She would seek
international support for India’s stand, while indicating that India
would not be deterred from defending her security.
Apart from projecting India’s stand on the crisis, Indira Gandhi also
had a specific objective – to dissuade America’s European allies
from toeing the US line at the United Nations.3 This applied
particularly to the two permanent members of the Security Council,
the UK and France. Mrs Gandhi had few expectations from her
Washington visit, but she needed to reciprocate Nixon’s 1969 visit to
India. Moreover, after her visits to Moscow, London, Paris and other
capitals, exclusion of Washington from her itinerary would have
caused undesirable speculation.
United Kingdom
In London, Mrs Gandhi had a one-to-one meeting with Prime
Minister Edward Heath on 31 October. Heath broached the question
of mutual withdrawal of troops and posting of UN observers in border
areas to prevent a conflict. Indira Gandhi explained why India
rejected these suggestions, emphasizing that an agreement between
Islamabad and the Awami League was required to resolve the crisis
peacefully. Asked about the possible outcome of such talks, she said
that she was not sure if Mujib would settle for anything less than
independence. She also indicated that she did not see how she
could continue to hold back the great domestic pressures she faced
and said she feared that war might break out. Heath asked the
Indian prime minister to keep him informed if the situation
deteriorated.4
The British side explored the question of a dialogue and political
settlement in greater detail the next day, when Foreign Secretary
Douglas-Home called on Mrs Gandhi. Douglas-Home inquired what
sort of a political solution would suit India best. The Indian prime
minister began by recalling that Islamabad had used East Pakistan
as a base for Naga, Mizo and other anti-India insurgencies.
‘However, the situation in East Bengal is now so chaotic that it