1. Prelude: The Alienation of East Bengal
Pakistan is a unique country having two wings which are separated by a
distance of more than a thousand miles. These two wings differ in all
matters, excepting two things, namely, that they have a common religion,
barring a section of the people in East Pakistan, and that we achieved our
independence by a common struggle . . . With the exception of these two
things, all other factors, viz., the language, the tradition, the culture, the
costume, the custom, the dietary, the calendar, the standard time,
practically everything is different. There is, in fact, nothing common in the
two wings, particularly in respect to those [things] which are the sine qua
non to form a nation.
– Abul Mansur Ahmed (Awami League), speech in the Pakistan
Constituent Assembly, 16 January 19561
The Pakistan that came into existence in 1947 was a geographical
and political anomaly. The geographical gap of over 1,000 miles
between its western and eastern wings was matched by a
corresponding gulf in their language, culture and socio-economic
conditions. These, in turn, gave rise to divergent political aspirations.
The failure of the Pakistani state to accommodate the aspirations of
the Bengalis of East Bengal and to reconcile the divergent interests
of the political elites of its two wings resulted in the increasing
alienation of East Bengal and the ultimate emergence of an
independent Bangladesh.
The divide between the two wings first manifested itself over the
question of the state language. Pakistan’s central government, with
strong support in the western wing, decreed that Urdu – the lingua
franca of West Pakistan – would be the national language. East
Bengal demanded that Bengali, too, should be recognized as a
national language, alongside Urdu. This was rejected by the central
government as inconsistent with the requirements of national unity.
Central leaders charged that advocates of Bengali were Indian
agents and enemies of Pakistan. The ensuing language movement
in East Bengal pitted the two wings of Pakistan against each other.
There was also a radical difference in the socio-economic structure