persuade the Soviet leaders that involvement in the Bangladesh
liberation war was in the nature of assistance to a ‘war of national
liberation’ (permissible in Soviet eyes), rather than interference in a
civil war and in the internal affairs of another state. Lifting the ban on
recruitment and induction of some left-wing elements in the Mukti
Bahini would help project an appropriate image in Moscow. As Col.
Osmani was not present in the city, Tajuddin sought the opinion of
the deputy chief of staff, Group Capt. A.K. Khondaker, before giving
his formal assent. Khondaker, who had an astute understanding of
the larger strategic picture, unhesitatingly supported the proposal.20
The Indo-Soviet Treaty was welcomed by Tajuddin, but not by his
foreign minister. The foreign secretary, Mahbubul Alam Chashi,
offered a curious assessment of the treaty, maintaining that the
Soviet position had actually become colder since the conclusion of
the treaty and that support was no longer readily forthcoming!21
Foreign Minister Khondaker’s distrust of the Indo-Soviet connection
and what he believed to be a growing leftist influence in Mujibnagar
was to precipitate a dramatic confrontation at the end of October.
Mrs Gandhi shows her hand
Till late October, Indira Gandhi had held her cards close to her chest.
Her government had made a herculean effort to provide shelter and
sustenance to millions of refugees. It had helped to train and equip
some 1,00,000 freedom fighters. It had provided all possible support
and assistance to the Mujibnagar government. The Mujibnagar
authorities were grateful to India for this support; yet many of them
nursed doubts and fears about the limits of New Delhi’s support.
Would India let them down when it came to the crunch? There were
deep misgivings about India’s continuing silence on the appeal for
diplomatic recognition and the absence of a clear indication of its
intentions regarding a decisive military intervention.
The clouds of doubt and despair were finally lifted when Acting
President Syed Nazrul Islam and Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmed
met with Indira Gandhi on 22 October, on the eve of her tour of
Europe and the United States. For the first time, the Indian prime