of the two wings. Feudal landlords and tribal chieftains dominated
society in West Pakistan. By contrast, East Pakistan was largely free
of landlord domination. In the pre-Independence period, the vast
majority of the big landlords or zamindars in the province were
Hindus. Land reforms were speeded up with the departure of most of
the Hindu landlords to India during and after Partition. The Estate
Acquisition and Tenancy Act passed by the East Bengal legislature
in 1950 set a ceiling of 33 acres on landholdings and protected the
rights of the tiller. The political elite in the eastern wing were drawn
largely from an emerging middle class – lawyers, teachers and
journalists – not landlords and tribal chieftains. The few industrial
entrepreneurs in Pakistan were based almost exclusively in the
provinces of Punjab and Sind in the western wing. They had close
ties to the West Pakistani political elite, which favoured a policy of
promoting economic development by providing incentives and other
support to the emerging entrepreneurial class. By contrast, political
leaders in the eastern wing called for an expanded role for the state
in economic development, including nationalization of the jute trade
and government support for East Bengal’s cottage industries. Jute
exports from the eastern wing were the major source of Pakistan’s
foreign exchange earnings. The central government channelled this
foreign exchange to industries in Sind and Punjab. East Bengal
demanded that the foreign exchange earnings from its jute and tea
exports should be utilized for its own development in order to reduce
the wide gap in per capita income between the two wings. Rejection
of this demand provided grounds for the charge that the western
wing was treating East Pakistan as a colonial possession.
Unlike the western wing, East Bengal had a sizeable, though
shrinking, Hindu minority. This raised the question of the role of
religious minorities in the new state of Pakistan. Though attacks on
the minorities were distressingly common, most political leaders of
the eastern wing advocated a secular, or non-communal, approach.
In 1953, the Awami Muslim League redesignated itself as the Awami
League, reflecting its essentially secular political programme. The
other party with mass support in the province – Fazlul Huq’s Krishak
Sramik Party (Peasants and Workers Party) – similarly pursued a