of the 162 East Pakistani seats.1 Yahya had expected an outcome
that gave no party an absolute majority in the National Assembly,
leaving him free to play on party and personality differences in the
time-honoured manner. Yet, the Pakistani army was not altogether
unprepared to deal with a recalcitrant Mujib. Even before the polling,
the army had begun to draw up contingency plans for a military
crackdown in the event of Mujib proving to be uncooperative. On 11
December, within four days of the declaration of electoral results, Lt
Gen. Yaqub Khan, chief martial law administrator for East Pakistan,
issued a contingency plan, named ‘Operation Blitz’, to be
implemented in certain emergency situations, such as open defiance
of the martial law, a mass movement jeopardizing the integrity of
Pakistan, or a declaration of independence. The general, a student
of Napoleonic strategy, believed at the time that a ‘whiff of the
grapeshot’ would suffice if Mujib and his followers refused to
‘behave’.2 The army was determined to preserve its prerogatives.
Bhutto fired the first salvo of West Pakistani intransigence. In a
public speech on 20 December, he declared that ‘a majority alone
does not count in national politics’,3 emphasizing that real power at
the Centre rested in Punjab and Sind. He declared that a constitution
could not be framed either, without the cooperation of his party, nor a
government formed at the Centre unless it included the party. Bhutto
clearly believed that in the final analysis he could turn to the army to
coerce the Bengalis into accepting the traditional dominance of West
Pakistan.4 A familiar pattern was repeating itself. As the Awami
Leaguer Kamal Hossain points out, ‘. . . a minority, unable to contain
a majority within a democratically constituted representative
institution had always fallen back on military force’.5
Mujib’s sweeping electoral victory and the unbounded Bengali
enthusiasm for full autonomy made Mujib a willing prisoner of the
Six-Point Demand. He risked a strong reaction from his followers if
he were to water down the programme. On 3 January 1971, he led
the newly elected Awami League legislators in solemnly swearing
their commitment to full realization of the Six-Point programme.
Addressing a massive public rally, he declared that the Awami