to attack India in retaliation for the success of the freedom fighters
and India were to defend itself against the Pakistani attack. He
rejected the description of Mukti Bahini actions as ‘cross-border’
operations, pointing out that most of these actions took place deep
inside East Bengal. ‘When history judges these events, it will
attribute to you the greatest responsibility for this situation, for your
military and political support to the [Pakistani] military junta . . . To
start at this point without going into the chain of events is to distort
reality,’ he said.1 The US proposal failed to address the root cause of
the crisis – the brutal suppression of the people of East Bengal by
the Pakistan army.
Such was the state of play when Indira Gandhi embarked on a tour
of the major western capitals of London, Paris, Bonn, Vienna,
Brussels and Washington. She offered a bland, low-key explanation
for her tour. ‘Our country is facing danger,’ she declared in a national
broadcast. ‘Yet, after much thought, I decided to undertake the
journey. The invitations were of long standing and it seemed
important in the present situation to meet leaders of other countries
for an exchange of views and to put to them the reality of our
situation.’2
As we saw earlier, on the eve of her departure, she confided her
aim to the Bangladesh leaders, Syed Nazrul Islam and Tajuddin
Ahmed. She informed them that she was going to make a final
appeal to the international community to push for a peaceful and
urgent solution to the crisis but that she was not optimistic about the
outcome. A final solution, she confided, might have to be found
through other means.
In each of the capitals she visited, the Indian prime minister would
explain why the East Bengal crisis could only be resolved through
negotiations between Islamabad and Mujib’s Awami League and
why India rejected proposals that treated the question as an Indo-
Pakistan issue. These included proposals for mutual troop
withdrawals, stationing of UN observers on the border, and offers of
‘good offices’ between 
India and Pakistan. She would highlight the threat to India’s security