to Yahya’s statement that he would go to war if even a morsel of
East Pakistan territory came under Indian control, Gromyko said he
got the impression that ‘certain circles in Pakistan are not against
war’.5
The most powerful message delivered by Gromyko concerned the
Indo-Soviet Treaty. Ambassador Marker provides a vivid first-hand
account:
Speaking in Russian, Gromyko said that the Soviet leadership had taken
note of Yahya Khan’s statement and warned, ‘please do not take any
action that would oblige us to fulfil our obligations to a country with whom
we have a Treaty of Friendship’. At this point Gromyko stopped the
interpreter, and looking long, hard and directly at Sultan Khan, he said in
English, ‘The interpreter did not interpret me correctly. I did not use the
word “please”. I think you understand my meaning’.6
The Moscow Summit
True to their treaty obligations, the Soviets spared no effort to meet
India’s arms requirements and to dissuade Pakistan from embarking
on a military adventure. Soviet diplomatic support for India became
much more forceful after the conclusion of the treaty. However,
Moscow continued to visualize a political solution within the
framework of a united Pakistan. It turned a blind eye to Indian
involvement in the Bangladesh freedom struggle, but it was not
ready to support a secessionist movement. This posed a major
challenge to Indian diplomacy, what with the looming prospect of a
war before the end of the year.
Moscow’s principled opposition to intervention in a civil war was
subject to certain caveats. The Soviets took a more flexible position
in the case of a ‘war of national liberation’. This, in turn, was related
to their assessment of the political orientation of the freedom
fighters. Here, the Awami League was at a disadvantage: it was not
a pro-Soviet, left-wing party. Before 25 March, it had been in regular
touch with American diplomats and had relatively few contacts with
the Soviets. The Mujibnagar government was composed exclusively
of Awami League members; it offered no role for pro-Soviet parties
like the CPB and NAP(M), even though these parties were totally