its own purposes in its relations with the Soviets without any
compensating gains [for the US]’, particularly in South-east Asia.
Moreover, an unprepared visit could create serious complications in
US relations with friendly Asian countries.
Kissinger held a contrary view. ‘The visit of an American emissary
to Peking was bound to spark a geopolitical revolution; the effect on
Hanoi alone would be traumatic,’ he believed.5 Kissinger was
dismissive of the Warsaw channel, which he regarded as
unproductive – a view that ignored the fact that the channel had
yielded the sought-after invitation for a high-level visit. The real
problem with the Warsaw channel was that it was operated by the
State Department. In the ensuing inter-departmental power play,
Secretary of State Rogers was no match for Kissinger. Nixon fell in
with Kissinger’s proposal to set up a secret channel of
communication with Beijing, leaving the State Department in the
dark. The choice of channel was to have momentous consequences
for South Asia.
The White House launched its China initiative in the deepest
secrecy in October 1970. On 25 October, Nixon asked Yahya Khan
to convey a message to the Chinese leadership during his scheduled
visit to Beijing in November. The US president’s message was that
he regarded a Sino-US rapprochement as essential, that the United
States would never join hands with the Soviet Union in a
condominium directed against China, and that it was prepared to
send a high-level emissary to China. A similar message was sent
through President Ceausescu of Romania the next day. The State
Department was kept in ignorance. Secretary of State Rogers had
no inkling of the move for the next nine months, till July 1971.
Zhou’s response first arrived through the Pakistani channel on 8
December. China would welcome a visit by a special envoy of
President Nixon to discuss ‘vacation of Chinese territories called
Taiwan’. A month later, the Romanian ambassador conveyed a
similar message from Zhou, with an important additional element –
Beijing was also prepared to receive President Nixon himself. The
White House replied through the same two channels. The US was