shift in India’s policy of non-alignment; and second, it should contain
no provision that might be misconstrued as being directed against a
third party. Kosygin tried to reassure her on both points, but Mrs
Gandhi was not fully convinced. Thus, when Kosygin referred to
possible treaty provisions concerning economic and political
cooperation, the Indian prime minister asked him pointedly what he
meant by ‘political cooperation’. The Soviet leader replied that he
meant cooperation in the field of foreign policy; however, this would
be dropped if it was not acceptable to India. At another point, when
Mrs Gandhi expressed her apprehensions concerning China,
Kosygin offered to incorporate in the treaty a clause on ‘mutual
assistance’. Indira Gandhi responded that this would amount to a
military agreement. Kosygin said that the Soviet Union would not
insist on such a clause, but he believed that India would probably
resort to such consultations if the threat arose, regardless of any
treaty.
Indira Gandhi spoke frankly about India’s concern over Soviet arms
supplies to Pakistan. Soviet assistance to Pakistan had an impact on
the regional balance of power. Apart from this, the Soviet
equidistance from India and Pakistan caused irritation in India.
Moscow should refrain from any action that suggested parity of
treatment between India and Pakistan. The Indian prime minister
permitted herself to muse that this point would be met to some
extent if there was an Indo-Soviet Treaty. The talks ended on an
inconclusive note, and the two leaders agreed to continue
discussions on the treaty in Moscow, through the diplomatic
channel.11
In Moscow, the ingenious Ambassador Dhar continued to spin out
the ‘exploratory’ talks with only the sketchiest of instructions. Haksar
himself expressed his dissatisfaction over the absence of
instructions and drew the prime minister’s attention to the need for
clarifying India’s ideas on the Soviet proposal.12 Dhar, too,
complained about being left without instructions.
Finally, at the end of August 1969, an Indian counter-draft was
ready. Prepared by Kaul in association with Dhar and Kewal Singh,