unity. As had long been anticipated in New Delhi, the crackdown
precipitated an armed uprising and popular resistance on a massive
scale. It also triggered a massive refugee exodus, which New Delhi
feared would expand to a magnitude exceeding India’s coping
capacity and pose a threat to its security. Apprehensive about the
consequences of an extended guerrilla war and an unending refugee
exodus on an unprecedented scale, India decided to assist the
freedom fighters to bring their struggle to a successful conclusion
before the end of the year. An immediate march on Dhaka was ruled
out, not only because the army had no contingency plans for such an
operation, but more importantly because a government installed by
the Indian army would not be accepted by the international
community. Bangladesh could be liberated only by her own sons and
daughters. India could only play a supporting role.
Indian policymakers drew up a multidimensional grand strategy to
achieve this aim. On the military side, this included a massive
programme to train and equip Bangladesh freedom fighters, and
parallel preparations for direct intervention before the year end in
order to bring the liberation war to an early conclusion. These
military preparations were interlinked with diplomatic initiatives aimed
at mobilizing international support for the liberation struggle, and
ensuring that military operations would not be thwarted either by
Chinese intervention or a premature UN-imposed ceasefire. India’s
grand strategy was sufficiently flexible to cope with unforeseeable
diplomatic or military developments. When the risks associated with
the strategy registered a sharp and unexpected increase as a result
of a dramatic reordering of Sino-US relations, India was able to rise
to the challenge by harnessing the countervailing power of the Soviet
Union.
Together with defence and foreign policy, home affairs and
economic management were integral elements of India’s grand
strategy. While India generously provided shelter to the millions of
refugees fleeing from the Pakistan army, it was determined to enable
all the refugees to return to their homes. To facilitate this, the
refugees were accommodated in camps situated along the border,
even though their dispersal to different parts of India would have