million people of Bangladesh were united in their freedom struggle
and that the Pakistani army would be unable to retain control of the
nation.3
These discussions revealed the extent, as well as the limits, of
Soviet support. Moscow was more than ready to make sure that the
treaty acted as a deterrent against a Pakistani attack or Chinese
intervention; indeed, it had been pressing for such a treaty for more
than two years. The Soviet Union was also prepared to attach top
priority to Indian requests for military supplies. It was ready to
provide diplomatic support in the form of public criticism of Pakistani
repression in the eastern wing, holding Pakistan responsible for the
flight of the refugees to India, and demanding that Islamabad release
Sheikh Mujib and negotiate a political solution with the elected
representatives of East Pakistan. However, Moscow envisaged a
political solution within the framework of a united Pakistan. It was not
ready – as yet – to support a secessionist movement.
An immediate result of the Indo-Soviet Treaty was stepped-up
diplomatic support for India, coupled with a hardening of Moscow’s
attitude towards Pakistan. Jamsheed Marker, the Pakistani
ambassador in Moscow, recalls that in August ‘. . . a new and
ominous element began to emerge in our relations with the Soviet
Union . . . the Soviets had begun to take the view that Pakistan was
likely to initiate hostilities with India in order to divert world opinion
from the internal disorder in East Pakistan’.4 Gromyko forcefully put
across the new Soviet stance when the Pakistani foreign secretary,
Sultan Mohammed Khan, visited Moscow in the first week of
September. Expressing regret over Pakistan’s failure to take steps to
solve the refugee problem, Gromyko underlined the point that the
‘refugees have spilled over the national border: the situation has thus
spilled over the normal framework of Pakistan–Indian relations’. The
refugee problem could not be solved unless the Pakistan
government stopped its policy of repression and persecution. ‘In this
situation, any steps against Mujibur Rahman would create new
difficulties . . . a severe sentence on Mujibur Rahman would be
denounced by the Soviet people and world public opinion.’ Referring