The fact that the foreign minister chose to conceal from his cabinet
colleagues his contact with the US official in September raises
questions about his intentions. Khondaker was known to have a
negative opinion about the Indo-Soviet Treaty and, more generally,
about what he saw as a left ward shift in Mujibnagar politics. His
preference for a US connection reflected an astonishing diplomatic
naivete, given the US stance in the Bangladesh crisis. This also
gave rise to questions about his commitment to a fully independent
Bangladesh. The foreign minister planned to be present at the UN
during the General Assembly session. Tajuddin was concerned that
Khondaker’s statements in New York might create confusion and
embarrassment for Mujibnagar.
New Delhi had not so far made an issue of Khondaker’s reported
secret contacts with US officials. At the end of October, however, as
the war drew near, the Indian authorities decided it was time to take
up the question with Mujibnagar. Mrs Gandhi had already shown her
hand to the Bangladesh leaders. The die had been cast and
preparatory moves for the final showdown had already begun. Unity
of aim and maintenance of absolute secrecy regarding joint plans
had become an absolute necessity for India’s national security. On
27 October, D.P. Dhar flew down to Kolkata to apprise Tajuddin of
India’s concerns. India and Bangladesh were about to begin joint
planning for the final stage of the liberation war. Could security be
guaranteed while Khondaker occupied the post of foreign minister?26
Tajuddin himself was in favour of dismissing Khondaker, but the
acting president, Syed Nazrul Islam, decided to simply shift the
offender to another cabinet post.27 From Hossain Ali’s report, Islam
must have had at least partial knowledge of Khondaker’s contacts,
but it is not clear how he interpreted these unauthorized initiatives.
The acting president also had to bear in mind the need for
maintaining party unity. In the event, Khondaker was shifted to
another ministry, while Abdus Salam Azad replaced him as foreign
minister. Khondaker’s associate, Foreign Secretary Mahbubul Alam
Chashi, was dismissed from office on disciplinary grounds.
With this, the decks were cleared for joint planning for a decisive