youngsters into immortal martyrs for the Bengali cause. Tributes are
paid to them on 21 February every year at a solemn public ceremony
at the Martyrs’ Memorial in Dhaka. The significance of the language
movement in the history of the eastern province can hardly be
overestimated. In the words of the Bangladeshi political scientist
Talukder 
Maniruzzaman, 
‘[The] 
state 
language 
movement
secularized the political atmosphere of East Bengal. The success of
the movement showed that the politically relevant section of
Bengalis, and particularly students, could no longer be diverted from
substantive political issues through slogans of Islam, anti-Indianism
and anti-Hinduism.’6
The language movement gave a great boost to the demand for
autonomy in East Pakistan. Prominent Bengali Muslims pointed out
the Lahore resolution adopted by the Muslim League in 1940 had
called for constitution of ‘independent states’ in the Muslim-majority
areas in the North, Western and Eastern zones of the subcontinent.
Ignoring the position of the central leadership, in 1950 the East
Bengal Muslim League Working Committee on the Constitution
called for ‘maximum autonomy’ for the eastern wing. The
government’s rejection of the demand for recognition of Bengali as a
state language and the brutal suppression of protests brought the
autonomy question to the forefront.
Reflecting the mounting discontent with the central leadership, a
major section of the ruling party in the eastern wing broke away in
1949 to form the East Pakistan Awami [People’s] Muslim League. In
1953, the new party dropped the word ‘Muslim’ from its name,
restyling itself as the Awami League and signalling its secular
approach in politics.
In 1953, the main opposition parties in the eastern wing – the
Awami League, the Krishak Sramik Party of Fazlul Huq and the
Nizam-e-Islam – came together to form the United Front. The
common twenty-one-point programme of the United Front included
recognition of Bengali as a national language, full autonomy for East
Bengal, the raising of an East Bengal armed militia, shifting of the
naval headquarters from Karachi to Chittagong, release of all