League would never compromise on the Six Points. He called for
friendly relations with neighbouring countries and peaceful
settlement of all disputes. 6 These included Kashmir – an issue that
aroused little emotion in East Pakistan – as well as the Farakka
Barrage issue and the equitable utilization of the flows of the Ganges
River between India and East Pakistan.
In this tense situation, the Awami League leaders feared that the
Pakistani army might precipitate hostilities with India in order to
divert attention from the internal crisis and whip up nationalist
sentiment to thwart their demand for autonomy. It alerted its contacts
in Indian intelligence to this possibility and appealed to India to
refrain from responding to Pakistani border provocations.
Indian reactions – January 1971
On receiving the Awami League’s message, Ramji Kao, head of
India’s external intelligence agency RAW, sent a lengthy report to the
prime minister’s influential secretary, Parmeshwar Narain Haksar.
Haksar and Indira Gandhi knew each other well since their student
days in England in the late 1930s. In the words of his biographer
Jairam Ramesh, ‘Haksar contributed heavily to the making of Indira
Gandhi, especially in the first six or seven years of her prime
ministership . . . They formed an awesome duo: she with her
charismatic appeal, he with his intellectual gravitas. Ultimately, she
took all the decisions, no doubt, but she was influenced heavily by
him at every turn.’7 Haksar would play a central role in the crisis of
1971.
In his report to Haksar, Kao offered the assessment that in the
event of a constitutional impasse in Pakistan, the martial law
authorities would seek to divert public attention from the internal
crisis by initiating a military confrontation with India or an infiltration
campaign in Kashmir. In this context, Kao drew attention to the
considerable increase in Pakistan’s military capabilities since the
1965 India–Pakistan war.
The possibility of another Pakistani military adventure in Kashmir
was never far from Indian minds. Only five years had passed since