leaders favoured a centralized state and were strongly opposed to
the demand for ‘full regional autonomy’. However, Bengali politicians
were not excluded from high office if they were prepared to toe the
line. In the words of the historian Ayesha Jalal, the ‘only acceptable
Bengali in office in Karachi was a captive Bengali’.9 Despite this
severe handicap, ministerial office and membership of the legislature
made it possible for Bengali politicians to squeeze occasional
concessions from the ruling clique.
The career of the Awami League leader Huseyn Shaheed
Suhrawardy provides the best illustration of the limitations of and
possibilities for a Bengali politician in the central government.
Suhrawardy was dedicated equally to promoting the rights of the
people of East Bengal and to preserving the unity of Pakistan.
Appointed law minister in the central cabinet in 1953, he made a
bold effort to frame a set of compromise proposals that could serve
as the basis of a constitution. In order to allay fears of Bengali
numerical domination, Suhrawardy conceded the Punjabi demand
for consolidation of the West Pakistan provinces into a single unit
(‘One Unit’), with parity in parliamentary seats for West and East
Pakistan. In exchange, the parity principle would apply also to
representation in the civil and military services, in order to rectify the
imbalance between the two wings. East Pakistan would get ‘full
autonomy’, a joint electorate, and recognition of Bengali as a state
language alongside Urdu. The proposals were summarily rejected by
Governor General Iskandar Mirza. Suhrawardy was obliged to resign
from his post, and the Awami League joined the ranks of the
Opposition.10
The constitution that was finally adopted in 1956 offered a single
concession to the eastern wing. Bengali was accepted as a national
language. This was due in no small measure to the persistent
advocacy by Suhrawardy and the Bengali prime minister,
Mohammed Ali Bogra. The constitution, however, ignored the
demand for ‘full autonomy’, renamed East Bengal as East Pakistan,
despite strong protests from the province, and conceded parity in
parliamentary seats to West Pakistan, notwithstanding East