Pakistan’s larger population. The Awami League walked out from
parliament in protest before the constitution was adopted. A few
months later, however, in this game of political musical chairs,
Suhrawardy was sworn in as prime minister in a coalition
government, after he had accepted three conditions laid down by
President Mirza. These reflected the foreign and defence policy
priorities of the military-civil service clique; adherence to a pro-
western foreign policy; non-interference in military matters; and
keeping under control Maulana Bhashani, the leader of the left wing
of the Awami League and a strong advocate of an independent, non-
aligned policy.11
Suhrawardy had little choice but to work within the system. He
became an ardent advocate of ‘One Unit’ and Pakistan’s pro-west
foreign policy. His defence of Pakistan’s military pacts led to a split in
the Awami League. Its founder president, Maulana Bhashani,
resigned from the party and subsequently formed the National
Awami Party. Yet, working within the system, Suhrawardy and his
minister for commerce and industry, Abul Mansur Ahmed, were able
to achieve a modicum of success in advancing the economic
interests of East Pakistan. Industrial development was transferred to
the list of provincial subjects, enabling the East Pakistan government
to take its own initiatives in this field. The powerful Import–Export
Controller opened an office in Chittagong to facilitate issue of import
licences to provincial businessmen. Issue of licences to newcomers
in the commercial field was made easier. A trade agreement was
concluded with India. Steps were taken to ensure for East Pakistan a
fairer allocation of foreign aid received from the 
United States.
These modest measures to redress the economic imbalance
between the two wings proved to be the undoing of the Suhrawardy
ministry. They drew strong protest from vested business interests in
the western wing. Some of Suhrawardy’s allies withdrew their
support and the governor general demanded Suhrawardy’s
resignation. The Awami League–led coalition had lasted barely a
year.