New Delhi simply pocketed the Soviet assurance regarding arms
supplies to Pakistan – its immediate aim in the negotiations – and
decided to put the proposed treaty in cold storage, to be taken out
should the need arise in the future. Ambassador Dhar advised his
Soviet interlocutors that the domestic political situation in India was
not conducive to an early conclusion of the treaty. He highlighted the
threat posed by ‘rightist reactionary’ elements to Indira Gandhi’s
leadership and suggested that the negotiations be placed on hold
until a more propitious moment. Once again, the Soviets were ready
to oblige, and the proposed treaty went into hibernation.
At the end of 1970, Indira Gandhi decided to break free from the
right-wing party bosses and force a formal division of the Congress
party. Reduced to a minority in parliament, she sought a fresh
electoral mandate. The Lok Sabha was dissolved and general
elections held in March 1971, more than a year ahead of schedule.
The result was a resounding victory for Mrs Gandhi’s Congress (I)
party, which won 350 out of a total of 515 seats, obtaining more than
a two-thirds majority in the Lok Sabha. The prime minister’s right-
wing opponents were decimated. The electoral verdict removed the
domestic political constraint that Ambassador Dhar had advanced as
the reason for putting Moscow’s treaty proposal in cold storage.
However, Indira Gandhi showed no interest in reviving the talks –
until the summer of 1971, when the logic of events left her with no
other option.
Compulsions of 1971
India had hoped, until July, to obtain support from both superpowers
in dealing with the East Bengal crisis. New Delhi had greater
expectations of the Soviet Union, but it also sought US sympathy
and support. As we saw in the previous chapter, in early April, Indira
Gandhi appealed to the Soviet leadership to consider a joint initiative
with the United States. Moscow was prompt in extending diplomatic
support, but it maintained a polite silence on the appeal for a joint
initiative with the United States. New Delhi had failed to understand
the cryptic reference in the Soviet reply to ‘unused possibilities’ for