A new cabinet was appointed, but the days of the recently adopted
constitution were now numbered. It suffered from a fatal flaw: it
required periodic elections, the uncertainties of which were
unappealing to the governor general. Moreover, the concept of
division of powers between the Centre and the provinces was
suspect in the eyes of the commander-in-chief, General Ayub Khan.
‘The constitution, by distributing power between the President, the
Prime Minister and his Cabinet, and the provinces, destroyed the
focal point of power and left no one in a position of control,’ he was
to write later.12 President Mirza, on his part, was apprehensive about
the outcome of the general elections required under the constitution.
With the army chief and the president on the same page, the
constitution was doomed. On 30 September 1958, President
Iskandar Mirza imposed martial law, abrogating the constitution,
dismissing the central and provincial governments, dissolving the
central and provincial assemblies and banning all political parties.
Mirza failed to recognize in good time that by handing over power
to the army, he had made himself superfluous. The army was no
longer restricted to a behind-the-scenes role. The generals forced
Mirza to resign on 27 October and sent him into permanent exile in
London. Pakistan’s transition to military rule is often ascribed to the
failure of democracy in the country. In reality, the army seized power
in order to pre-empt the emergence of democracy in Pakistan.
The Ayub Decade (1958–68) and the Six-Point Demand
General (later Field Marshal) Mohammad Ayub Khan did not come
unprepared to shoulder his new responsibilities. He was convinced
that in politics, as in the military, there should be a single ‘focus of
power’. As early as in 1954, the commander-in-chief had set down
his political ideas with military clarity in a ‘short appreciation of
present and future problems of Pakistan’. In his opinion, the
Pakistani people could easily be led astray by communists and
unscrupulous politicians. ‘Unfettered democracy’ was, therefore, a
danger to be avoided. Pakistan needed a ‘controlled form of
democracy’ in which the president, as Head of State, would have