Warsaw when the ‘time was ripe’. Chen Yi also confided to premier
Zhou En-lai his ‘unconventional thought’ that in addition to reopening
the Warsaw talks, China should also take the initiative to propose
Sino-US talks at a ministerial or even higher level, ‘. . . so that basic
and related problems in Sino-American relations can be solved’.
These views seem to have coincided with Mao’s own thinking. His
personal physician, Dr Li Zhisui, recalls Mao’s observation in August:
‘Didn’t our ancestors counsel negotiating with faraway countries
while fighting with those that are near us?’2
In the words of the historian Margaret MacMillan: ‘The times were
ripe for each side [the US and China] to make a move toward the
other. In both countries there were influential voices saying that the
advantages of a relationship, even a cool one, outweighed
continuing non-recognition. For each the other was a card to play
against the common enemy, the Soviet Union.’3
Thus, by the end of 1969, the United States and China decided to
reopen ambassadorial-level talks in Warsaw. On 20 January 1970,
the first round of Sino-US talks under the Nixon administration was
held in Warsaw. At the next meeting, on 20 February, the Chinese
charge d’affaires, acting on instructions from premier Zhou En-lai
and with Mao’s approval, informed the US ambassador to Poland,
Walter Stoessel, that Beijing was willing to receive a minister or high-
level envoy representing the president in order to explore solutions
to the ‘fundamental questions’ in Sino-US relations. The Chinese
charge d’affaires emphasized that a resolution of the Taiwan issue
was fundamental to improvement of bilateral relations, but he added
that the Chinese side was also prepared to consider any ideas and
suggestions that the US might wish to offer.4
Though there was general agreement in Washington on the need
for an opening to China, Kissinger and the State Department did not
see eye to eye on the preconditions for a high-level visit. The State
Department view was that a high-level visit should be undertaken
only after the Chinese had provided some indication that they were
prepared to meet US concerns in Asia. In the absence of such an
indication, there was a ‘serious risk of our being used by Peking for