4. Mujibnagar
Tajuddin Ahmed’s contribution to the liberation of Bangladesh is
second only to that of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The charismatic
Mujib provided the inspiration for the freedom movement. Tajuddin,
the statesman and organizer, guided the struggle through its darkest
months to a triumphal conclusion.
In the second week of April, Tajuddin was able to re-establish
contact with other Awami League leaders. On his return to Kolkata
from New Delhi, Tajuddin met with the senior Awami League leader,
Kamaruzzaman, who had also arrived in the city. He then boarded a
Dakota aircraft placed at his disposal by the Indian authorities to
meet up with other Awami League leaders who had crossed into
India at various border points. Picking up Syed Nazrul Islam,
Mansoor Ali and Abdul Mannan en route, he arrived in Agartala on
11 April, where he found other senior Awami League members –
Khondaker Mushtaque Ahmed and Col. Osmani – waiting for him.
Two days of discussion and argument followed.
Tajuddin was acutely conscious of the urgent need to rally the
masses and keep up the momentum of the popular resistance.
Without waiting for the outcome of his meeting with other Awami
League leaders, Tajuddin made a rousing broadcast from Agartala
on 11 April on a small radio transmitter supplied by the BSF.
Speaking in the name of the ‘President, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, and the Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh’, he saluted the people of Bangladesh, who ‘have joined
the ranks of the immortals among the freedom fighters of history’, . . .
‘To the world we were a peace-loving people, friendly, humane, fond
of music and dance, imbued with an awareness of culture and
beauty. War and violence were thought to be foreign to our nature.
But today whilst we remain true to our heritage, Bengalis have
shown that they are also a warrior people, with an unconquerable
will and courage to face an aggressor who enjoys overwhelming
superiority in the use of weapons . . . [today] a mighty army is being