side to differentiate the agreement from a military pact, while making
it serve as a warning to both Pakistan and China.13
After six months of evasive and ‘purely exploratory’ discussions,
the Indians finally handed over their counter-draft to the Soviet side
in September 1969. When detailed discussions began on this draft,
Deputy Foreign Minister Firyubin politely indicated some basic
objections. He observed that the title of the treaty was inappropriate;
peace treaties were signed by warring states on the conclusion of
hostilities. It had no place in a friendship treaty. A non-aggression
clause was not appropriate in the context of the close ties between
India and the Soviet Union. Non-aggression pacts, he said, were in
fashion in the pre-World War II era, before the UN Charter prohibited
the use of force. A friendship treaty reflected a far higher level of ties
between the signatories. Firyubin also inquired why the reference to
‘appropriate effective measures’ had been dropped from the Soviet
formulation and why the Indian draft was confined only to
‘consultations’. Dhar gave a hint of India’s reasons, replying that the
intention was to avoid ‘unfair criticism and preventing people from
reading too much of belligerency and militancy’ in the agreement.14
The discussions led to a certain narrowing of differences and
agreement on some peripheral issues, but not to the crucial Article 6
of the Soviet paper.
New Delhi now reverted to two other issues on which it had lodged
repeated protests in the past. Dhar was advised in October that the
draft treaty could not be finalized until Moscow provided an
assurance that it would not supply any offensive weapons to
Pakistan. The second condition was that Soviet maps should
correctly depict India’s boundaries.15 India had earlier lodged
protests on these issues.
At this stage, a new factor came into play. Moscow came to accept
the failure of its efforts to persuade Pakistan to break away from its
close military and political ties to China or even to participate in
Soviet-sponsored schemes of Asian economic cooperation. When
Kosygin visited Pakistan in May 1969, he had put forward a proposal
for a transit agreement to facilitate trade between the USSR,