6 December would have brought about a ceasefire on both fronts
had it not been rejected by the United States and its allies. When
Nixon raised the question with Brezhnev, the latter formally
confirmed that the Indian government would readily accept a general
ceasefire after Bangladesh had been liberated. Kissinger dwells on
the fact that Indian officials declined to clarify their objectives in
Kashmir. He fails to mention that when the question was put to the
Indian ambassador in Washington, L.K. Jha, the latter asked
whether a similar assurance had been obtained from Pakistan – a
question to which the State Department had no answer.45 Despite
this reservation, India did, in fact, give the US a broad hint of its
intentions. On 12 December, Foreign Secretary T.N. Kaul informed
the US ambassador to the UN, George H.W. Bush, that India had no
major ambitions regarding Pakistan-Occupied Kashmir, adding that
India and Pakistan had discussed minor rectifications even in
peacetime.46 The significance of this comment was not lost on the
Americans. Kissinger incorporated it in his Situation Report to Nixon
the same day.47 He, however, fails to mention these facts in his
voluminous memoirs.
Kissinger’s real intentions were reflected in the draft UN Security
Council resolution tabled by the United States on 12 December.48
This called on India and Pakistan to observe an immediate ceasefire
and withdraw their forces to their own sides of the India–Pakistan
borders. In other words, India was required to withdraw troops from
liberated Bangladesh territory, while Pakistani armed forces
remained in that territory. The question of a ‘political solution’ was left
for the future. The clear intention was to prolong Pakistani rule in
Bangladesh.
End game
The US resolution ignored ground realities. Pakistani forces were
collapsing everywhere in the eastern front. On 11 December, Indian
paratroopers had been airdropped in the Tangail area, inside the
Dhaka bowl, where they linked up with Bangladeshi freedom fighters
under Kader ‘Tiger’ Siddiqui. The strategically important town of