Pakistan unless you can resume the process [negotiations with the
Awami League] which you started’.21 Replying to Mrs Gandhi’s letter,
the British prime minister said that he had impressed on Yahya the
importance of halting the refugee exodus and the need for ‘early
political advance’. He promised assistance for the refugees in India –
but then introduced a discordant note by referring to the need for
‘arranging, if possible, for their ultimate return home [emphasis
added]’.22
Swaran Singh’s principal objective in London, therefore, was to
disabuse the British of the notion that India might agree to
permanently host the refugees. When he met Heath on 21 June, he
explained the strain on India’s security caused by the presence of
the refugees and stated emphatically that India insisted that all the
refugees must return to their homes. This required a political
settlement acceptable to the Awami League. It was essential that
Mujib be released from prison and talks be held with him. Heath’s
response was positive. He said he ‘fully understood’ India’s position
and asked Swaran Singh to assure Mrs Gandhi that Britain ‘. . .
would continue to do all we could to persuade President Yahya Khan
to bring about a political solution as quickly as possible’. Within a day
of his meeting with Swaran Singh, the British prime minister told the
Pakistani high commissioner that Islamabad ‘should understand the
real fear felt in India about the instability that could be caused by the
refugee problem’.23
France
In Paris, too, Swaran Singh achieved significant results. France had
earlier adhered to a very narrow interpretation of the principle of non-
interference. Thus, when Swaran Singh took up the question of the
refugees with Foreign Minister Schumann on 12 June, the latter took
the position that while the humanitarian question of refugee relief
was an international concern, the question of a political solution was
an internal problem of Pakistan. Undeterred by this setback, Swaran
Singh seized the opportunity offered by the presence of President
Pompidou at an official luncheon. He was able to persuade the