The myth that Indira Gandhi was persuaded by a cunning Bhutto to
give up her original aim of reaching a final agreement on Kashmir at
the Simla conference is belied by the facts. Every Indian draft
presented in the conference, including the final draft presented on
the last day, reserved a final settlement on Kashmir for a future date.
Mrs Gandhi did, indeed, hope for a final settlement on the basis of
converting the Line of Control to a formal international boundary over
a period of time, but she feared that her political opponents would
condemn her for ‘surrendering’ Indian territory if she were to do so at
Simla. Public opinion was not ready to accept an accord on these
terms – either in Pakistan or India. Indira Gandhi aimed to initiate a
move in the desired direction at Simla, while leaving a final
settlement to a future date.
Critics have argued that India held powerful bargaining counters in
Simla in the form of the 93,000 Pakistani POWs and the Pakistan
territory occupied by Indian forces; that these levers could have been
used to compel Pakistan to accept conversion of the Line of Control
in Jammu & Kashmir into a permanent international boundary; and
that Mrs Gandhi allowed herself to be persuaded by Bhutto to desist
from pressing for a final settlement of the Kashmir issue at Simla.
Their arguments show little understanding of international realities or
of 
Mrs Gandhi’s objectives.
International law categorically prohibits the use of POWs as a
bargaining counter. Article 118 of the 1949 Geneva Convention
Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War says: ‘Prisoners of War
shall be released and repatriated without delay after the cessation of
active hostilities [emphasis added].’ Violation or rejection of the
Geneva Convention would not only have invited condemnation by
the international community but would also have deprived India of
the protection of the convention in any future conflict with Pakistan or
other powers. In calling for the surrender of Pakistani forces, Gen.
Manekshaw had repeatedly promised to respect the Geneva
Convention. These promises would have been dishonoured had
India chosen to flout international law. India had also repeatedly
assured the international community that it had no territorial designs