about the evolving situation. Kaul said that refugees had already
begun to come across the border. He apprehended that the trickle
would soon grow into a massive flood, imposing a huge burden on
India. Would the United States agree to share the economic burden
of providing relief to the refugees? Kaul also said that he feared the
situation developing across the border might precipitate a security
threat to India. He drew Keating’s attention to the presence of
extremist pro-Chinese elements in East Pakistan. China might
decide to fish in troubled waters. The foreign secretary suggested
that it might still not be too late for the United States to convey to the
Pakistan government its hope for a peaceful solution to the East
Pakistan problem.
Keating parried the question concerning refugee relief with the
observation that it related to a hypothetical situation. He responded
to Kaul’s second question on the lines of the instructions sent to his
colleague in Islamabad. He said that Washington viewed the conflict
in East Pakistan as a domestic issue that should be resolved
internally by the Pakistanis themselves.9
This negative response did not extinguish Indian hopes of
attracting US support. As we have seen, in its first feelers to the
Soviet Union, India broached the possibility of a joint US–Soviet
initiative to bring the East Pakistan conflict to an end as soon as
possible. Moscow’s response to this suggestion was a deafening
silence.
Declassified US documents reveal what appears to have been a
surprisingly optimistic Indian initiative. (Available Indian records
provide no confirmation of this report, but it deserves notice
nevertheless.) On 9 April, Kissinger chaired a meeting of the 40
Committee, the group of senior US officials responsible for
overseeing clandestine operations, to consider an Indian request to
the CIA for provision of unmarked small arms for the East Bengal
freedom fighters. (The request, presumably from RAW, might have
been prompted by the intelligence agency’s knowledge of the Awami
League’s hopes for securing US support.) CIA Deputy Director
General Cushman said the CIA had a secure channel through which