Pakistan, it became evident that the Ayub regime could not be
further sustained. The 1962 constitution provided that in the event of
the president’s resignation he would be succeeded by the speaker of
the National Assembly. In this case, the speaker, Abdul Jabbar
Khan, happened to be a Bengali. The unthinkable prospect of
placing a Bengali civilian at the centre of power was averted by
abrogating the constitution and declaring martial law. On 24 March,
Ayub announced his resignation and handed over power to the army
chief, General Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan, who assumed office
as president and chief martial law administrator. In his farewell
address to the nation, Ayub declared: ‘I have always told you that the
secret of the continued existence of Pakistan is in a strong centre . . .
But now it is being proposed that the country be divided into two
parts, the centre be made weak and helpless, the defence forces be
paralysed completely and West Pakistan’s political position be
ended. I cannot preside over the destruction of my country.’24 This
parting shot was aimed at the Awami League’s Six-Point Demand,
which was diametrically opposite to his basic conviction that
Pakistan could survive only as a highly centralized state, with an
army that had unquestioned authority to decide its budgetary
allocation, and a political system dominated by West Pakistan, the
army’s recruitment ground.
In a cable to the US State Department in April, the American
Ambassador to Pakistan, Benjamin Oehlert, Jr, explained that ‘[the]
major objectives [of imposition of martial law] probably were to
maintain intact [a] strong government, to protect [the] existing power
structure in West Pakistan and to prevent East Pakistan from
obtaining national political power proportionate to [its] population’.25
Fragile unity
By 1969, the fragility of the Pakistani state was apparent to close
observers. In February, the director of intelligence and research in
the US State Department prepared an analysis entitled ‘Pakistan on
the Brink’. It concluded that ‘in East Pakistan opposition to Ayub has
taken on strong overtones of anti-West Pakistani sentiment to the