As Kamal Hossain points out, this meant in effect that the ‘. . . ruling
minority would have a veto on constitution-making and, indeed,
unless there was a prior understanding with them, the Assembly
would not be convened’.22
The US Consulate General in Dhaka was situated at a central
location on the topmost floors of one of the city’s few multistoreyed
buildings. The consul general, Archer Blood, surveyed the scene in
the streets below after the radio announcement. Sensing the mood
of the crowds below, the consul general reported to Washington that
he had just witnessed the ‘beginning of the break-up of Pakistan’.23
A powerful undercurrent of nationalism was visible everywhere.
Student groups were in the forefront, raising the slogans ‘Joi Bangla’
[Victory to Bengal] and ‘Bir Bangali, ostro dhoro, Bangladesh
swadhin koro [Brave Bengalis, take up arms, liberate Bangladesh]’.
Militant processions converged on the Purbani Hotel, where the
Awami League leaders were holding a meeting. The crowd carried
sticks and staves, and raised the cry of ‘independence’.
The mass movement that began on 1 March was planned by Mujib,
but it was also the spontaneous reaction of a people who had been
denied their democratic rights once too often. Mujib harnessed the
protests to launch a comprehensive non-cooperation movement.
This began with his call for a peaceful, countrywide hartal (strike),
including closure of government offices and the courts. Certain
specified services, such as the post office, public utilities, railways
and other public transportation, factories and markets, were
exempted from the strike. The call met with total compliance. The
army was unable to obtain provisions from the market as
shopkeepers refused to transact business with the military. Curfews
declared by the army were systematically defied by the populace.
The resultant situation has been described by the deputy martial
law administrator, Maj. Gen. Khadim Hussain Raja.
The Martial Law Administrator, at this stage, was left with no one to answer
his commands except his troops. Even in the matter of troops, it became
clear to us that the Bengali troops would not shoot at the Bengali crowds.
In fact, it seemed obvious that on a clarion call from Sheikh Mujib, they
would even take up arms in his support.24