had already communicated directly to Washington on more than one
occasion. Indian leaders confirmed that India was fighting a
defensive war on the western front and had no intention of going on
a strategic offensive in the west. India was ready to accept a general
ceasefire if Pakistan agreed to withdraw its forces from Bangladesh
and transfer power to the Awami League.
India, in turn, raised its concerns about the arrival of the Enterprise
in the Indian Ocean. Kuznetsov was told that far from fraying Indian
nerves, the threatening posture adopted by the United States had
the effect of strengthening its determination. Notwithstanding this,
India requested the Soviet Union to make a public announcement at
the highest level that interference by other countries in the affairs of
the subcontinent would only aggravate the existing situation. A TASS
statement to this effect had, indeed, been issued early in the war, but
in India’s view this did not suffice. India requested an official
statement at the highest level, pointing out the consequences of
third-party intervention.43
In light of these consultations, Brezhnev sent a reply to Nixon’s
message of 10 December. Brezhnev rejected Nixon’s allegation that
there was a lack of clarity concerning India’s intentions. India had no
plans for seizing West Pakistan territory. India was ready to accept a
general ceasefire if Pakistan withdrew its forces from the eastern
theatre and transferred power to the lawful representatives of the
people, thereby creating conditions for the refugees in India to return
to their homes. Regarding the Enterprise, Brezhnev said that it was
‘difficult for us to understand how it is possible to combine striving for
a peaceful settlement of the problem by collective efforts of our
countries with such unilateral actions like demonstrative movements
of naval forces and so on. Suppose the other side will also embark
on the path of taking similar measures – what then will be the net
result?’44
Kissinger claims in his memoirs that India’s intention was to
‘smash’ West Pakistan after achieving its aims in the eastern theatre.
He claims that his aim was only to prevent the destruction of West
Pakistan. The facts contradict these claims. The Soviet resolution of