Five days after the farewell parade, Indira Gandhi arrived in Dhaka
to an unforgettable welcome. Tens of thousands had poured into the
capital from the outlying districts to catch a glimpse of the Indian
prime minister and hear her speak at the Suhrawardy Udyan. The
streets of the city were festooned with posters bearing her portrait
alongside effusive expressions of gratitude and admiration.
To enable the embassy to meet the unprecedented challenges it
faced, exceptional powers were delegated to it, dispensing with time-
consuming bureaucratic procedures. It was assumed that formal
financial sanction would follow automatically in all cases of
expenditure approved by Ambassador Subimal Dutt. I recall, for
example, that we received an appeal for assistance from the
Bangladesh government to deal with a major cholera epidemic. A
massive inoculation campaign was urgently required to deal with this
public 
health 
emergency, 
but 
the 
proportionately 
massive
requirements of vaccine were not available in war-devastated
Bangladesh. Under Dutt’s instructions, I rang up the concerned desk
officer in the ministry of external affairs (MEA) and informed him that
the ambassador had asked for the requisite quantity of cholera
vaccine to be airlifted to Dhaka within forty-eight hours. The task
involved coordination between the ministries of external affairs,
health, defence and finance, as well as between these civilian
agencies and the air force. In normal times this would have taken
weeks, if not months, with each organization raising its own issues at
every step. In the event, in April 1972, two Indian Air Force planes
delivered the urgently needed vaccines in Dhaka in thirty-six hours!
This is only a small example of the way the Government of India
functioned during and after the 1971 war. The contrast with the
stately pace at which the government normally moved could not
have been more startling. It was possible to execute tasks so
speedily only because everyone involved was inspired by a
common, clearly defined, overarching national aim.
This period of frenetic activity drew to a close as normalcy was
restored and an increasing number of countries, including the
principal western aid donors, accorded diplomatic recognition to
Bangladesh. This enabled Bangladesh to diversify its sources of