from the stage at which they had been broken off in March.40
Not satisfied with the response, the White House decided to turn
on the pressure on Moscow. The Soviet minister of agriculture,
Vladimir Matskevich, happened to be visiting Washington. He was
summoned to the White House on 9 December to receive a tough
message from Nixon himself. Matskevich was totally at sea about a
question unconnected with his official responsibilities. The bemused
agriculture minister was informed that if the Soviets continued with
their policy in East Pakistan, it would ‘poison the whole new
relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union’.
Moscow, he was warned, should consider whether its gains in India
were ‘worth jeopardising the relationship with the United States’.
Nixon drew the Soviet minister’s attention to US treaty obligations to
Pakistan.41 He followed up the next day with a message to
Brezhnev, urging him ‘in the strongest terms to restrain India with
which, by virtue of your treaty, you have great influence and for
whose actions you must share responsibility’. He specifically sought
an assurance that India would accept a ceasefire in the west
immediately after a ceasefire had been agreed in the eastern
theatre.42 
Though the Soviet leaders rejected the contention that progress
towards detente required them to align their South Asia policy with
that of the United States, they could not afford to simply brush aside
American concerns. Kissinger had repeatedly expressed concern
over India’s designs regarding West Pakistan. Moscow knew these
were unfounded and was prepared to serve as a channel for
communicating an official Indian denial to Washington. Partly for this
reason and, more generally, because of the need for timely
coordination with India in a rapidly evolving situation, the Soviet
leaders sent Vasily Kuznetsov, the senior-most deputy foreign
minister, to New Delhi for consultations under the Indo-Soviet Treaty.
India reciprocally sent D.P. Dhar to Moscow. 
Kuznetsov arrived in New Delhi on 12 December and immediately
called on Mrs Gandhi, who readily confirmed that India had no
territorial designs on West Pakistan – an assurance that New Delhi