3. Towards a Grand Strategy
Reports of the slaughter of unarmed civilians in East Bengal aroused
deep emotions among the Indian public. There was strong
condemnation of Pakistan across the political spectrum and
demands that the government extend full support to the Bangladesh
cause. The population of the border areas displayed an
extraordinary degree of solidarity in receiving and hosting the tidal
wave of refugees fleeing into India. Powerful voices were raised in
favour of formal recognition of an independent Bangladesh. On 31
March, the doyen of India’s strategic thinkers, 
K. Subrahmanyam sounded a call for early military intervention by
India to install an independent Bangladesh government in Dhaka,
urging the Indian government to seize the historical opportunity. The
highly respected and influential analyst found wide support.
Some accounts of the 1971 war depict India as seizing the golden
opportunity offered by the Bangladesh uprising to pursue its plot of
dividing Pakistan. The documentary evidence disproves this view. As
we saw in the previous chapter, Indian policymakers were
apprehensive about the consequences of a break-up of Pakistan.
They had pinned their hopes on a transition to democracy in
Pakistan and a transfer of power to a Bengali-led government at the
Centre. Intervention was contemplated only in the event of a civil
war, which, if prolonged, was likely to be taken over by pro-Chinese
communist militants or ‘Naxalites’. As we have seen, Washington
correctly assessed the Indian position in March.
Indian policymakers reacted with horror and disbelief as news
trickled in of the military crackdown. For the first few days they found
it difficult to believe that the Pakistani army would pursue its
institutional interests by conducting savage massacres that could
only lead to a total collapse of national unity. New Delhi was still
reluctant to shed all hopes of a negotiated political settlement
between the army and the Awami League. A senior Indian official
later recalled: