had an exchange of views regarding the desirability of signing some
sort of a treaty . . . What do you think of the feasibility or otherwise of
resuming the exchange of views and ideas regarding the draft
Document?’
Swaran Singh reluctantly agreed that talks on the treaty could be
resumed, but he tried to separate the two issues, urging that priority
be given to his request. ‘While we are discussing and considering
this Document, we may be too late, events may overtake us. Can we
think of something quickly?’ he asked. Gromyko was unmoved, only
expressing his satisfaction over India’s readiness to resume
discussions on the treaty.
When he met Kosygin on the following day, Swaran Singh repeated
his request for Soviet support. India, he said, looked to the Soviet
Union to neutralize a Chinese military intervention in support of
Pakistan. Kosygin agreed that it was very possible that China would
want to fan tension and conflict, but was silent on the appeal for
assistance. Swaran Singh was not a man to give up easily. He
continued to dwell on the Chinese threat and on India’s
determination to defend itself if attacked. He concluded by
observing, ‘. . . we have no doubt that we can count on your help and
understanding’. Finally, Kosygin offered some words of assurance.
‘You can depend on us as your friends,’ he said.21 It was a general
assurance, but not the specific commitment sought by the Indian
foreign minister.
It was clear from these conversations that the Soviet Union was
ready to come to India’s assistance in the event of a Chinese attack
but that it wanted to base this on a formal treaty. The Indian side
tried to evade this issue, but did not offer a specific suggestion
regarding an alternative form of commitment, such as a simple
verbal understanding or a secret exchange of letters.
Foreign Secretary Kaul examined the options and concluded that a
formal treaty would be preferable. A mere verbal understanding was
inadequate. A secret exchange of letters would not serve as a
deterrent to China in the current developing situation. The best
option was a formal treaty providing for mutual consultations in the