will use all the persuasive methods that I can [with Yahya Khan], but
I must use them in the way that I think is the most effective.’ He also
informed Swaran Singh that he had decided to provide seventy
million dollars for refugee support, adding that he recognized this
was only a temporary palliative and that it would not solve the basic
problem of getting the refugees to return to their homes.36
Nixon succeeded in misleading even such a shrewd and
experienced statesman as Swaran Singh. Addressing a group of
Indian diplomats in London at the end of his tour, Swaran Singh was
upbeat about his talks with Nixon. ‘[The] present position is that we
have got greater support in the White House as compared to the
State Department.’ he said.37 Swaran Singh was soon to be
disillusioned. In July, after Kissinger’s dramatic visit to Beijing, the
outlines of a Washington–Islamabad–Beijing nexus became evident.
The Indian foreign minister’s itinerary included all the three western
countries that occupied permanent seats in the Security Council. His
discussions in London and Paris proved fruitful; in Washington, he
drew a blank. London and Paris were receptive to public opinion.
They also saw the Bangladesh crisis as a regional, South Asian
issue and took into account the fact that their interests in India
outweighed their interests in Pakistan. In Washington, media and
Congressional opinion was similar to that of the British press and
parliament. State Department perspectives, too, were not dissimilar
to those of the Foreign Office. At least in the early months of the
crisis, the State Department saw the question as essentially a
regional issue and recognized that US interests in India outweighed
those in Pakistan.38 However, the White House was determined to
pursue a very different policy, partly due to Nixon’s personal
prejudices and partly because it perceived – or misperceived – the
problem as a Cold War issue.
United Nations
Meanwhile, the UN high commissioner for refugees, Prince
Sadruddin Aga Khan, sought an expanded role for himself, beyond
that of mobilizing refugee relief. On a visit to India and Pakistan in