stipulating whether it was destined for the eastern or western wing of
Pakistan. This package was supposedly designed as ‘an effort to
help Yahya achieve a negotiated settlement’. Nixon’s approval came
with a handwritten note that read: ‘To all hands. Don’t squeeze
Yahya at this time.’ ‘Don’t’ was underlined three times.32 
In June 1971, it was, indeed, necessary for the White House to
keep Yahya in good humour, since he was still its principal channel
of communication with China. This was, however, only a secondary
consideration. The primary factor was Nixon’s personal dislike of the
Indian prime minister and his regard for the Pakistani military
dictator. This is evident from the fact that the White House ‘tilt’ in
favour of Pakistan became even more marked after July, by when a
direct channel of communication had been established between the
White House 
and Beijing.
Swaran Singh met with Rogers and Nixon on 16 June. In his
meeting with Rogers, Swaran Singh offered a ‘reasoned and
restrained analysis’, in the words of his American interlocutors.33 He
emphasized that the first requirement was to end the military
crackdown. The movement of refugees to India must be brought to a
halt and all of the refugees must return to their homes. This required
a political solution reflecting the will of the people, as distinct from a
civilian regime deriving its authority from the Pakistani army. Asked if
this would entail an independent Bangladesh, Swaran Singh replied
reassuringly that India was not committed to any particular outcome.
He urged Washington to use its influence with Islamabad to make it
see that it was in Pakistan’s own interest to install a government
reflecting the will of the people. This offered some prospect of
preserving the unity of the country.
Rogers said that the US could encourage Yahya to seek a political
solution, but it could not ask him to accept secession. He said that
the US had made no military shipments to Pakistan and would keep
this matter under careful review. He observed that economic aid
should not be used to gain political leverage. Countering him,
Swaran Singh pointed out that in the case of Pakistan, economic aid