UK, France, and the Federal Republic of Germany, followed suit.
The United States formally recognized Bangladesh on 8 April. Thus,
by early April 1972, most of the major powers, including all the
permanent members of the UN Security Council, with the solitary
exception of China, had accorded diplomatic recognition to the newly
independent People’s Republic of Bangladesh.
Plans for restoration of the civil administration in post-war
Bangladesh had already been drawn up by the Mujibnagar
authorities in November. These plans were speedily implemented
after liberation. The very next day after the Pakistani surrender,
appointments of senior district officials (deputy commissioners and
superintendents of police) were announced over the radio. On 18
December, an advance team of senior Mujibnagar officials, led by
Chief Secretary Ruhul Quddus, arrived in Dhaka to take over the
reins of administration. Acting President Syed Nazrul Islam, Prime
Minister Tajuddin Ahmed and other cabinet ministers followed on 22
December. Thus, within a week after liberation, all the organs of the
new state had begun to function across the length and breadth of
Bangladesh.
Pakistan came under increasing international pressure to release
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. In early January 1972, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto,
who had replaced the disgraced Yahya Khan as president and chief
martial law administrator, decided to release the Bangabandhu from
prison. Mujib was flown out to London, from where he returned to
Dhaka, after a brief halt in New Delhi on 10 January. ‘I decided to
stop over in the historic capital of your great country on my way to
Bangladesh, for this is the least I could do to pay a personal tribute
to the best friend of my people, the people of India and to your
Government under the leadership of your magnificent Prime Minister,
Mrs. Indira Gandhi,’ Mujib declared on his arrival at Delhi’s Palam
airport.4
Mujib returned to Dhaka on 10 January 1972 to a deliriously joyful
welcome. His triumphal return invested the government of the new
state with an authority it had not possessed earlier. The task of
disarming ex-freedom fighters and channelling their energies into