conflict which have bedeviled the relations between the two
countries for the last 25 years [code words for Kashmir] shall be
resolved bilaterally and by peaceful means’. The wording was open
to the interpretation that, in addition to bilateral negotiations,
recourse might also be had to other peaceful means, such as UN
resolutions or international arbitration or adjudication.
Indira Gandhi and Bhutto met in the afternoon, together with
leading members of their delegations, to explore possibilities of
breaking the deadlock. Nothing substantial emerged from the
meeting. Mrs Gandhi’s contribution to the discussions consisted of a
few short but pointed comments. The ‘ceasefire line has no validity; it
did not keep the peace’; the latest Pakistani draft ‘weakens the
bilateral approach’; and she also reiterated the Indian position on
repatriation of POWs. In response, Bhutto pleaded that, for historical
reasons, anything resembling a ‘No War’ Pact conjured up in
Pakistan a sense of capitulation. If the agreement failed to provide
for troop withdrawals and repatriation of POWs, the pact would be
seen as the product of negotiations under duress. The Pakistani
President said it would be a ‘great tragedy’ if agreement on
repatriation of POWs were to ‘flounder on Sheikh Mujib’s caprice’. As
regards Kashmir, Bhutto said that ‘in the foreseeable future an
agreement will emerge. It will evolve into a settlement. Let there be a
line of peace, let people come and go. Let us not fight over it.’ ‘My
back is to the wall,’ he pleaded. ‘I cannot make any more
concessions.’ At this point, T.N. Kaul intervened to highlight India’s
principal requirement. ‘If in Jammu & Kashmir the Line of Actual
Control could be made into a line of peace, other steps could follow,’
he stated.25
Thus, the Simla conference remained deadlocked till the very last
day. Almost the only positive result of the discussions at the level of
officials was convergence on the title of a possible accord – that it
should be called an ‘agreement’, rather than a ‘treaty’ (as India had
proposed) or a mere ‘joint communique’ (as suggested by Pakistan)!
India had presented two drafts in an attempt to reach an agreement
on the ‘elements of durable peace’ – focusing on peaceful settlement