elevated himself to the rank of field marshal – claimed to be the first
‘elected’ president of Pakistan.
In March 1962, a new constitution was introduced. This provided
for a president empowered to act as the single ‘focal point’ of power.
Provision was made for a national assembly as well as for provincial
assemblies for each of the two wings of the country. Rejecting the
Bengali demand for representation in proportion to population,
Ayub’s constitution provided for parity between the two wings in the
National Assembly. Legislation enacted by the National Assembly
could pass into law only if it received the president’s approval. The
president was empowered to appoint and dismiss central ministers
and the two provincial governors without reference to the National
Assembly. The provincial governors had similar powers to appoint
and dismiss cabinets in their respective jurisdictions, without
reference to the provincial assemblies. They were answerable to the
president alone and held office at his pleasure. Ayub detested
political parties, and his constitution initially had no provision for
them. However, legislation was later enacted to permit their
functioning, partly because of public pressure and partly because it
dawned on Ayub that parties were not totally devoid of merit – they
could be used to ‘organize members on the basis of party rule and
discipline’ and to ‘explain government policies to the people’. 14 He
saw no role for political parties in the decision-making process.
Ayub’s announcement was greeted with outraged protests from
politicians, intellectuals and the general public in both wings.
Demands were raised for abrogation of the new constitution and
restoration of fundamental rights. In Dhaka, university students went
on strike, burnt copies of the constitution and demanded the release
of Suhrawardy and other political leaders who had been incarcerated
on grounds of national security. The National Democratic Front
launched by Suhrawardy brought together political parties from both
wings on a common platform for democratic rights. ‘The country
started behaving like a wild horse that had been captured but not yet
tamed,’ Ayub complained in his memoirs. ‘Every time you try to
stroke it affectionately or feed it, it bites you and kicks you.’15