were also inducted as freedom fighters.9 Special care was taken to
exclude volunteers who might have links to Naxalite or pro-Chinese
extremist groups. The Indian authorities were always conscious of
the possibility that weapons supplied to the guerrillas might end up in
Naxalite hands or in the clandestine arms market.
An important development was the raising in mid-May of a force of
frogmen for sabotage operations to disrupt sea and inland river
transport. Very early in the day, Tajuddin and Osmani appreciated
the importance of these operations in the riverine terrain of
Bangladesh. An Indian naval team under Lt Cdr Samant was
responsible for training the force, which constituted the fledgling
Bangladesh navy. Samant led from the front in operations within
Bangladesh and would be awarded the Maha Vir Chakra for his role
in 1971.10
In October, a small Bangladesh Air Force was established under
Group Captain A.K. Khondaker. Their assets consisted of two aircraft
(a Dakota and an Otter) and two helicopters.11
It is clear from Manekshaw’s directive that India planned for a short
guerrilla campaign, not a full-fledged drawn-out guerrilla war. India
feared that in a prolonged guerrilla war, leadership would pass into
the hands of pro-Naxalite and pro-Chinese elements. New Delhi
planned the guerrilla operations as a short-duration strategy aimed
at preparing favourable conditions for a quick and decisive
conventional campaign. The guerrillas would play their part by
destroying the communications and transportation infrastructure on
which the Pakistani army was dependent, by forcing dispersal of
Pakistani troops and isolating them from their support areas, and by
undermining the opponent’s morale. In the final stage of a classic
guerrilla war, the guerrillas convert themselves into a regular army. In
the last phase of the 1971 war, the guerrillas operated as an adjunct
or auxiliary to the regular forces of India and Bangladesh.
Mukti Bahini (April–June)
Manekshaw’s instructions were broadly consistent with the outline
plan formulated by the Mukti Bahini commanders at their Teliapara