flow of intelligence.
On 12 April, just days after Tajuddin’s meetings with Indira Gandhi,
New Delhi adopted a plan named ‘Operation Jackpot’. Its broad
objective was:
To build up the strength of Bangla Desh Forces to keep West Pakistani
forces tied down in a running struggle and to consolidate their hold on
peripheral territories with a view to roll West Pak forces back and
administer a crushing blow with such open assistances as may be needed
eventually. 6
In the next few weeks, India took a number of policy decisions,
which in their totality constituted a grand strategy to assist the birth
of an independent Bangladesh and secure speedy recognition of the
new state by the international community. These decisions
encompassed assistance to a government-in-exile, asylum for the
torrent of refugees fleeing the place, mobilization of resources for
their sustenance, a slew of diplomatic initiatives, training and
equipping of freedom fighters, and military plans for Indian
intervention at the final stage. All the resources of the state – military,
political and economic – were mobilized to serve the national aim.
Nature of the challenge
Stung by public criticism of the government’s ‘inaction’, some of Mrs
Gandhi’s cabinet colleagues were asking for immediate military
intervention in April. To silence them, the prime minister asked the
army chief, Gen. Sam Manekshaw, for his opinion, knowing full well
that he would need time to prepare for a major unplanned
contingency.7 Failing to see through the prime minister’s political
ploy, Manekshaw, a gifted raconteur, circulated a colourful tale about
how he had restrained Mrs Gandhi from ordering the Indian army to
march into East Pakistan in April. The true reason for the
government’s decision have been spelled out by Maj. Gen.
Sukhwant Singh, who served as deputy director of military
operations in 1971. Sukhwant Singh recollects:
. . . political compulsions clinched the issue [of timing] . . . if the creation of
an independent Bangladesh was achieved by Indian military action, how
was its domestic and external viability to be assured without its recognition