deception to provide cover for Kissinger’s secret trip to Beijing.
(Secretary of State Rogers was informed about Kissinger’s China
visit shortly before the flight took off!) The plan was implemented
flawlessly, and the world was taken by total surprise when it was
revealed that the Nixon’s assistant for national security affairs had
visited Beijing and that the US president himself would soon visit
China. For India, it came as a double surprise. The revelation of a
Pakistani role in the US–China breakthrough raised questions about
its implications for US policy in the South Asia crisis.
The Jha telegram
Nixon chaired a meeting of the National Security Council on 16 July
to consider the implications of the breakthrough in Sino-US ties for
US policy in South Asia. He opened the meeting by stating that the
situation in the subcontinent posed enormous risks for America’s
China policy. It was imperative that the Pakistanis not be
embarrassed at this time. World opinion was on the side of the
Indians, but they were ‘a slippery, treacherous people’. The US could
not allow a war in the region until ‘we take this journey’ to Beijing.
Acknowledging that he had ‘a bias’, he said he would cut off all
economic aid to the Indians if ‘they mess around in East Pakistan’.
Kissinger agreed that India seemed bent on war. By linking a
solution to the refugee problem with an overall political solution, India
appeared to be using the refugees for a political purpose. Kissinger
said that he thought China would intervene if war broke out. If that
came to pass, ‘everything we have done [with China] will go down
the drain’.19
It might be noted that by this time the United States no longer
required a Pakistani channel for communicating with China. A direct
channel had been established at the conclusion of Kissinger’s trip.
Kissinger’s original justification for keeping Pakistan in good humour
had ceased to be valid, but the president obviously had other
reasons for humouring Yahya. Secondly, Kissinger’s assessment of
Chinese intentions was wide of the mark. We now know that China
did not at any stage commit itself to direct military intervention in