Bangladesh forces under the command of Indian army formations.
Col. Osmani, commander-in-chief of the Bangladesh forces, initially
objected to this arrangement, but finally fell in with the views of the
cabinet.5 This decision was the precursor to the Joint Command
formed after the outbreak of war.
With the intensification of Mukti Bahini cross-border operations in
October, the scale and intensity of the Pakistani response registered
a corresponding increase. Indian border outposts came under heavy
shelling from Pakistani artillery. In response to this development,
New Delhi decided in November to allow the Indian army to cross
the border up to a distance of 10 miles in order to silence Pakistani
guns. In carrying out these instructions, the army also took care to
secure specific positions that would strengthen its offensive posture,
with an eye on the impending war.6
This led to some major battles between Indian and Pakistani
troops, involving significant casualties on both sides. On 20
November, Indian forces launched an operation in the Boyra area, in
the course of which Pakistan lost fourteen tanks and three aircraft.
On 23 November, a determined attack was launched against the
Pakistani forces in Hilli on 23 November, on orders from Manekshaw.
In the heavy fighting that ensued, Indian losses included sixty-seven
killed and ninety wounded. Indian forces were able to register some
advances, but Pakistan held onto Hilli itself till the outbreak of war.
Maj. Gen. Jacob summed up his assessment of the net effect of the
November operations:
Pakistanis were thrown off balance and our strategy of drawing the
Pakistanis to the border began to work. We secured suitable jumping off
places, particularly where obstacles had to be crossed, and such
operations also gave our troops realistic initiation into battle.7
A Pakistani military analyst offers a similar assessment:
By November 20, we [Pakistanis] had lost most of the border outposts 
. . . Indian forces had established their forward bases inside our territory to
facilitate offensive operations.8
Yahya Khan reacted to these developments by accusing India on
22 November of launching an ‘all-out attack against East Pakistan’.
He proclaimed a state of national emergency the following day.