2. Birth of a Nation
On assuming office as president and chief martial law administrator,
Yahya announced his intention of holding free and fair elections to
pave the way for a new constitution. He conceded the Bengali
demand for parliamentary representation in proportion to population.
(This gave East Pakistan a majority of 162 seats in the 302-member
National Assembly.) The assembly thus elected was to draw up a
new constitution within sixty days – a formidable task, considering
that it took Pakistan almost twenty years to produce its first
constitution. To ensure that the new constitution protected the
interests of the army, Yahya decreed that his ‘authentication’ was
required for it to come into effect.
Pakistan held its first general elections in December 1970, almost a
quarter of a century after gaining independence. In the eastern wing,
the Awami League, under Mujib’s leadership, succeeded in
converting the election campaign into a virtual referendum on the Six
Points. Right-wing parties calling for a strong Centre found no
support from the public. Left-wing parties championed the regional
cause, but questioned whether the rights of East Bengal could be
achieved through constitutional means. The veteran peasant leader
Maulana Bhashani called for independence and declared that his
party, the National Awami Party (B), would boycott the elections.
In the event, the Awami League won 160 of the 162 East Pakistani
seats for the national legislature, thereby gaining an absolute
majority in the house of 300. In West Pakistan, Bhutto’s PPP won 81
of the 140 seats. Significantly, the PPP did not contest a single seat
in the eastern wing, while the Awami League fielded only seven
candidates in West Pakistan, all of whom were defeated. The
Pakistani general elections saw two separate campaigns – in East
and West Pakistan, respectively – featuring different parties and
contrasting issues.
The results took Yahya by surprise. Military intelligence estimates
had predicted that the Awami League would win no more than 46–70