. . . 129
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End)
Sai , ae
¢ : <% 3 4 S es
: ghar ks MAJ GEN GUL HASAN KHAN
CHIEF OF THE GENERAL
STAFF PAKISTAN ARMY 1971
phar a :
wiveal sd me
iz “ oe a
+ = ce aN ee: = SIREN mis
> q 2 AVS), j os ; rs = a
ae o>. > alee etiee eS ae
VICE ADMIRAL S. M. ae GF ae 8 = s ore 7. 3m
GOVERNOR & MLA, Seth be.
EAST PAKISTAN z Bs Ses:

130 Tragedy of Errors
» ti " 3 =
4 j i 7
——
Ls LT GEN
4 ') SAHTBZADA YAQUB KHAy
oe ') COMMANDER EASTERN
so wie F COMMAND,
a th = GOVERNOR EAST PAKISTA
% 3 \
—_—
e,
" , x Rawr ae
ve e: i
‘’ WY bs . Bie:
a \ 0 ha
w NG eee
§ v |
My
LT GEN TIKKA KHAN . " Z
COMMANDER EASTERN ws dca
COMMAND, i he
GOVERNOR FAST PAKISTAN |

: |
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 181
The President appointed a Council of Admin} ; ir ¢
consisted of himself as the CMLA and his eae pn
Lieutenant General Abdul Hamid Khan, Vice Admiral a; 4
Ahsan and Air Marshal Nur Khan as Martial law administrators
(MLAs). General Peerzada acted as the secretary of the Council of |
Administration. Each member of the Council had three or four
ministries under him. Later in August, 1969 a civilian cabinet of
) Vg members, five from each wing including one retired general
was instaled. The Bengalis were reluctant to join the cabinet as
joining it meant siding with a military regime which was not
appreciated in the eastern wing. General Peerzada says that he
had to coerce them to join the cabinet. The Bengali members were
Anwar-ul-Haq, Dr. A.M. Malik, Professor Shamsul Haq and G. W.
Choudhry.
The cabinet, however, did not have any powers as these
remained with the CMLA Secretariat and the senior bureaucrats,
Major General Sher Ali Khan, who was the minister of
information in this cabinet, felt that his colleagues had little
confidence in themselves as they represented no political party or
constituency. They realised that they were there only to show a
civilian face to a military government!9,
This view was expressed by most of the politicians and
intellectuals interviewed by the author in Dhaka. "The central —
leadership did not come through any political process and hence ,“
did not represent the polity of Pakistan" said Amir-ul-Islam \
‘Politicians should have a representative character" opined Munir- +’
ul-Hussein, editor of the Ittefaq. "Nazimuddin, Nur-ul-Amin,
Whaeed-uz-Zaman, Subur Khan, Mahmood Ali and Khairuddin
were all swimming against the current” were Dr Kamal Hussain’s
omments on the Bengali representation at the centre. “All
‘awanted people were picked up"”” remarked Khondkar Mushtaq,
When I told him that Bengalis got an equal share in the cabinets of
Ayub and Yahya.
General Peerzada, however, maintains that the civilian cabinet
Was quite helpful as in the regular weekly meetings some of them
Were quite vocal and assertive in giving their views. The last word,
of course, was always that of General Yahya said Peerzada.
_ The effective element of president Yahya’s government was the .
[MLA’s Secretariat headed by General Peerzada, and the Martial
" Administrators, (ndtygovernorg)ih;the provinces, Though a

132
Tragedy of Errors
the appointments of the president were made by Major Geng *
Muhammad Ishaq Khan who was his military secretary, Geng)
Peerzada, though a soft spoken officer with a frail constitution, i
reputed waihawe been very authoritative. He was indeed the key
person in the chain of command. Having served under Gener
Yahya Khan twice before he had gained his complete trust ap;
confidence. It was through him that all files had to move befor
reaching the president, as is the case in all senior headquartey,
following the chief of staff system. Direct access of ministers an
secretaries to General Yahya was rare as the PSO kept a tigh
reign on the governmental machinery. Politicians, cabinet
ministers, senior bureaucrats, military officers quite often had ty
bide their time in the PSO’s office before being ushered in to the
president’s chamber, General Peerzada, there: fore, developed a
close relationship with quite a few of them. Some did not
appreciate his stern attitude.
The cabinet meetings, at least initially, did take place every
week which were chaired by General Yahya. There was also a
regular principal staff officer’s (PSO) conference at GHQ every
week. The former dealt with peripheral matters, the latter more
substantive ones particularly those relating to defence. The major
decisions affecting Pakistan’s security, however, were taken bya
kitchen cabinet consisting of General Yahya and his close aides
Chief of Staff, General Abdul Hamid, Quarter Master Gener2l
Abu Bakar Osman Mitha and National Security Chief, Major
General Ghulam Umar who used to meet after office hou!’
\Fateful decisions about the future of the country were mostly
‘taken by them. Mr, Bhutto occasionally found his way also into
this small group. .
Reaction in East Pakistan
Thyagh there was no immediate adverse reaction to Gene
Yahya’s take over in East Bengal. sj rally
satisfied at Ayub’s departure thes ee —— were a was
not looked at favourably in ‘he PoneinialOn of martial lav tel
grudgingly”! said professor onic Schon wing. It was ag it |
came as a shock to them22 writ Seeman Talugdar. In chat |
After a short period of eiea es General Fazal Mugeem ihe,
_ {new West Pakistani leadershiy aches sesentment agai n
Pakistan from now on, b ship returned. The movement in #4 |
» €came more political in nature. |
|

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) we
Issues Faced “
The issues faced by Yahya, i .
(1) the possible dissolution of One Unit we ns teking ONE, WORE:
between the two wings (it was now unacce ists question of parity
disciple Sheikh Mujib and his followers) os to Suharwardy’s
elections (how soon could they be held and u ; ie ns. :
framework)? (4) should the accepted democrati pr aan |
one vote be given to the people? (5) should th Eight of one ee
relationship be decided before the elections or wee
elected constituent assembly to decide .? (6) should the 1 pe
1962 Constitution be revived ? (7) what should be th eae
of the central legislature unicameral or bi pew
should be the representation of ea i eee mal “vet
ch province or wing i
the two Houses and ir ar sv
(8) how to remove the economic dispari
between the two wings expeditiously ? - eid
It was a pi iti :
rel teying tome tak apwocent eee an
| a political structure. ne
i
| General Yahya took an immediate decision of holding elections
on the basis of one man one vote and allowing full political
activity. This is what he pledged to the country in his very first
broadcast to the nation on March 26, 196923, He also broke One »
Unit and re-introduced the four provinces in West Pakistan.
These two steps had far reaching consequences and should not
have been taken by an individual or a coterie of aides alone. The
1956 Constitution had been agreed upon by two very senior and
respected Bengali leaders. Both Maulvi Fazal-ul-Haq and Hussein
Shaheed Suharwardy had given their acceptance to the parity
between the two wings. Granted that there was some
dissatisfaction on this issue in East Pakistan but whether parity
should be done away with or not could have been left to the
elected national assembly to decide.
It is true that a number of leading politicians including Mian
smta Khan Daulatana, chief of the Council Muslim League, .
ae Shaukat Hayat Khan and of course the aggressive Young
dis: hutto of the Pakistan People’s Party, were asking for the
oe of One Unit. The two East Pakistani stalwarts Sheikh
digee e Rahman and Maulana Bhashani_ also wanted the
emberment of One Unit and the abolition ,of the parity

134 |
Tragedy of Errors |
formula between the two wings. Choudhry Muhammad Ali ang
Malik Abdul Qasim were the only two who opposed the break y,
of One Unit and wanted this decision to be left to an electeg
national assembly “a
General Peerzada defends the break up of the parity formul,
between the wings by saying that Mujib-ur-Rahman was against
parity and that parity had not really been accepted by the
Bengilis. He went on to say that no body in West Pakistan
shouted heavily against the breaking of parity.
Yahya clarified some of these points in his speech to the nation |
on July 28, 1969.,"My mind is absolutely open on these subjects, |
_. The decision must be with the people. The only requirement that] |
would insist upon is that any constitution or any form of |
government that the people of Pakistan adopt for themselves must
v seater to the ideology and integrity of Pakistan"*. Yahya was quite
firm that if any individual or any group OF any party which
propagated against the basic principles of Islam and the ideology
and integrity of Pakistan would incur “the wrath of the people and
their armed forces”. He stuck to his word when he launched his
military action on March 26, 1971. But the fact that that proved to
be the proverbial last straw, did not strike him then.
Yahya, unlike. other heads of state, did realise that East
Pakistan was getting a raw deal and that they were, in his words,
.. “fully justified in being dissatisfied with this state of affairs’”®. He
~ was determined to put an end to this situation. In his address to
the nation on November 28, 1969 he noted that "the requirement
would appear to be maximum autonomy to the two-wings of
Pakistan as long as it does not impair with the national integrity
and solidarity of the country"”’.
4 General Yahya in his later years had begun to succumb 1
/ personal weaknesses which not only caused frequent
embarrassment to him and to the nation as a whole but
sometimes impaired on his judgment and ability to handle 4 vely
delicate political situation. Every step taken had to be carefully
weighed and assessed to ensure that the after effects of the
decisions would ft be hing ta th integrity of the country. "
himself with 1 9 be because, barring a few, he had surrou? al
~  seekin # Se stent into Selfish politicians, pleas”
ig generals and pliant bu acy tied him in a web £™
a

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 135
where he could not extricate himself without causing a” ,
which could shake his own foundation. Some eee it if
went to the extent of saying that ‘pimps’ ruled the country after -”
dark.
General Yahya, however, appeared to be sincere in handing
over power to the elected representatives of the people and to do
so in the accepted democratic manner, as long as it did not affect
the solidarity and integrity of the country which became the real
stumbling block later. He decided to allow political activity and
gave considerable freedom to the press.
A year after taking over, General Yahya announced the
conditions under which the next elections for the national and
provincial assemblies would be held. This was done by issuing a
Legal Frame Work Order (LFO). The important ingredients of
(which were:-
° \Fundamental Principles of Constitution (Article 20/
The Constitution shall be so framed as to embody the following
fundamental principles: a
1. Pakistan shall be a Federal Republic to be known as the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan in which the provinces and
other territories which are now and may hereinafter, be
included in Pakistan, shall be so united in a federation that
the independence, the territorial integrity and the national
solidarity of Pakistan are ensured [and that the unity of the
federation is not in any manner impaired.
\/ 2. a. Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of
Pakistan shall be preserved and
b. the Head of the State shall be a Muslim.
3. a. Adherence to fundamental principles of democracy shall
be ensured by providing direct ahd free periodical
elections to the Federal and the Provincial legislatures
on the basis of population and adult franchise;
b. the fundamental rights of the citizens shall be laid down
and guaranteed; !
C. the independence of the judiciary in the matter of
dispensation of justice and enforcement of the
fundamental rights shall be secured.

136
Tragedy of Errors
4. All powers including legislative, administrative ,
financial, shall be so distrib uted between the feder
government ,that the provinces shall have maxim.
autonomy,” that is to say maximum legislatiy,
administrative and financial powers but the fede.)
government shall also have adequate powers including
legislative, administrative and financial powers, 4,
discharge its responsibilities in relation to external anq
internal affairs and to preserve the independence anq
territorial integrity of the country.
5. It shall be ensured that:
a. the people of all areas in Pakistan shall be enabled tp
participate fully in all forms of national activities; and
b. within a specified . period, ‘economic and all other
dippers between the provinces and between different
as in a province,are removed by the adoption of
statutory and other measures.
Time for Framing the Constitution (Article 24)
The National Assembly shall frame the Constitution in the
form of a Bill to be called the Constitution Bill within a period
¢ of one hundred and twenty days from the date of its first
‘2 meeting and on its failure to do so shall stand dissolved.
| Authentication of the Constitution (Article 25)
The Constitution Bill as passed by the National Assembly,
shall be presented to the President for authentification. The
National Assembly shall stand dissolved in the event that
authentification is refused.
Purpose for which Assembly may meet (Article 26)
1. Save as provided in this order for the purpose of framing @
Constitution for Pakistan, the National Assembly shall no!
meet in that capacity. until the Constitution Bill passed by
that Assembly and authenticated by the President,
come into force.
2. A provincial-assembly shall not be summoned to meet unti
after the Constitutional Bill passed by the nation
en been authenticated by the President, and hes
come into force.

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 137
Comments
The LFO did specify a large number iti
authors thought would ensure that an eee "4 aaa
acceptable to the majority of the people of Pakistan ‘would “he
| democratically installed and that the solidarity and integrity of the
country would also be assured. However, the LFO did not receive
the willing approval of the politicians and some senior generals. It
was criticised in East Pakistan as it was considered a retreat from
the plan put forward by Yahya on November 28, 1969%8. The
authentication by the President of the constitution framed by the
newly elected members of the national assembly was considered
by the Bengalis to be a curtailment of the sovereignty of the
parliament. Article 25 Gostheniestion) was considered to be
totally undemocratic and article 27 (according to which any
question or doubt as to the interpretation of the LFO would be
resolved by the President) created doubts about the sincerity of
the army to hand over power. Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman is
reported to have said "I shall tear LFO to pieces as soon as the
elections are over"29. He knew he could do that if he gained the
overwheming support of the East Pakistan electorate.
Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto was apprehensive that the elections held’ ‘/
under the LFO could endanger the integrity of Pakistan*’, He did
not approve of the 120 days time limit after the elections to frame
a constitution. He had also wanted the autonomy issue to be
~ settled before the people’s mandate was asked for, either through
parleys between political leaders or by means of a retereniusy | q
In this he was supported by several generals. They wanted a/’
‘ constitutional document prepared before the elections , which
, would define the limits of provincial autonomy. If this had been
done and East Pakistan, due to its geographical separation from
West Pakistan, was given a large measure of provincial autonomy
in the LFO, Sheikh Mujib may not have been able to whip up the
bitterness and anger against the Punjabis and spit. fire against the |
West Pakistani leadership as he did during the election ey
is a correct view expressed by a western author”.
The Legal Frame Work Order had not been accepted willingly
by the iwo-main contenders for the ‘throne’. Mujib had t ay
intention of adhering to it,and Bhutto had serious reservations. */
- THe biewest flaw in the LFO was not
was, therefore, a non starter. The biggest a the elected
Specifying the fact that a constitution framed by the

138
Tragedy of Errors
constituent assembly could only be accepted for the Presidenp,
authentication if atleast two third of the members of parliamen,
approved it. In the absence of this clarification in the LFO th,
simple majority clause would have applied giving East Pakistan
smooth sailing of a constitution based on their 6-Points formula
G.W. Chowdhry, the civilian member of Yahya’s cabinet, claims
that "the clause of 60 per cent votes from the total members of the
“legislature for passing a constitution was dropped by General
Yahya",
The framers of the LFO were, however, sitting smugly as they
had included in this document that no one has the right to offer a
solution which would adversely affect the solidarity of the people
of Pakistan. This according to the LFO ‘none would tolerate’.
They felt quite satisfied by including in it the words ‘The
provinces shall be so united in a federation that the independence,
territorial integrity and: the national solidarity of Pakistan are
ensured and that the unity of the federation is not in any way
impaired’. harm
But at no time was Mujib warned of violating the LFO. In fact
the President did not consider anything wrong with the 6 Points.
CMLA Headquarters even confirmed that "preaching of 6 Points”
was not against Martial law Regulation 60°25, Perhaps General
Yahya and his close aides felt that the 6-Points formula was
merely an election slogan to win votes and that the Awami League
would modify them when it comes to framing the constitution.
The reality of the situation during the electioneering campaign
in 1970 was that Mujib-ur-Rahman, the rabble rouser_that he
was, had succeeded in galvanising the vast majority of the
Bengalis towards attaining their goal of maximum autonomy
bordering on separation. Unfortunately no government at the
Centre, military or civil, could have prevented Mujib and his
followers from preaching his 6 Points which by then had become
the demand of the vast majority of the Bengalis.
Although Yahya kept repeating that he would not tolerate.a?y
scheme which would mean the break up of the country he had n°
| power left to enforce his statements. His military commanders in
[, Hast Pakistan were not inclined nor had they the military muscle
‘jo face the people of East Pakistan in 1970.

