India’s Role in the break Up of Pakista 281
stan
India mobilised world publi ii
plea that India’s Spee con toe 'nlon against Pakistan on th
the Bengali refugees. In act fing affected by the pr 5
ee ual fact the a € presence of
over them was a pittance compared to th mount of money spent
on the Afghan refugees in a period of r sum spent by Pakistan
economic burden came to over $ 2 billi 1 long years. Pakistan’s
spend more than $ 300 million in the lon whereas India did not
shown to the Bengali refugees Nes month’s ‘hospitality’
neighbouring ingen provinces. India claime Bengal and the
666.67 million”’. She imposed a surchar ed that she spent $
fares more to highlight the burden on sia of 5% on rail and air
her own people agree to her policy of usi S economy than to make
Pakistan problem. On the other han at force to settle the East
wanted their government to welcom me S parliamentarians
Bengal. Shri Jyotomoy Basu, speaki e t e refugees from: East
May, 1971 asked su, speaking in the Lok Sabha
y; ed the government to direct official on 31
not to stop the evacuees from coming into our comme he border
India’s claims that i ae |
pakistan Eescauize. of the wan ‘o vee to get directly involved in Kast |
belied by the fact th 0 millions of Bengali refugees jis
oanenntratine WA armed Pa the Indian high command began |
early as Feb oe i. oa orces close to the East Pakistan border as
India, ‘Y> when no East Bengal refugee had entered
If refugees was the main issue, India should h ,
United Nations for assistance as was d b aman La
contrary India refu a ; one by Pakistan. On the
wlharnataacun to accept UN observers to assess the
Delhi dia n . ed by India to overcome the refugee problem. New
high comm even permit Prince Sadruddin Agha Khan, the UN
Nivea =e for refugees, to visit the refugee camps. The
the relev nto India showed their unwillingness to cooperate with
Sete, United Nation agencies. India did not accept UN
body mrs eneral, U Thant’s, mediatory role. When the world
Pakistan a arrange the repatriation of the refugees back to East
the refi er the law and order jhad improved, India prevented
told th ae from leaving". Indian foreign secretary T.K. Kaul
Sarees nited States on 16 July that India would not accept UN
nel on its side of the border even to handle refugees".
vii further stated that India would not accept any proposal
Us ch would curb guerrilla activity from its territory’ . It rejected
advice to control the guerrillas operating from India. When the

ase Tragedy of Errors
World Health Organization wanted to know what help India
needed to alleviate the suffering of the hg Gandhi is-
reported to have avoided the answers directly . Infact Shri Indrajit
Gupta, member of parliament from Alipore, complained in the
Lok Sabha that relief goods coming from Denmark, Canada and
UN were not being cleared from Dum Dum Airport, Calcutta’,
India rejected Yahya’s plan of solving the East Pakistan Crisis in
Mid-November, 1971, which included among other points, the
return of the refugees with dignity and honour“. /
Even K. Subramanyam admits that India did not dismember
Pakistan to solve the refugee problem. "To maintain that is utter
rubbish. India went to war to satisfy the nationalist and popular
~ view that the dismemberment of Pakistan was in the long interest
of India"*, said the Indian security analyst.
Subramanyam accepts that the government of India did not
even try to close the border but even allowed the refugees to come.
‘In a sense the commitment of the government of India to the
liberation of Bangladesh was implicit in this decision"*® confessed
Subramanyam. As against this in 1974-75 the Border Security
Force of India turned back 39,000 Bangladesh refugees trying to
enter Assam (India).
The Indian Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA)
based in New Delhi and, part of the Indian Ministry of Defence ;
ine the i. of looking after the refugees. According to thé ,,
would amount to $ 900 million within a year. They '
concluded that a “war with Pakistan would be cheaper"7,
io we me Gandhi succeeded in her mission of portraying
were still ae lein the oom aS most brutal and fascist, there
taken in b th © wnited States and elsewhere who were not
; y the sweet talk of the Iron Lad Th B Marton,
while speaking at the anny ] ay. 1 homas
Studies in Chi __,_> Meeting of the Association for Asian
| Vhicago, Illinois, on 30 March, 197 d India
for its ‘evil’ : . 1, condemned Ir
oF Its. intentions. He wrote in his h time in
history had the inter paper that at no
any € Internal affairs of one country b ‘ustify
the invasion and di ntry been used to ju
; a Ismemberment of another try48. "India’s
Intervention in the Bang] ee ee COURT
inception. wh angiadesh Crisis within 48 hours of its
; : ion. M en not a single refugee had gone to India.could hardly
* was ed merely as furthering a desire deg comin the
cmocratic rights of the Bengalis" said Marton‘9, US Secretary of

India’s Role in the break UP Of Pakistan =e
William Rogers expressed his app; , —
ae political problem that is created in the nw = he said if
nse of armed forces then there is no end to war"50_ sus led the
indian Propaganda
The agitation in East Pakistan against Prec:
gave India the opportunity they were looking vehi 1969 -
uprising against the prolonged military regime iia. € mass
; . » Which was blamed
for not removing the causes of the alienation of the Bengalis fr
their co-citizens in the West, provided fertile ground fos balla
carry out its propaganda in favour of the breaking away of the
province from West Pakistan.
All Tea Hallo (AIR) began a regular programme of
highlighting Mujib’s 6-Points formula for regional autonofny, It
went beyond giving its listeners news about the internal
developments in a neighbouring country. AIR carried out a well
planned propaganda of the so-called exploitation of East Bengal by
West Pakistang with the aim of causing hatred between the
Bengalis and Punjabis. AIR station at Calcutta was broadcasting a
programme every evening entitled Apper Bengla, Oupar Bengla
(this side and the other side of Bengal) openly supporting the
cause of Bangladesh®! - (Little did they realise then that they
would be paid in the same coin twenty years later when the
Kashmiris would rise up against them and Pakistan would give
them moral support). Indian embassies abroad were asked to
build up the image of Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman as a national
leader and one who was fighting for his democratic rights.
Throughout 1970 India had been highlighting the economic
disparity between the two wings and the denial of the politica
rights of East Bengal in particular. Delhi, therefore, ao y,
favourably to the Awami League’s victory in the December, ~~
elections. There was a “euphoric feeling”. said sepa ae
new chapter in Indo-Pakistan relations would open up. ‘ake po
Would be forgotten. Pakistan military establishment a ie?
down. The Pakistani market would be open to a to
When Yahya showed signs of not naa sa ea the
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, Indian leaders were agar’ fuel to the
Postponement of the national assembly gave @ he boil..The .
Indians to bri ‘mation in East Pakistan to the Dol
ring the situation in ast - felamabad increased.
Propaganda against the military regime 1”

284 Tragedy of Errors
‘s carried out a psy-warfare agai
The septa Sek a military action. Notwithstanding rs the
Army aftet © fact
PO ae rmy did go beyond the call of duty. stories of Magg
tha ers were highly exaggerated by the ‘Akashwani* (ay Indig
mur ). Reports of Indian commandos taking part in Subversive
en inside East Pakistan along with the Bengali dissidents
em to be received soon after the postponement of the national?
eae session®4. A banner headline of an Indian news. Paper
the Hindustan Standard, reported the fall of Dacca in April,197),
Maharajkrishan Rasgotra, who had been posted to the Indian
mission in Washington as the deputy high commissioner in 1969
was directed by Mrs Gandhi ta Say ane ae en Richa
away from his alleged pro-Pakistan stand. gotra
ae aster Ge reports from Indian intelligence sources on the
atrocities being committed by the Pakistan army in East Pakistan
after the military action. He had them published in the USA in
/ the form of two books known as Red and Green Book and had
them widely distributed to the US Congress, universities ang
press media. He also arranged to send about 40 US Senators
including Edward Kennedy, a strong supporter of India, to visit
the refugee camps. They went back convinced that India would be
justified in intervening militarily because of the burden they were
facing”,
In New Delhi, S.K, Singh, the spokesman of the ministry of
external affairs, was busy indexing the material on the military
crackdown in East Pakistan. Information coming in from the
Indian high commission in Dacca, press clippings of the Indian
and foreign newspapers, telexes from embassies abroad were all
put together and compiled into two volumes entitled Bangladesh’
Documents. He held press briefing daily to give a detailed account
of the happenings in East Pakistan. Foreign embassies picked up
the information given by SK and telexed it to their capitals. The
world got a one-sided picture.
. Singh later visited the Soviet Union, Germany, France, United
Kingdom and Canada and played up the refugee issue. Asking
them to help India to get rid of them. Though the real intention
hie their sympathy so that when the Indian army attaches
; vectiot p Would accept it as an essential surg

India's Role in the break up of Pakistan 285
Immediately after the military crackdown . th ;
qimes began splashing false and exaggerated Stories janie
glleged successes of the Mukti Bahini‘té try’ and boost up their
morale and encourage other Bengalis to join them. Tikka was
pelieved killed, whole units of the Pakistan army were shown as
having surrended. Three cantonments, according to the paper
had been freed. According to the Indian media Mujib was
directing the freedom struggle from Chittagong. Mujib, though
ander arrest in West Pakistan was being quoted Blood for Blood !
calls Mujib". "Newspapers reported battles that were never there" °
observed Kuldip Nayar*’.
Radio Bangladesh was allowed to be set up in Calcutta and was
used extensively for broadcasting exaggerated stories of alleged
genocide of the Bengali population by the Pakistan army. When
Mr. Hussein Ali of the Pakistan foreign service serving as
Pakistan's deputy high commissioner in Calcutta defected, he =
established the first Bangladesh mission in an outside country »
eight a before Bangladesh became a reality. This was only
made possible, by the encouragement and support received from
the government of India. Although the existence of Bangladesh
had been unofficially recognised by India, statements by the
Awami League leaders Serj however, cleared by the Indians to
see that nothing;contrary t ‘Indian propaganda is_said. Any hint
of creating affinity between East and West Bengal was also to be
watched. They were apprehensive of a demand building up for an
independent Bengal which would incorporate their territory as
well, ,
Blatant and persistent propaganda about the refugees and
atrocities committed by West Pakistan troops in Western capitals
made their own military intervention appear as correct to restore
normalcy, Western authors were not wrong in blaming Pakistan's —
poor press coverage and Pakistan’s clumsy handling of the news
media which indeed provided India with the high ground from
which to dominate the international public debate. This is why
India succeeded in winning world support for Bangladesh, so
when UNGA voted 104 to 11 with 10 abstentions.favouring an
iMmediate ceasfire and withdrawal of forces, no heed was paid to
this resolution. India also attempted and succeeded in achieving a
— military victory to ensure that world opinion does not
ange. ‘2

286 Tragedy of Errors .
GANGA Incident
Having engineered the hijacking of GANGA, an Indian Folke,
aircraft, to Lahore on it’s flight from Delhi to Sirinagar, on 2]
February, 1971, India banned the overflights, over it’s territory,
from West Pakistan to East Pakistan. This act was totally
unjustified and against ICAO conventions. Muslim countries plea
to India to lift the ban on overflights was rejected®*. This forced
PIA to take the long and circuitous route through Colombo to
reach East Pakistan reducing the ability to assist the
administration in the eastern wing in dealing with the internal
| situation in that province.
Build up of Forces |
Six additional Indian divisions are reported to have moved into
West Bengal “on the pretext that these regular troops were needed
to control West Bengal’s unarmed left wing dissidents" writes
Joseph Alsop. From a strength of only 7,000 in normal times,the
force in West Bengal, increased to 90,000 by March, 1971 | Wvell
before the military” action by the Army in East Pakistan.
Additional battalions of the Border Security Force were inducted
bringing their total upto twenty five’.
Some western writers accepted the Indian version that the
build up of Indian forces around East Pakistan as early as
February, 1971 was due to India feeling threatened because of an
increase in Pakistani forces in East Pakistan. This argument fails
on two counts: (1) Troops in East Pakistan were increased after 1
March, 1971 when the internal situation became serious due to
the postponement of the national assembly session. The increase
in the strength of the Indian Army around East Pakistan was
before 1 March; (2) Even with the creation of some adhoc infantty
divisions with no artillery armour or engineer support,and with
only a squadron of F86 aircraft in East Pakistan, thete was no
possibility at all of Pakistan taking the offensive towards 4 vital
hat eee ieee territory, more so when the population itself
; ostile.
For Sisson and Leo Ro -estigi rkeley
University, to accept the fact that Sy OS en Army
was capable of launching military action on both the eastern and |
western frontiers with India which necessitated stationing - !"8°
military forces along the East Pakistan border’, indicates either ¢
tilt towards India by the authors in question, or” a lack of profound
military knowledge and the situation on the ground at that time.

India’s Role in the break up of Pakistan on
The Indian Air Force increased ;
theatre. It was put on a higher state nett In the eastern
Maritime and photo reconnaissance by the AR combat readiness,
Bay of Bengal and East Pakistan air space re continued over the
Bengal Regiments which, deserteg after the eel The East
joined by the Indian border Security forces ame action, were
out raids into East Pakistan. Major Praval F), They cairied
‘Indian Army After Independence™ also dint a of the book =
Mukti Bahini operations were continuing even b tor ar badd
of April®. Indian guns from across the borde: e ore the middle
artillery support to these raiderg6!. continued to give
Harassment At Sea
On 2. April, 1971 Indian warships harassed a Pakistani
merchant vessel "Ocean Endurance’ 70 miles west of the Indian
naval base of Dwarka. The vessel had to return to Karachi Three
days after, Safina-e-Arab, another Pakistani ship, which was
heading towards Chittagong was similarly intercepted, A new unit
of ground to air missile began practice firing as far as 123 miles
into the sea,/from the Indian coast, forcing PIA aircraft to even
make a longer detour to East Pakistan. . |
Leo Rose, a political analyst of the South Asian scene, is not
correct when he says that "initially most of the official government |
spokesmen in India assumed a hands-off position after the 25th |
March military crackdown, classifying it as an internal affair that
Was not a matter for Indian intervention". Only five days after |
the military crackdown » the Indian Parliament unanimously
expressed its whole hearted sympathy and support for the
‘Bengalis’, Indira Gandhi is on record as saying "The government
is on top of the situation and would move at its own time and
discretion", This could not be termed as a hands-off policy.
Opposition parties called for direct intervention in East Pakistan
'N Support of the government-in-exile. |
Henry Kissinger, President Nixon's perineal
"eported to him as early as | April that t the high
embarking on a course of action which would ae : e ne
level of tension in the subcontinent and run the Indi ‘Con ress
“erlous international crisis”. Shukla, of the All India ; oe
Committee, felt that Mujib was fighting India’s wa ,

288 Tragedy of Errors
therefore, deserved all help. Bijay Singh Nahav, chief ministe; of
West Bengal, was prepared to recognise Bangladesh even jf his
own central government did not yet feel it prudent to do sof”, 1
India played a dual role. On the one hand they encourageg
* gecession and on the other they build up world opinion in favour |
of a military involvement by India to bring normalcy in Eagt. .
Pakistan. By the end of May Indian leadership came to the
conclusion that the external powers would. be only peripheral
factors in East Pakistan,,and would also{ not) place any serious
obstacle in the way of direct Indian intervention if this should
become necessary”.
| Leo Rose harps on the theme that India’s assistance to the
Awami League was meant to force Islamabad to come to a political
‘solution. This could be true as Sheikh Mujib’s 6-Points formula
suited India. It would have made the eastern wing dependent on
India and away from Pakistan. But when things did not turn out
~ her Ways she eventually chose a military solution. By the end of
May Néw Delhi had come to the conclusion that without an
Indian’contribution a satisfactory solution to the civil war in East
Pakistan was not possible”. Ea
Bellicose Statements
Joya Prakash Narayan, also openly supported the secessionist
movement. He was willing to call his own people unworthy of the
salt they ate on Indian soil if they were not prepared to go to war
in support of Bangladesh. According to him “defeat for Bangladesh
would be defeat for India”. K. Subramanyam, the hawkish
bureaucrat turned academician, called the year 1971 as a year
which saw "the greatest genocide of the modern era in Bangladesh
and an unparalleled hospitality by India of millions of (Bengali)
refugees"”!. Indigenous newspapers argued for immediate
intervention by India.
. It is true that thousands of people were killed including
innocent men, women and children by both Bengali militants and
by the law enforcing agencies. This fact cannot be denied but
where Subramanyam becomes totally biassed is when he calls the
military action ‘the greatest genocide of the modern era’. How
could he forget the extermination of the Jews in the gas chambers
‘in Nazi Germany. The killing of hundreds of thousands of civilians
at Hiroshima and Nagasaki in a matter of moments by the United

India's Role in the break Up of Pakistan 289
| or the massacre of a million
em or the Iranian Revolution ee by the Pol Pot
pildren during the ouster of the Shahinshah - sumed its own
¢ rtainly a stature in the academic world, but " ubramanyam has
mabjective in his analysis when it den 1° 2m0t help being
ysubjectve ts ; n It “comes to Indo-Paki
ralations. A hatred for those who broke up his Bhar ; a6
ingrained in his heart. He misses no oppo Gane is stil]
d pulls _no punch ; ity, minces no
words and puts NO punches when it comes t
istani leadership. Hi man? © attacking the
Pakistan! Pp Ss term ‘man S_struggle for freedom’ |
should a ota Afghanistan, “Kashmir Punjab “Assam, if
estine and Sout rica. He shoul : ic a
Paneladesh alone. d not have confined it to,
‘The opportunity to intervene directly came when the Awami
League leadership sought refuge in West Bengal to escape;being : -
arrested by the law enforcing agencies of the government of .
Pakistan. It is at that time that military action against Pakistan to
support the Mukti Bahini took shape" acknowledged the
reknowned journalist, Kuldip Nayyar,” one time editor of the
prestigious Indian paper, The Statesman.
Active Measures
Indira encouraged and allowed the establishment of a
government of Bangladesh in exile in Calcutta, as early as April,
1971. The locality, where its officers were established, was given
the name of Mujibnagar (8, Theatre Road, Calcutta) - Indian
constitutional experts drafted the so-called declaration of )
Independence which was announced by the Awami League
leaders, in hiding, on 17 April, 1971.
India prevented a meeting between the foreign minister of the
Bangladesh government in exile and General Yahya. It wanted all
contacts to be handled through New Delhi”. India’s defiant
| attitude, her isolated nature and her acerbic temper prevented her ~~
from accepting any compromises. She knew her mind and was
determined to follow through with her plans come what may.
In response to the Indian prime minister's appeal for raising
funds to help Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, Chief Minister of Bihar
Mr. Krapura Thakur announced a donation of Rs. 25 lakhs “for
‘upply of arms and ammunition to Bangladesh""*. Subramanyam,
Published an article in the National Herald on 5 April, 1971
*ntitled "East Pakistan Crisis" persuading India to attack East

290 Tragedy of Errors
Pakistan”, He also published articles quoted by a London Times
correspondent that sections of East Pakistan should be seizeq by
Indiaand the provisional government of Bangladesh be
established there. India’s defence minister Loans as early as May,
1971 that War may be thrust on them - On 18 May Indira
Gandhi in a public speech repeated this assertion.
Indian ambassadors conveyed to their respective accredited
governments that India may be forced to act in its nationa]
interest.
Saner Elements Advise Restraint
C. Rajgopal Acharya, governor general of India from 1947 to
1950, General Carriapa, former commander-in-chief of the Indian
army, M. Karunaidhu, chief minister of Tamil Nadu in 1971 are
quoted by Leo Rose as warning India not to encourage the
_-separatists for fear of similar demands in India’’.
. p
It is also true that Indian bureaucrats pointed out the
repercussions of India/supporting the Bangladesh movement as all
bureaucrats are expected to do. They drew their attention to
possible reaction by Muslim states, reaction by other democracies,
Bengalis demand for a united Bengal and the creation of another
Muslim state. But these aré factors which any bureaucrat would
bring out. What is important is the final conclusion and
recommendation. Should we or should we not intervene
militarily? The answer was, yes we should!
Drums of War ‘-
™ a the time the fateful decision of not handing over power to
tor ves nade by Yahya, Indira Gandhi had achieved a decisive
fe f ee . arch, 1971 general elections in India. She had not ,
“ai 28 wn me prime minister of India again but now/had more
position to + be = Parliament. She was, therefore, in a
fi +" pt a belligerent attitude towards Pakistan. Known
or her indomitable spirit and str ,
who would certainl ; Strong will power,she was a lady
; nly not hesitate in sate
as using force’ if sary to
\achieve her ambition of h & tore necessary
\ of the break up of Pakistan.
The IDSA held Sa
Narayan resided The ane. on 3 July, 1971. Joya Prakash
retired , : € speakers included newspaper editors,
ed government officials, Mrs. Vij
als, Mrs. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit and R.K.
Nehru. Subramanyam read ' shmi Pandit an
— out his famous paper in which he

