240
Tragedy of Errors
30. Wilcox, W., The Emergence of Bangladesh, American Enterprises Thea
of Public Policy Research, Washington DC., 1973, p. 35. ” NStityts
31. Ibid.
32. Singh, Jagdev, p. 9.
33. Pakistan Times, August 14, 1974.
34. Garg, p. 141.
35. Mankekar, p. 13-4.
36. Garg, p. 137.
37. Interview, Lt. General Aurora.
38. Illustrated Weekly L Europe, January 13, 1972 (Italian).
39. iene Mr. Hashmi, former Cantonment Executive Officer, Dacca in
www.balochlibrary.com

Military Action
|
The primary task of the army is to defend a country’s
international borders against any external threat. A subsidiary
role, which = certain circumstances assumes considerable
significance, is to act in aid of civil power to quell an insurgency
against the state, or simply to maintain law and order. Towards
this end operational plans to meet the former contingency and
plans for internal security (IS) duties to cater for the latter are
prepared, updated and kept ready.
In normal peace time conditions, when calm and harmony
prevails, the IS plans remain buried under heaps of other
administrative files in the adjutant general’s branch of any army
headquarters. But when the country is faced with internal
disturbances and the writ of the government-in-power begins to
be seriously challenged military commanders with foresight begin
to take a fresh look “at the dust-laden plans for assisting the
government to restore normalcy.
Operation BLITZ
Lieutenant General Sahabzada Yaqub Khan, Snene
the Eastern Theatre had, in February, 1971, prepared plans —
dealing with an insurgency situation in East Pakistan. The p an
W's code-named OPERATION BLITZ. He was, however tars
that a military action alone was not the solution OT rT ot
Impasse, "I need hardly mention that operation , be followed
and should not be an end in itself but — om
; _ we n
immediately by the projection of political and eeentl sequel to
-*\ the national level. Such a course would be an bo tase
this fire bri d - fi the wheel would only then e
full ein. gade action for
le “ircle" wrote Yaqub to Yahya.
Ww : :
a bidier Slipattest Waneeie he postponement of the
nape? situation in East Pakistan after anne. Sheikh Mujib-
‘nal assembly session was fast deter

nae Tragedy of Errors
call for a virtual take oy
ur-Rahman, had giver rovince by his supporters which, jy th
included almost all politicians, the age oP ureauerats and"
large number of the members of t : =H ule ements jp the
armed forces besides the entire Bengali civil population,
Although all the personalities interviewed at Dacoy
categorically denied that the ae rl t ‘i League
massacred the non-Bengalis even Detore e military crackdown
by the Pakistan army, heaven et, there was re evidence t,
prove that they went on a rampage as S as the announcement
postponing the national assembly session was made on March 1
The scene immediately prior to the proposed military action was
of complete disorder and total disregard of governmental
authority.
General Yahya had by then lost complete faith in his military
commanders in the Eastern theatre. "A first class army in Eas
' Pakistan is completely demoralised because of two old women’
remarked the President to General Tikka Khan. Implying that if g
firm action had been taken earlier things would not have gone out
of hand. General Tikka, known for his blind obedience to orders,
would, he was certain, be able to put the train back on the rails by
sheer use of force.
There were only two alternatives at that stage. Order the army
to restore the authority of the government or hand over powers to
the majority party.
. The military junta was split on the question of suppressing the
insurgency by a military action. Those in East Pakistan were not
in favour of it as they had been witnessing the growing popularity
of the Awami League in that province. They knew that even after
eliminating the die-hard secessionist the movement in favour of
the 6-Points formula would not die down. They were concerned
about the mass killings on both sides which were bound to follow
hes the army was given a free hand to deal with all thos?
e’ements which had bottled them up and were humiliating the™
at every corner,
tiie os in Mi Pakistan particularly the well known hawks
Dad, (Adj “te A. O. Mitha, (Quarter Master General), Khu
ie _ “i General), Iftikhar Janjua (Master Gene!
Coun 7 . or alam Umar, (Chief of the National Secu
cil) were advocating a strong military action’. The

Military Action 243
anted outright and ruthless milita : .
Yaqub Khan. "No commander should be afiva Te eae
putcher if that is the demand of the hour" waa Generel is. a
idea for dealing with the prevailing situation. In fact both G al
Khadim Hussein Raja and General Rao Farman Ali felt hai th
principal staff officers (PSO’s) from GHQ, who had Jebtenited ,
Dacca just prior to the proposed military action, had been mats
take over from them if they hesitated to use military force to
restore normalcy. "Mitha, Khuda Dad and Janjua were sent as
others and I may decline to take action" confided General Raja to
the author. He emphasised that before this no PSO had ever
visited East Pakistan.
Operation SEARCH LIGHT
The military authorities in East Pakistan were completely
ignored during the political negotiations which had begun in
Dacca on March 15. When Raja asked Tikka as to how the
negotiations were going on he replied by saying "you know as
much as I do - we both’ read the newspapers". But Tikka, a
practical soldier, wanted to be prepared for the worst. He had seen
the anger and hatred in the eyes of the Bengalis against the army
and the West Pakistanis from the day he set foot on the soil of
East Bengal. He did not want to be caught unawares by a pre-
emptive action by the militant wing of the Awami League.
General Yahya had already given him a hint that force may have
_ tobe used if no positive result is achieved through talks.
He, therefore, as early as March 15, told General Officer
Commanding 14 Division to be prepared if negotiations failed. On
March 16, Tikka called Raja and Farman and directed them to
prepare contingency plans for a military action to restore the
authority of the government. This was not to be an ordinary aid to
Civil power but it was to be an action to suppress a revolt against
an established authority,said Raja while explaining the details of
the military plan to deat” with the situation that would arise if the
Political negotiations failed.
On March 17, Raja and Farman met. They were SS a =
the command and staff college and were Se iciie q Aacle ac
Writing appreciations at the highest level. They divide e f the “)
Into tw . : wrote the assessment 0 e
rah 0 parts. While Farman ‘dinate formation. On
‘ation Raja drafted the tasks of the subordin

244 Tragedy of Errors
h 19, the plan for a military action against dissident, a
coccabivnista en presented to General Tikka and Genera] Abd
Hamid, the COS. It was accepted in toto recalls Genera] Raja
General Hamid wanted to ensure complete security of the pla).
and told Raja that the contents were not to be disclosed except o,
a strictly need-to-know basis. Sector commanders only, therefore
were taken into confidence. ~~
Commander 57 Brigade, Brigadier Jahanzeb Arbab, visited 9
East Bengal Regiment at Joydebpur on March 19. On the way
back his route was obstructed by a loaded railway wagon which
had been placed on the railway crossing by the locals. Jahanzeb, a
Pathan from Peshawar, known for his assertiveness in the army,
ordered the commanding officer to have the obstacle removed "|
want this barricade removed in 20 minutes. In case of any
opposition use maximum force" thundered the brigadier. "No body
can stop us we can move in any direction, whenever and wherever
we want" added Jahanzeb with an air of arrogance.
The crowd did not budge. Shots rang out and there was an
exchange of fire. Troops of 2 East Bengal carried out the
instructions of their superiors but fired their 63 rounds
reluctantly and mostly in the air. Only 2 civilians were killed. Five
Bengali soldiers who were not willing to shoot on their own people
deserted with their arms and ammunition. This incident further
added to the tension between the army and the Bengalis.
The decision for suppressing the insurgency in East Pakistan
by military force, if it becomes necessary, was made on March 22,
1971 at a meeting between the President, the governor and the
martial law administrator at Dacca. No party leader opposed the
use of force to re-instate the government’s authority. On March
23, Pakistan’s National Day, Dacca wore a grim look. Instead of
the Pakistani parcham (flag) black flags fluttered on every house
and vehicle. On the afternoon of March 23, when Dacca had give?
its unanimous vote against a United Pakistan,the armed forces
chiefs also conveyed their recommendation of/a military action
ha ay the emergency plan to restore law and order
/
wae it was not till March 24, that the final decision
wami League and its supporters was taken.
avenues for seeking a political solution, short ‘no Pakista?
, of making

Military Action aa
into a confederation, had been explored With no effect. No amount Z
of persuasion, reasoning or discussion had made Mujib or Bhutto —
change their rigid stand. Having set the country on the path of self
destruction, by initially postponing the national assembly session;
Yahya, now brought it on the edge of a precipice. The point of no
return had arrived.
Yahya called General Tikka Khan and Major General Rao
Farman and asked them to finalise the Operation order for
OPERATION SEARCH LIGHT. The plan prepared earlier by
Farman and Raja was given the final touches. "The killing of a few
thousand would not be too high a price for keeping the country
together. Show them the teeth and they will be quiet", said
Yahya‘,
Objectives of Operation SEARCHLIGHT
The long term objective of Operatioii SEARCHLIGHT were:
(1) to seal-off the borders; (2) to create conditions for selecting a
civilian set up; (3) to regain the administration of the province and
(4) to accommodate the non-radical elements of the elected
representatives into a new political arrangement.
The immediate objective of the military crackdown were,
however, (1) disarming of all Bengali troops. This meant taking
away weapons from the six East Bengal Regiments, the 30,000
personnel of the East Pakistan Rifles and the police. (The reaction
of such an action on the Bengali troops in the mixed units were
hot, however, assessed); (2) arresting of all prominent Awami
League leaders; (3) imposing of martial law strictly; (4) controlling
of all airfields; (5) securing of the Chittagong naval base; (6)
*nsuring the security of all towns; (7) cutting off of East Pakistan
from the rest of the world in terms of communication links and (8)
taking away Radio and TV stations from the clutches ‘ ~
Awami League and placing them again under the control of the
sovernment®,
: . +7: i nd the
on “ major difference between caapaprann Spe that the
© to be carried out in East Pakistan in a cut in a civil war
military action this time was to be carried out 1 had passed
Situation and not in aid of civil power as all authority had pas
; all the objectives
0 the hands of the Awami League. Whereas tion to be
Were to b rly as possible the first ane
fanaa € achieved as early - League of it’s leadership.
"ed out. was to deptive the Awami Leagu

= Tragedy of Errors
Farman knew that it would be difficult to trace the Politica)
leaders as they were being supported by the local population ang
their exact location at the time specified for the arrest would not
be easy to establish. He suggested that a political Meeting bg
called and when all are in, arrests could be made (all is fair in love
and war). The President, who tried to play a fair game, disagreeg
and told Farman “do not arrest the leaders while they are jp ‘
conference with me”.
No written orders were issued. Senior staff officers wer,
dispatched to commanders on the ground giving them the
required go-ahead signal. Farman went to Jessore, Raja went to
Comilla and Colonel Saadullah went to Rangpur and Rajshahi, He
tried to reach Chittagong but did not succeed. A liaison officer was
sent to Sylhet which was out on a limb.
To attain a measure of surprise the departure of the President
from Dacca at 1900 hours on March 25, was kept a secret. The
President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, fearful of his own
citizens in his eastern province, travelled incognito to the air field
in a small private car driven by General Hamid to fly back to
Karachi in his special plane. The Logistic Area Commander sat in
the president’s car on the return journey. With the four-star plate
uncovered and the president’s flag fluttering on the side. The
young brigadier, nervously pretending to be General Yahya, was
escorted with the usual motorcade to the president’s house. But
East Pakistan was brimming with pro-Mujib informers. Wing
Commander Khondkar, second-in-command of the Dacca air base,
saw the general entering into his special plane. He immediately
rang up Mujib and the cat was out of the bag. The Awami League
leadership knew that the worst was about to come. "The birds,
except one, flew away and were safely on Indian territory before
the crackdown came at midnight", said Tikka.
It did not come too soon. If a pre-emptive strike had not been
taken Colonel M. A. G. Osmani’s plan would have come into
action. The EBR and EPR were to rebel and capture Dacca airfield
and the Chittagong sea port. The defecting police and EPR units
Were to control the city while the EBR was to storm the Dae
cantonment on the night of 25/26 March. Key posts along the
Indo-Pakistan frontier were to be occupied to facilitate receipt of
istance from India? Gener ree aci d the
soe - hdla". General Tikka, therefore, advance
Peration to re-establish government authority by 4 hours*.

Military Action aa
The troops available to General Tikka Khan to carry out this
stupendous task were 14 Infantry Division ents
. g of four
‘nfantty brigades, an armoured regiment, five artillery regiments
two mortar batteries, one light anti-aircraft battery one
commando battalion; The six East Bengal Regiments and the |
16,000 strong East Pakistan Rifles were to be disarmed hence
would not be part of the force required to re-instate the writ of the
Centre. In fact as events eventually turned out they joined the
rebels. In all, therefore, General Tikka had about 12,000 men in |
uniform from West Pakistan and 13 battalions of Mujahids and
Razakars against over 100,000armed Bengalis and 60 million |
volatile local population spread over 55,000 Square miles of |
isolated territory cut up by non negotiable rivers and streams.
(Map 3 gives the deployment of 14 Infantry Division immediately
prior to the military action). |
Realising that the troops in East Pakistan were not enough to
deal with a military uprising some additional troops began to be
sent to East Pakistan. Although one brigade of two battalions was
earmarked to boost up 14 Infantry Division only one battalion
reached Dacca before March 25°.
The Crackdown
The military crackdown began at 1 a.m. on the night between
25 and 26 March 1971. The next day Major Zia-ur-Rahman’s voice
on the radio proclaimed East Pakistan as People’s Republic of
Bangladesh. "Today Bangladesh is a sovereign and independent
state’ said a voice from a clandestine radio!®. General Yahya Khan
on arrival at Karachi let out his anger and frustration by
outlawing the Awami League, banning all political parties,
imposing complete press censorship and denouncing Mujib’s
action as an act of treason. (Ironically te did not put his signature
on the findings of the special tribunal headed by Brigadier
Rahimuddin Khan who found Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman guilty of
treason and sentenced him to death in August, 1971)!!.
Within 15 minutes of OPERATION SEARCHLIGHT Sheikh
Mujib-ur-Rahman was arrested from his Dhonmandi jeep
> Swift action headed by Major Bilal under the overall command o
Ut, Col. Z. A. Khan. The double storey building on Road 32 was 8
ple structure with a very small courtyard in front. Not vhich
effort was needed to surround it. The commando company, W

248 Tragedy of Errors
istance. 31 Fiel
was to carry out the task, bie ey Khan ahi ee
Artillery (Lt. Col. Choud ry MU Rah a ) Was ty
search the house of Sheikh Mujib-ur-Nahman aver his arres,
Zahid maintains that orders to him were not to Use automatie
weapons and to open fire only when fired upon. "We do not want
to escalate the situation, this is our country’, was Zahiq’,
instructions to his men. However, when Zahid went into Sheikh
Sahib’s house he was shouted at by Mujib’s wife, his daughter ang
his son Kamal. They also abused the Quaid-e-Azam. Zahid, coulg
not take the insults any longer and manhandled the two ladies
before leaving the residence.
According to Col. Zahid about 500,000 worth of currency notes
including US dollars, German marks and Indian rupees were
found in Sheikh’s house. Rabinder Nath Tagore’s portrait adorned
the sitting room!”.
Dr. Kamal Hussein, surrendered without resistance on April 4,
at Dacca!3, All other leaders of the Awami League escaped. Mujib
was kept during the day at Azam Garrison High School in the
cantonment and for security reasons moved to the Flag Staff
House at night. Bhutto was still in Dacca staying at the
Intercontinental Hotel. Ghulam Mustafa Khar, a close confidant
of Bhutto at that time, arranged a meeting on March 27, with
Mujib. Mujib while in captivity sarcastically told Bhutto
"Tumhara Baap to gaya" (your father has gone away) implying we
have nothing further to discuss. Bhutto gulped the insult
silently’.
Dacca University
Dacca University, like all other institution of higher learning in
the Subcontinent, was a hot bed of political activity. Ever since the
freedom movement started in British India university campus®
had been infiltrated into by various political parties. The virus
continued to stay and spread even after independence. Those most
| cree HS were the Dacca and Rajshahi universities
Pakistan. By 1971 the militant wing of the Awami Leagué
had virtually taken over the Dacca University.
Oe Rab, the militant leader of the East Pakist#”
: og ee (EPSL) and his general secretary Shahjaha?
Bak eld a rally on March 2, in the arts faculty of the Dactt
niversity where for the first time the Bangladesh flag was raised’

Military Act ion 249
bdur Rab aroused the emotions of th ;
a asked them to treat the West Pakistes pa pos army
alien forces of aggression and to eliminate such force 15 oes i. |
them to cooperate with the brave freedom fighters s ; e a
them in dealing with the non-Bengali ghettos ie B . “ip |
Chittagong, Saidpur and Mirpur/Muhammadpur which rine
Bihari loralities im Dacea. The Swadhin Bangla Kandnc Chen,
Sangram Parishad (Central Students Action Coinmittes. of |
independent Bangladesh) was formed to implement all decisions |
taken by the radical students! "Radical groups in the grounds of |
the Dacca University started training students in the use of fire |
arms" reported Paul Martin!?. |
It is not surprising, therefore, that the Dacca University was,
made the first target of the military action on the night between
25/26 March.
Dacca University had several hostels called halls, Jinnah Hall
was the residence of junior lecturers and all in-house-teachers, |
Jagannath Hall accommodated the Hindu students; Iqbal Hall
was the centre piece of all political activity Rogaya Hall was meant
for all girl students. Jagannath Hall was barricaded. It was
surrounded by barbed wire and within its perimeter ‘Mukti
Jogda’ (freedom fighters) received their training using dummy
and service rifles. The University area harboured most of the |
armed dissidents and had become a stronghold of the rebellious |
students, professors and other intellectuals.
18 Punjab Regiment, part of 57 Infantry Brigade, was given the
task to clear the university of all rebellious elements. It i“
difficult task as it involved fighting in a built up nos -
battalion was, therefore, given the support of tanks and ant ay
'n the hope that the rumbling of tanks and the presence 0 tie
“sat the university would compel the students to OT Ri ceata
Weapons and surrender. But that was not to be. fire, mortar
military Operation had to be launched. Machine an had to come
shells and recoilless rifles, had to be used. rs secessionists,
arn and to put the fear oO as "Rach room of the
Joo,» Tounds screeched over thet hed out. Iqbal Hall and
“8annath Hall had to be individually flus d later searched for
feay 4 Hall were also fired upon an
"minating evidence.

