. 341
Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre
in time and space the advantage lay with the attacker as the
jefonders lacked mobility and air cover. They also had no reserves
io talk of and had to depend on mobilising second-line forces
| hich, besides taking time, could not be as effective as regular
troops: .
operational Plans
Consequent to the operational directive received from GHQ, 14
Division issued the following operational instruction on 17
September, 1970 based on a threat estimate of approximately
three infantry divisions.
Operational Instructions of 14 Division,
17 September, 1970
The Mission specified was:
1) Defend East Pakistan while inflicting maximum attrition
on the enemy but avoiding the destruction of own forces
and;
2) Ensure defence of Dacca at all costs.
The Plan to accomplish the mission was:
1) Troops should be prepared to fight a series of delaying
actions.
2) While withdrawing to the main defences, leave stay behind
parties to carry out harassment of the enemy during their
advance.
3) Self contained sectors to be designated (later further
divided into fortresses and strong points).
4) Small scale tactical offensive operations to be undertaken.
5) No change in the basic assumptions.
Drawn up in September, 1970, when the election, had not yet
laken place nor had the Bengalis yet rebelled against the armed
forces it appeared to be quiet feasible. In ordinary circumstances It
Would have been workable, though even then the factor of air
‘uperiority and a naval blockade did not appear to have been
laken into account, Fighting a delaying action and being able to
“neentrate on previously designated position requires mobility,
long y iori od communications
8 Tange firepower, local air superiority, g0 Fihin wees
the complete support of the local population. None © this
“sent even in September, 1970.

342 Tragedy of Errors
Too Little Too Late
The scene in East Pakistan had changed completely after the
military action in March, 1971. The Bengali units had deserteq
and had gone over to India, the civilians, though subdued ang
frightened because of the fear of the stick, had turned againgt the
Pakistan armed forces.
In view of the growing threat from India in support of the
Mukti Bahini and the need to control an ever increasing hostile
population more troops were flown in to East Pakistan soon after
the military action. Elements of 9 Infantry Division and 16
Infantry Division began arriving by air via Sri Lanka. The two
newly inducted divisions came without their guns and armour,
They could only carry their infantry weapons and even lacked
engineer support. The Corps signal battalion was only sanctioned
in March, 1971.
Lieutenant General Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi (54) took over
the command of the eastern theatre of operations from General
Tikka Khan on 7 April. He was a highly decorated officer having
earned a Military Cross and Mention in Despatches as a junior
officer during World War II and a Hilal-e-Jurat in the Indo-
Pakistan War of 1965. As an officer in 8 Punjab Regiment he had
seen active service in Egypt, Iraq, Palestine, Burma, Malaysia,
Singapore and Java and hence fighting in different environment
was not new to him. But what affected his professional ability in
East Pakistan was his rigid ideas and his false sense of pride of not
falling back in the face of the enemy. His Mianwali background,
and his limited academic achievements may have had much to do
with his narrow military outlook.
General Niazi had earned good confidential reports in his
career but his superiors had emphasised his knowledge and flair
for tactics only. Command of an independent theatre requiring *
understanding of national Strategy was not what he had been Oe
out to be. He was a Shera (lion) but only at the lower net
command. He was "practical and bold" but unable or owing ‘
visualise the intentions and capabilities of a powerful part
General Yahya, however, could not find any other senior ° few of
go to East Pakistan in April, 1971. It is believed that quite @
them got out of it when asked to do so.

343
Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre
By the time Niazi came on the scene the Pakistan army had re-
' established the writ of the central government in most of the
province. The troops, along with the civil armed forces, (by now
manned purely by the West Pakistanis) were manning most of the
outposts along the international border. By the middle of May,
1971 all appeared quiet on the Eastern front.
This lull before the impending storm had created a false sense
of security. Niazi, based his operational plan for the defence of
East Pakistan more on bravado than on a cool assessment of the
military situation. Operational Instructions Number 3 of 15 July,
1971 contemplated a forward posture with strong points and
fortresses which were made logistically self sufficient to fight a
battle lasting for atleast thirty days if by-passed. Twenty five
fortresses and nine strong points were designated. All, however,
could not be adequately manned due to shortage of troops. Dacca
was the nerve centre, but no troops were left to defend it.
A fresh plan for the defence of East Pakistan, was sent in
August, 1971, to GHQ by Eastern Command. In addition to the
development of major towns as fortresses and strong points with a
firm commitment to defend Dacca at all costs. The plan included
offensive actions against Tripura in the east. Siliguri in the north,
Krishannagar in the West. The plan was duly approved by GHQ
which went even further and directed Eastern Command to plan
on posing a threat to Calcutta and the capture of Farrakha
barrage. Targets for the Special Service Groups in Indian territory
Were to be selected. |
It is normal for a defender to plan local offensive actions to
improve their defensive position and deny launching pads for the
*nemy immediately in front of their defended areas. But major
offensive operations much beyond the range of own guns and
Without air support when troops are insufficient to fulfil their
primary task is sheer folly. One can only feel frustrated on the |
lack of realism on the part of the military leadership at GHQ at |
that time, With the rear areas insecure and the home base
“ompletely cut off; the air force and the navy particularly non-
€xistent in East Pakistan; with the third dimension totally absent,
‘0 have thought of making such ambitious plans could only come
from highly inflated egos. |
|

344 Tragedy of Errors
‘singly both the local commanders in East Pakistan ang
woe ee oured with the ability of Eastern Commang tg
suppress the Awami League militants that they lost Sight of the
simmering within. The rumbling of the impending earthquake
was falling on deaf ears. The military planners failed to assess the
correct internal situation in September. The apparent calm and
the ability to move upto the borders fooled them. The isolation of
East Pakistan in the event of an all out war, the military
imbalance in the Eastern theatre, the total command of the air by
the Indian air force, the likely naval blockade and the
international support moving away from Pakistan were not taken
into account.
Operational Policy
The political directive to Eastern Command till then was not to
allow the Mukti Bahini to control any territory in East Pakistan
on which they could declare a government of Bangladesh. What
haunted Niazi was the fear that the Mukti Bahini would do just
that. He was determined not to allow the secessionists to capture
even a small portion of East Pakistan territory. He, therefore,
locked his mind on this one goal alone. He was certain that he
would be able to prevent rebels from their nefarious designs. The
fact that India would invade East Pakistan with full force was not
yet visualised by him.
Luckily better sense prevailed and the reality dawned on our
generals by then when the menacing concentration of Indian
forces along East Pakistan borders became clear. In the
operational directive issued in September by GHQ, Eastern
Command was clearly directed not to plan on carrying the wal
Into enemy territory, East Pakistan was to be defended by #
mobile defence. This envisaged light forces guarding the border
rivers around the ‘ eal a Pow which, because of ieee vt
was also mentioned th permis mong eetenriite Po et it
belie. at Eastern Command was to be kept
The threat assessment had increased. The Indians could noW
muster upto eight infantry divisions and five to six armoured
regiments in addition to the 3 : line of
Communication tro e 32 BSF battalions, Mukti
Bahini. The imbal Pe ego and the 100,000 or 9° in
, ance had by now altered further, not only

eee ae er By Eastern Theatre a
h "o % nis
/ pumbers bale veapone. on = operational effectiveness due to the
jack of i . fth Sie Sd PMment, air support and naval
| strength In the case of the Sakistani troops in East Pakistan,
| Threat Assessment
Eastern nme _ the Indian threat as follows:
A main effort of three infantry divisions pl ;
prigade and two Mukti Bahini brigades ain si nstentty
baria, Comill ected against
Brahman , a, and Chandpur. It also expected tw
secondary efforts, one against Rangpur and Hilli an the oth ;
against Jessore, each by two infantry divisions su =
of ie pported by a
regiment or two of armour. Niazi correctly realised that the
threat to Dacca was most likely from the east as that was the
shortest route, but he deployed his strongest division on his
western front.
Although General Niazi was expecting an attack by the middle
of November he was wrongly convinced that India would not
launch large scale military operations. His operational policy
was, therefore, based on dealing with the Muktis supported by
the Indian army from their side of the border.
It was assumed that the Indian Navy could effectively put a
naval blockade of East Pakistan. India could employ eleven
aircraft squadrons, including a bomber squadron, against one
squadron of 12 inferior aircraft. The PAF had, therefore, no
chance of survival beyond a day or two. With Eastern
Command, consisting only of one full fledged infantry division
and two incomplete divisions, the ratio of forces had now
become 2 : 8 on the ground and 1: 11 in the air. With India
enjoying total command of the outlet to the sea.
Adhocery
_ The only answer Eastern Command could find to bei
inferiority in numbers was to give the false impression to ‘Ake
own troops, not so much to the enemy, by armed tne
formations, Consequently East Pakistan civil armed tc “
(EPCAR ‘ctod entirely of West Pakistan
) which, by now consiste he nucleus of the
Personnel, mostly from the Frontier, formed a mmand of
newly created 36 (Adhoc) Division placed under the co
Moi e ( oc «mer EPCAF commander.
7 a General Jamshed Khan, the oer jacked artillery and
's adhoe formation of only one brigade

| aeY Tragedy of Krrors
engineer support. It had no armour to talk of and the onl
mobility it could count on was by impounding the few civilian
naukas (civilian boats). Even 93 brigade which was given to it wa
adhoc as it was raised by depleting other formations. It was lace
under command Brigadier Abdul Qader and consisted of only two
battalions against the standard three.
91 (Independent) Brigade was raised in Chittagong in
September. It consisted of only one infantry battalion which had
been taken out of another formation. To give it the semblance of a
brigade two wings of para military forces, a mujahid battalion,
some razakars and a few reservists were added. A commando
battalion less one company was also given to the brigade. This
motley force was commanded by Brigadier Ata Muhammad Malik,
a gunner officer of repute who, till recently, was in the Martial
Law Headquarters in Dacca. In the same month 313 (Adhoc)
Brigade was raised in Sylhet and placed under command
Brigadier M. Saleemullah, who also came over from Martial Law
Headquarters to assume his new responsibilities. 313 Brigade like
other newly raised formations consisted of only one regular ©
battalion reinforced by a host of irregulars. Similarly 39 (Adhoc)
Division was raised on 18 November (only three days prior to the
Indian attack) under Major General M. Rahim Khan by milking
other formations. 314 (Adhoc) Brigade consisting only of a couple
of hundred para military personnel was stationed at Khulna,
giving a false impression of the town being held strongly. 34
Brigade was split into two. Each element of only a battalion or two
strong was designated as a brigade. Brigadier Nawab Ahmad
Ashraf, a gunner officer, was advisor to the governor of
Balochistan when on 27 November he was ordered to go to Kast
Pakistan to organise the defence of Dacca. On arrival there he was
told by General Niazi that there were no troops available for the
defence of the capital. Just to accommodate him 34 Brigade was
split and he took over an adhoc formation at Nator - A pitiable
example of unco-ordinated military planning.
on aper vw eee only added to the number of formalione
aper without in any way increasi i ility 0
Festern Command. y way asing the fighting capability
War of Attrition
serie He ae bach Mukti Bahini had been enlarged, equipped and
ans to become once again a force to be reckoned

Indo-Pakistan War - 197} Eastern Theatre 347
with in their operations against the Pakistan army in Rast
istan. The Indian aim wags to k ~ a
Pakista ep the Pakistani forces
dispersed and to draw them out to the border where, with limited
company and battalion attacks by the Mukti Bahini Wibported b
the Indian Sie pa -y deplete the defenders numerical
, tire him out an Ower his :
a “oad Gtiberiohess Morale, before the main
Indian regular forces along with the Mukti Bahini
limited attacks against 9 Division in the J eaeore-Thentn es ee
early as October, 1971. 14 Division in the Sylhet - Bhramanbaria
sector and 36 (Adhoc) Division in the Comilla Sector also came
under attack. Not all the attacks Were successful. In fact in most
cases they were repulsed and border observation Post retaken and
secured. But the aim of keeping the Pakistan army spread out and
involved all along the border was achieved.
Towards the end of the Monsoon season an undeclared war
between the Indian and Pakistani troops had begun in East
Pakistan. It dawned on GHQ rather late to ask Eastern Command
to present their revised operational plans on 15 November, 1971
(just six days before the Indian full scale attack on East Pakistan).
Major General Jamshed and the Chief of Staff, Brigadier Bagir
Siddiqui flew to Rawalpindi and presented the new operational
plan. Eastern Command, however, made no alteration to the
existing one, They were still working on their original plan of not
giving away any territory to the Mukti Bahini lest they were able
'o establish a Bangladesh government on East Pakistan soil.
Genera] Niazi was determined .to stop the enemy on the border
While defending Dacca at all costs. With limited troops at his
disposal both were not possible without exposing one or the other.
He preferred to leave Dacca undefended in the false impression
that more troops would be sent to East Pakistan, failing which
Sue formations would be able to fall back to the capital. (General
Niazi Should have been aware that several small enclaves and
Salients were already in Mukti Bahini hands, and if they so
desired they could have put up a make shift Bangladesh
80Vernment. Since by 12 October Niazi had lost 7,700 square
‘lometres of territory his determination not to give up any
‘ertitory had no longer any weight. sss dl
_ , e
tr Niazi still believed that after fighting a Saran Gdttincive
"°PS Would be able to fall back and occupy prop

| a Tragedy of Errors
positions. He did ask for an additional eight battalions to be able
to maintain an adequate reserve for the defence of Dacca while
preventing the Mukti Bahini from capturing territory along the
border. GHQ agreed to the request and promised to send the
reinforcements as asked for. Eventually only two battalions were
sent.
Even by 19 November (two days before the Indian attack on
| Fast Pakistan ) the decision to fight on the front as well as in the
rear was not changed. According to Niazi the decision to vacate
politically important areas is always a government decision and
cannot be taken by a theatre commander". In his view a decision
to abandon thousands of loyal Pakistanis was a political decision
and should have been made at Rawalpindi. His directive to his
formations was that there would be no withdrawal till 75%
| casualties had been suffered. Such orders are easy to give but
| difficult to implement. It is only possible if the commanders who
| give such instructions are with the troops who can see them
standing like a stonewall in the thick of battle. Also fighting to the
| last man and last round is done in the main defensive position and
in well prepared fortresses into which troops must be allowed to
| fall back well in time and as intact as possible.
|
| DEPLOYMENT OF TROOPS NOVEMBER, 1971
| Southwest Sector (Jessore)
| HQ 9 Infantry Division Jessore Maj Gen Muhammad
| Husain Ansari.
57 Infantry Brigade Jehnida Brig Manzoor Ahmad. |
_107 Infantry Brigade Jessore Brig Muhammad Hayat.
314 (Adhoc) Brigade Khulna Brig Fazle Hameed. ?
3 (Independent) Armoured
Squadron
49 Field Regiment, Arty Lt Col Moghul.
55 Field Regiment, Arty Lt Col M Sharif.
211 Mortar Battery, Arty
21 Punjab Regiment (R&S) Lt Col Imtiaz Warraich.
4 gun boats at Khulna naval base.
Task Defend Jessore at all costs,

Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre wan
Northern Sector (Bogra)
16 Infantry Division N
HQ =r Maj Gen Nazar
—— Hussein Shah.
3 Infantry Brigade ;
fi Brigad Snape Brig Akhter Ansari.
5 t r ;
sinsbeiiaeaieenas sic Brig Tajammul
Hussein Malik.
Bri
34 Infantry hn Nator Brig Mir Abdul Naeem.
93 (Adhoc) Brigade - Brig N. A. Adbuat
26 Cavalry : Lt Col Bukhari
48 Field Regiment, Arty . Lt Col Manzoor
80 Field Regiment Arty : Lt Col Tariq
117 Mortar Battery - Major Imtiaz
34 Punjab Regiment (R&S) Lt Col Amir
Muhammad Khan.
Task Hold Dinajpur, Saidpur, Rangpur, Bogra and Rajshahi as
fortresses.
Central Sector (Dacca)
HQ 36 (Adhoc) Division Mymen- Maj Gen Jamshed Khan.
singh
93 (Adhoc) Infantry Mymen- Brig Abdul Qader.
Brigade singh
Task Defend Dacca at all costs.
Northeast Sector (Sylhet)
os : _ Maj Gen Qazi
HQ 14 Infantry Division ns me a Majeed.
ig M. Saadullah.
27 Infantry Brigade Bhraman- Brig M
baria
Brig Muhammad
202 (Adhoe) Brigade Sylhet oa call
Brig Iftikhar Rana.
313 Infantry Brigade Maulvi Bazar 6
8 (Independent) Armoured
Squadron. Lt Col C. M. A. K. Zahid
31 Field Regiment Arty
Section, 53 Field Regiment

350 Tragedy of Errors
210 Mortar Battery Arty
P1, 34 Punjab Regiment (R&S).
Southeast Sector |
HQ 39 (Adhoc) Division Chandpur Pie) ie
im an
117 Infantry Brigade Comilla Brig Muhammad Atif.
53 Infantry Brigade Feni Brig Aslam Niazi.
91 (Adhoc) Infantry Dhumghat Brig Mian Taskinuddin,
Brigade
97 Infantry Brigade Chittagong i Ata Malik
unamma °
Armour Nil
53 Field Regiment Arty Lt Col Salim Malik.
(two batteries)
171 Mortar Battery
Task Defend, Comilla, Chandpur, Laksham and Chittagong as
fortresses,
Comments
The actual deployment saw companies spread thinly along the
border with battalions holding frontages as much as 30 miles in
some sectors (Military manuals recommend a 1 mile frontage for a
battalion with a depth of half a mile or so). Extended frontages,
lack of depth in defence, forward posture, no reserves at division
and command level were the major weaknesses of the defensive
plan before the start of hostilities. The plan of falling back after
the battle was joined was also unsound particularly when the rear
areas were not only unsafe but it was a question of having an
enemy all around.
PAF could only spare one squadron of 12 F86Fs for East
Pakistan. Air commodore Inam-ul-Haq who was the Air Officer
Commanding (AOC) in Dacca had only two airfields Tejgaon and
Kurmitola (both around Dacca) to operate from.
Rear Admiral Muhammad Sharif, Flag Officer Commanding
Kast Pakistan, had no naval ships to guard the ports of Chittagong
and Chalna. A few gunboats was his entire navy in East Pakistan.

