Causes of Alienation =
irrespective of which province they belonged to) the more the
West Pakistani entrepreneur shied away from East Pakistan. "It
was not, therefore, economic disparity that produced the conflict | 4,
but the conflict that produced the issue of disparity" (a wise | a
comment by W. Wilcox)’*; (16) transfer of resources from East
Pakistan to West Pakistan; (17) economic growth was not
dovetailed with political institutions; (18) a larger number of
Indian refugees from East Punjab and the other Muslim minority
provinces came to West Pakistan than to East Bengal. (Six and a
half million compared to 0.7 million)?9. Most of the displaced
persons specially the educated lot moved into towns in Punjab and
Sindh. This ‘forcible’ urbanisation in West Pakistan compared to
very little in East Bengal immediately after Partition also affected
the different rates of economic growth in the two wings.
Industrialists who came from Africa and India did initially go to
both wings but they were more accepted in the western than in
the eastern wing. They, therefore, had their main office in West
Pakistan which resulted in a transfer of their earnings from the
eastern wing to the western and finally (19) floods and cyclones +
which caused serious damage to standing crops were more .
common in East Pakistan.
Economic disparity further increased in 1969-1971 due to
agitations, lawlessness, strikes, looting, burning, disruption of
communications, damage caused to ports, sinking of river crafts,
bringing of politics to streets and factories in East Pakistan, These
three years caused a further set back in trying to remove the
economic disparity between the two wings. In addition it added to
a rise in prices which the politicians capitalised on.
The author, while travelling, with Maulana Abdul Hameed
Khan Bhashani, the Bengali leader of the Awami National Party,
in June, 1969 asked him about his slogan "Deekho Deekho Agun
Jalo" (burn everything you can see). When reminded that he was
destroying the wealth of his own province. He replied "we are not
destroying crops which is the life line of the peasants, but of what
use are the shining lights of big cities or the shops full of goods
Which the poor cannot buy". His attitude was that of a devoted.
communist. Sharing of poverty is better than accumulation of
| wealth in a few hands. But he added to the existing economic
disparity between the two wings by destroying property in his
OWn province,

88
Tragedy of Errors
. : from the lone
The important question that arises PSidey
distribution of resources between the political units of a federatio,
is:- should the financial resources be allocated on a PoPulatic,
area basis? The answer to this question has been addressed in the
next chapter.
Defence Expenditure
The very heavy expenditure on defence irked the Bengali
most as they did not feel threatened from India. The Kashmi,
question did not give them any cause for motivation. They wanteg
a full share in the armed forces defence establishment or else ng
to contribute funds more than their share.
Not only was money being spent on a large standing army ;
y é y in
which Bengalis were heavily under-represented, but almost all of
the defence oriented industries were located in West Pakistan,
The civilian labour employed in these factories was consequently
non-Bengalis. The down stream effect benefitted the West
7 Pakistani entrepreneurs.
Purchase of defence equipment not only consumed the foreign
exchange coveted by East Pakistan but it also gave rise to many
middle_men, mostly from the western wing, who made huge
ae ae from companies supplying military hardware to
n.
Mr. Sartaj Aziz, a former finance minister of Pakistan, in a
television interview in August, 1992 acknowledged that because of
the 1965 war with India, which was fought oyer Kashmir, the
resources needed to reduce the disparity between the two wings
was no longer available. ‘If that war had not taken place both East
and West Pakistan would have prosper
the alienati ap ve prosper ed and a major cause for
Anis on of the Bengalis would have been removed" said

Causes of Alienation 89
Notes
1. Interview, Colonel Syed Farooq Rahman.
2. thimonginly sp oo Failure of National Integration, Columbia
3. Interview, Professor A.H. Dhani.
4. mnie, Safdar, Pakistan Divided. Ferozesons Ltd. Lahore, 1984, pp. 9,
5. Ss lets iPr Thee 5, Constitutional Quest for Autonomy,
6. ee me Fifty Years of Pakistan, Magbool Academy,
7. Ahmad, Maudood, p. 29.
8. Interview, Professor A. H. Dhani.
9. Interview, Brigadier Abdul Hafeez.
10. Interview, Professor Shamsul Haq.
11. Interview, Enamul Haq Choudhry.
12, Khan, M.A. Field Marshal, Friends Not Masters, A Political Biography,
Oxford University Press, 1967, p. 102.
13. Interview, Khondkar Mushtag Ahmad.
14. Interview, Professor Abdul Qayvoom.
15. Maswani, A.M.K. Subversion in East Pakistan, Amir Publications, Lahore,
1979, p. 154.
16. Interview, Professor Abdul Qavoom.
1, , Siddiq, Witness to Surrender, Oxford University Press, Karachi, 1978,
p. 8.
18. Interview, Professor A. H. Dhani.
19. Interview, Khondkar Mushtag Ahmad.
20. Chowdhry, G.W. Last Days of United Pakislan. C. Hurst and Company,
London, 1974, p. 11.
21. Interview, Brigadier Abdul Hafeez.
22. Interview published in the Urdu Digest, March, 1978, p. 16.
23. Mugeem, F. Maj. Gen. Pakistan’s Crisis in Leadership, National Book
Foundation, 1973, p. 12.
24, Choudhry, G.W. p. 11.
25. Thid.
26. ee Zh The Myth of Independence. Oxford University Press, Lahore

90
Tragedy of Errors
27. Ibid.
28. Malik, Hafeez, Dr. Soviet American Relations with Pakistan Iran and
Afghanistan. St. Martin’s Press, New York, 1987.
29. Interview, Brigadier Abdul Hafeez.
30. Interview, Professor Munir uz Zaman Taluqdar.
31. Personal experience while commanding an artillery unit in Saidpur, Fag,
Pakistan - March, 1969.
32. Maswani, p. 29.
33. Raunaq Jahan, p. 20.
34. Interview, Amir ul Islam.
3B. Bhutto Z.A. The Great Tragedy... p- 5.
. _36. Ayub, p. 188.
. 37. Mahmod, Safdar, p. 41.
38. Interview, Rahman Sabhan.
39. Interview, Emajuddin Ahmad.
40. Interview, Munir ul Hussain.
41. Syeed, K.B., Politics in Pakistan - The Nature and Directions of Change.
Preager Publications, New York, 1980, p. 63.
42. Mugqeem, p. 33.
43. Jahan Raunagq, p. 24.
44. Mahmood, Safdar, p. -10.
45. Sison and Leo E. Rose, War and Seccession, Pakistan, India and the Creation
Bangladesh, University of California Press, Berkeley, LA. 1990, p. 10.
4G. Pakistan Public Service Commission Reports.
47. Subramanyam, K. Ayoob, The Liberation War. S. Chand and Company Pvt.
Ltd. New Delhi, 1972, p. 33. (Figures taken from census of Pakistan).
48. eee BR. (ed) Thoughts on Pakistan. Thatcher Co, Bombay, 19:11, P.
49. Mahmood, Safdar, p. 33.
50. Dawn, 2 July, 1952.
51. Ambedkar, p. 56. .
52. Jahan Raunag, p. 25.
53. Subramanyam gives a lower figure, p. 38.
54. Sisson and Leo Rose, p. 10.
55. New York Times, 22 April, 1966.
56. Subramanyam, p. 3.

Causes of Alienation 91
57. Chaudhry, G.W, p. 8.
58, Jahan Raunagq.
ai condom 10 pa Mapierre, Freedom at Midnight, Pan Books Ltd.
OO Suffolk, UK, 1983, p. 13, alco oe Tari At oe Military Rae
Peoples Power, London, 1970. , uutary Rule or
61. Maswani, p. 13.
62. Interview, Professor Qayoom.
63. Collins Larry, Dominque Lapierre, p. 129.
64. Sved,.p. 47.
65. Mahmood, Safdar, p. 1-1.
66. Ibid.
67. Palit, D.K, Maj Gen, The Lightening Campaign. Compton Press, Salisbury
19172, p. 23. v
68. Salik, p. 7.
. Bhutto, Z.A. Myth of Independence. p. 184.
70. Syed, p. 69.
71. Rashidi; M.A. Indo-Pak Relations, Pakistan Study Centre. University of .
Sindh, Jamshoro, Pakistan, 1988.
72. Choudhry, G.W. p. 30
73. Williams, Rushbrook, The East Pakistan Tragedy, Drake Publishers Inc.
New York, 1992, p. 108.
74. Rashidi, p. 25.
75. Interview, Rahman Subhan.
76. Ahmad Vigar; Amjad, Rashid, Management of Pakistan's Economy, 1947-
1982, Oxford University Press Karachi, 1981, p. 12.
77. Malik, Hafeez Dr. p. 96.
78. Wilcox, W. The Emergence of Bangladesh, American Enterprises, Institute
of Public Policy Research, Washington DC, 1973, p. 17.
79. Jahan, Raunagq, p. 82.

Regional Inequality - Remedial Measures
The facts mentioned in the earlier chapter certainly give the
impression to a casual reader that East Pakistan was
discriminated against and was not given its due share in the socio-
political life of the country, nor were sincere efforts made to
reduce the glaring economic disparity between the two wings. It
will, however, not be correct to conclude that no attempt was °
made to correct the imbalance between the two regions, and that
there was a deliberate policy of economic strangulation of the
eastern wing.
According to Mahboobul Haq, “underdeveloped countries do
shelve all ideas of equitable distribution and welfare state". This is
so because resources are allotted to areas where maximum and
quick returns are expected. Gustav Papanek maintains that
"inequalities exist in several countries but its importance must be
- put in perspective", the famous Harward group of economists
Arthur Lewis and Henry Johnson infact advocate "tolerance of
inequality”. ”
Even in West Pakistan, the rate of economic growth was not
the same in the four provinces. Balochistan and rural Sindh were
far behind Punjab and Karachi in industrial development. The
villagers of Saranan and Dalbandin in Balochistan live in the
medieval ages while those around Sialkot boast of TV aerials,
frigidaires and modern cooking facilities. In all countries, | Ji
developed and underdeveloped, more so in the case of the latter, |
regional inequalities exist. The states of Texas and Arizona are
not half as prosperous as Washington and New York. The North-
west territories of Canada have a lower standard of living than
Ontario and Quebec in the Ae Financial resources in a free
- market economy, generally gravitate towards areas which promise
quicker and greater returns. =.
he Economic development requires an industrial culture not —
\allocation of money. Foreign exchange obtained from the ik iw
jute was no doubt over fifty percent of the total export earnings ©

94 Tragedy of Errors
Pakistan but that alone could not have berg tne standard of
living of the Bengalis at par with the Punjabis. Itt ahi the only
criteria, then East Bengal before Partition wou not have
remained a slum while Calcutta near-by rolled i aes Wealth
obtained from the golden fibre. United Germany 18 facing a Similar
problem of bringing its eastern half at par with the erstwhile West
Germans. The ‘Ossies’, as the East Germans are called, do not
) have the capacity to absorb the money which Bonn is prepared to
\ spend on them.
Allocation of financial resources 1s only a small input into the
total requirement. Without communication infrastructure, power
generation, skilled labour, managerial expertise, technical, and
scientific education, entrepeneurship and a willingness to take
‘risks, rapid economic progress 1s not possible. With a non-
| favourable investment climate even foreign aid is not easily
forthcoming. All of these cannot be implanted overnight. It takes
time to catch up with a more developed region if it be in the same
_ country more so when it is geographically divided.
The questions which need answering are, however, what steps |
did the leadership in Pakistan take to redress the grievances of its
eastern wing? How far did they succeed and why did they fail in
achieving a measure of national integration between the Bengali
a and the rest? fem, a
\ Language Issue Resolved
. After having queered the pitch, steps were taken to pacify the
— of the Bengalis on the language issue. Bengali was
ton y accepted as the second language of Pakistan in 1956 when
; was — in the 1956 Constitution. The Bengali script
= “i on BUC. notes, postage stamps, official documents
in some public places as well. Bengali members of the
constituent assembly and the central legislature were allowed to
address the House in Bengali. Efforts were al ;
Marshal Ayub to introduce a comn i lig — by Fiel
It was an uphill task which ; non script for Bengali and Urdu.
beginning. Gover n was a non-starter from the vely
nment officials posted in-E
west were encouraged to learn B . ast Pakistan from the
frontier corps i n Bengali but unlike officers in the
; ‘ps 1t was not made compul
~¢ertain proficiency in Bengali withi pulsory for them to acquire 4
Political R In a specified period of time.
4 epresentation Remedied
Ss mentioned earlier a 3
. ma . .
Bengalis from the West Pakistan i nse for the alienation of the
as their inability to get what

Regional Inequality - Remedial Measures "
they considered to be their rightful share in iti ,
The political steps.taken to give the Bengalis assy heme
of the country’s administration, in keeping with the fact that th 2
y constituted the majority of the population, were not, however. as
inadequate as it was made out to be. = ,
The Basic Principles Report of 1950 which was the first
attempt made at formulating a constitution for the country
recommended a parliamentary system of government with a
bicameral legislature. The lower house was to comprise of
representatives from both the wings based on the basis of
population. This would have ensured a larger number of members
from East Bengal. In the upper house equal representation was to
be given to all the federating units irrespective of their size, This is
the practice taken from the mother of parliaments. So is the case
in the Rajya Sabha in India where each state has been allotted
equal number of seats. Uttar Pradesh, with the largest population
has the same representation in the Rajya Sabha as Rajastan with
a very small population.
In the first constituent assembly out of a total of 74 members”
44 were Bengalis. Again in 1954, the new constituent assembly ,
accorded a greater number of seats to East Bengal. There were 44”
members from the eastern wing out of a total of 79 seats!. This
should have more than satisfied the demand of the East Bengalis.
As regards the two most important. posts of the governor-
general and the prime minister of the country, after the death of
the founder of the nation and that of Liaqat Ali Khan, both the |
appointments were held by Bengalis. Khwaja Nazimuddin ~
followed the Quaid-e-Azam, as the head of state and Muhammad ;
Ali Bogra became the chief executive after Liagat Ali Khan. If
Nazimuddin was not considered to be a blue-blooded Bengali
because he came from the Urdu speaking family of the Nawabs of
Dacca, West Pakistanis should hardly be blamed. The fact that.he
eventually proved to be weak and indecisive, though thoroughly
. honest and sincere, was again not a deliberate attempt to keep the
Bengalis down. In 1948 there was no other Bengali leader who
could be elevated to the highest post in the land. Both Maulvi _,
Fazlul Haq and Hussein Shaheed Suharwardy stood discrete VA
because of their dilly dallying on the ideas of a United Bengal.
Other Bengali politicians had still not come on the centre stage.
Suharwardy did, however, become the prime minister of Pakistan
In the late fifties.

96
Tragedy of Errors
All the chief ministers of East Pakistan from 1947 to 1958 wep,
indigenous and not imported from West Pakistan. Khwaj,
Nazimuddin was the chief minister from August 14, 1947 yj)
September 11, 1948. He was followed by Nurul Amin, Maulvi A
K. Fazlul Hag and Ata-ur-Rahman, and then came Ayub’s martig]
law of 1958.
The 1956 Constitution, which was the first constitution
adopted by the country gave parity between the two wings. Thus
reducing the representation of the Bengalis at the Centre some
what but still ensuring that the West Pakistanis are not in a
position to dominate over them. Even in the case of parity the
East Bengalis were in a position of advantage as they were more
homogeneous in their political outlook whereas the people in West
/ Pakistan were divided between several political parties some
diametrically opposed to each other. The_political spectrum in|
West Pakistan ranged from the extreme left to the extreme right. ,
The Sindhis, Punjabis, Pathans, and Balochis had their own
interests to protect and quite a few political parties could be won
over by the Bengalis on issues that affected the interests of both.
The same could not be said of East Bengal.
Two other demands of East Bengal were met. Although the
system of separate electorates was preferred and adopted in West
Pakistan the Bengalis were allowed to chose their representatives
on the basis of joint electorates, as many of them depended on the
support of the Hindu Bengalis to get a majority. The younger
generation of Bengalis should have recalled that their elders had
fought for seperate dleciangtes which was conceded to them by E.
S. Montague,-the then secretary of state for India, and Lord
Chelmsford, the viceroy of India in 1919. Forty years later the
Muslims of East Bengal changed their outlook for political!
expediency.
> The third demand was of giving greater autonomy to East
Bengal which was conceded to by giving more subjects to the
Penis ebabeesty, the only Bengali leader who had a national
on tee talking about the 1962 constitution said that 98
autonomy [for East Pakistan] has been achieved”
ine ee mealies when Field Marshal Ayub formed his
Pakistan. G se 4 members each from West and from East
- General Yahya Khan appointed an equal number of

|
Regional Inequality - Remedi *
g edial Measures
ministers and secretaries in the Centre from both wings and
chose, correctly, Shafi-ul-Azam, a Bengali civil service officer, as
the chief secretary of East Pakistan.
Step taken to remove Economic
Disparity between the two wings.
/
East Bengal was the poorest part of the province of Bengal in
undivided India. It had the lowest percentage of urbanisation,
industrialization, literacy, electrical power Capacity and per capita
income at the time of independence. This was to be expected
during British rule as the rulers had no strategic reasons for
developing East Bengal. They concentrated on north-western
India because of a threat to their empire from that direction.
Whatever industries or business concerns existed prior to
independence were in the hands of the Hindus. It was they who
controlled the jute trade. Repatriating their earnings from the 900
million rupee worth of jute being sent to India. Major General
Ayub Khan, then commanding a division in East Bengal foun’ the
area ‘extremely underdeveloped’. The only good roads that existed
was, according to him, "30 mile stretch in Pabna district, a bit of
road near Dacca and Jessore and thats all" He goes on to blame
Maulvi Fazlul Haq and Hussein Shaheed Suharwardy who were
chief ministers of Bengal before Partition for_not improving the
infrastructure in East Bengal. "They did nothing to better the life
of the Muslims there" writes Ayub.
It goes to the credit of the central government that in the very
first Five Year Plan (1955-1960) the objective of ‘rapidly
Increasing the rate of development in East Bengal was clearly
stated’. When Ayub came to power in 1958 he did try to extend
industrialization to areas in East Pakistan as well. Khalid Bin
Sayeed maintains that "Bengali merchants and contractors were
also encouraged to join the growing class of bourgeoisie”.
Field Marshal Ayub mentions the fact that the younger
Seueration of Bengalis were demanding that development in other
Punt - Stopped till their province was brought upto par with
"the « : He, of-course, disagreed with this concept and felt that
ones Sain way was to give greater incentive to less developed
out retarding progress in the other areas”.

