Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 179
;
Bengalis constituted 54 per cent of the population and had a
homogeneous political culture ,they had an advantage over th
politically divided West Pakistan. It Was a decision which should
have been taken after very carefully Consideration. Though-
ratically correct. it was im d i 3 8
democratice er, Prudent in the environment
prevailing oh time, sechiribc once the concept of the winner
 takes,all had been concede reversing the q
| on y) fatal. €mocratic process
|
The decision to postpone the national assemb] ion.
! the Bengalis of their earned status of the majority party = ned
| central legislature. They were looking forward of undoing all the
| perceived injustices which had been committed by the Punjabi-
, dominated. leadership. The cancellation of the earlier
; announcement set the country on the path of self destruction. r |
‘Whether it was Bhutto or some of the generals who
' encouraged Yahya not to hand over power till Mujib modified his
' 6-points,the president alone bears the full responsibility of
postportinne the national assembly session without giving a new 4
date which led to disastrous consequences,
Yahya gave three major reasons for postponing the national
assembly session. These were: (1) a major political party as Well as
certain other political parties have declared their intention not to
, attend the national assembly session on March 3: (2) The tense
" situation created by India had further complicated the issue and
(3) more time was required to allow the leaders to arrive at a
: Teasonable understanding on the issue of constitution making!5,
: None of these were credit worthy. The actual situation was
' that it was only Bhutto and Qayyoom who had decided not to
, attend, with the former demonstrating all his demagogary.
: Maulana Kausar Niazi the Information secretary of the PPP,
Supporting his leader said president’s decision was based on good
‘ Mtentions!06. )
Air Marshal Asghar Khan, the chief of the Tehrik-e-Istiqlal
) Patty advocated immediate transfer of power to the mn OEY
any Nawabzaba Nasrullah Khan, the veteran West oe
Politician and the leader of his Pakistan Democratic re Merion
PPreciate Bhutto not attending the assembly session’.
Maudoodi of th lami said "It would be improper to
seek ; of the Jamaat-e-Is ami ame as of the opinion
* solution outside jthe assembly'!°%; He w

180
Tragedy of Errors
iving of 120 days time limit to frame the constjs,,,
sia ei ta more *avisable!"?, Khan Abdul Wali Kha
the National Awami Party blamed Bhutto for “throwing a Span,
in the works by announcing that he would not attend the Semi,
thus playing a major role in the dismemberment 4
country”!!!, Malik Ghulam dilani president of the Punjab Pekin,
Front, called “the postponement an unfortunate decisio,),
Maulana Ghulam Ghaus Hazarvi was against ‘
postponement!!*, Hashim Khan Gilzai, of the Nationa] Away
party (Wali Khan Group), felt that "the decision was deplory
and undemocratic!" Muhammad Khurshid, president Pani,
Awami League demanded “immediate announcement of g g,.
date''®, Mian Muhammad Yasin Khan Wattoo, Malik M. Jag,
Abid Hasan Manto and Major General Nawabzada Sher Ali Ki,
of the Jamaat-e-Islami in a joint statement at Lahore asked fory,
national assembly to be summoned before March 7, 1971, the dy,
fixed by Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman to hold a public Meeting »
Paltan Maidan Dacca where it was anticipated that Mujib wo,
declare independence for Bangladesh.
Justice Z. H, Lari (CML) deplored the postponement!’
Sardar Ataullah Mengal (NAP) did not approve of the decisi
Air Marshal Nur Khan (CML) urged the president to immediate
fix a new date!!’ otherwise the damage done would be too gr:
and difficult. to repair. He felt that Mujib has a right to ruje!lé
Major General Sarfraz Khan, vice president of PDP, opine
that it was a step in the right direction!'® but later he urged
president to hand over power to Mujib!*". Ataur-Rahman-Khaa¢
the Pakistan National League in East Pakistan, which -¥
opposing the Awami League in the election, now felt that &
decision of the president was very shocking and in comple!
disregard of the hopes and aspirations of the people. Profes*
Ghulam Azam of the East Pakistan Jamaat-e-Islami commen
that it was most unfortunate that the normal course of democ
had been obstructed. Shamsul Huda of the East Pakistan Mus”
League angrily retorted "I have been shocked and grieved , wh
asked for his comments. Nur-ul-Amin of the PDP felt this fill
receded the prospects of framing the country’s constitution’
Dawn in its editorial wrote "We are at a cross road. The sf!
of elation and optimism that prevailed after the elecU
yielded place to dismay and) uneasiness"!22, A.Z, Sulet ae
know ous nalist ahd alorle time lehdittan of the Pakistan Ne
i.

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the Ena), aa
apers was also of the opin;
an been held on the date cn that the national assemb]
shoul ‘ Ze announced even if Bh Y
poycotted it. utto had
Almost all the political parties were ava;
General Yahya’s statement regarding Peking rstPonement.
leaders was, therefore, incorrect as it was Only the oe Political
more political party which favoured the Postponement and one
jreotr one others who‘opposed it. aS against
(t
The other reason for Postponing the national :
given by General Yahya was that the general tone mews
created by India had further complicated the whole Position. This
did not hold water either as India’s interference in the
developments in East Pakistan had been evident since long and it
was increasing day by day. Postponing the session only made ©
India more determined to see their game through before normalcy
returns,
The third reason of allowing more time to the political leaders
to arrive at a reasonable understanding on the issue of
constitution making was also a Sop as only six days later he
announced a fresh date which was not too far away. ;
The reaction of the two main rivals in East and West Pakistan
Tanged between surprise and extreme anger. Mujib was angry.
bitter and frustrated. He said “the postponement will not go
nnchallenged." He deplored the postponement and called for a
hartal on March 7, 197 11°, Bhutto having set the mischief a foot }
became as cool as a cucumber. He said "surely nothing is lost, if
the promise of a United Pakistan is accepted, by a delay fe few
days to enable the major parties to come to an agreement". -
being asked whether he was consulted by the president ae : e
| decision, he replied "No No not at all!"!25 He did not think t ‘ -
Pak of no return had reached. He considered the re wy days
dp Stan as disproportionate, though he bigest onl en det
atten 8olng to set Khyber to Karachi on fi 4 that Mujib
show i. the NA session. The only ae » entire Borgel
populatic. the world that ne one SS 6 Points whereas
Bhy ~ on of East Pakistan in support o Aociual. ¥,
to's Statements were more boastful than e ?

\
182 Tragedy of Errors
Reactions to the Postponement in ancien
J premeat in East Pakistan as soon
All hell was — ark wave of anger and bitterness apa
announcement was ugh the whole of East pa)...
the West Pakistanis swept throug’ akista,
Sheikh Kamal, son of Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman was watchin,
cricket match between Pakistan and the international cleye, ,
Dacca when the radio cricket commentary was interrupted at 15
p.m. by a brief announcement about the Postponement Of the
national assembly session. Ahmad Salahuddin, sitting nearby, Say
Sheikh Kamal getting up from his seat, and along with oth
Bengali friends tearing the shamianas and setting fire to them. He
, was then seen leaving the ground in disgust. Soon the spectato,,)
stand was empty as almost all those who had come to watch the
match walked out. It was the beginning of the break up of,
_/ United Pakistan. ,
The daily ‘People’ of Dacca in its editorial of March 2, 197
wrote "Only for the sake of a minority party’s agreement the
democratic process of constitution making has been obstructed
and the national assembly session has been postponed sine die’
An impromptu press conference was called at Purbani hotel
Mujib was furious. He became raving mad. "You would see history ,
made if the conspirators fail to come to their senses. It is the duty
of every Bengali ..... not to cooperate with those who are against
handing over of power and instead do everything in their power to
foil the conspiracy against were pasa the Bangabondu -
(literally brother of the Bengalis) (It was the first time that Sheikh
Mujib had called East Pakistan, Bangladesh). Doctor Kama
Hussein went to Admiral Ahsan to ask him to request the
President not to postpone the session sine die.
The people came out on the streets to express their indignation
Coane deprived their legal right to fonp & pvemnment a the
Bengal ogans against martial law authorities were raised. No
alls Were attacked, their houses and sh re looted. The
army was called out in aid of civ; let ter istal
administration, There were clashes Pong tte oe the a
and the mobs. By the time ce din pre me on 0 d 358
y were removed to the hone subsided 172 lay dead an
. The situati :
Pékistan of tare Mrs pi aie intelligence agencies in .
East Pakistan. B 4, read "General public reacted sha!P
‘an. bengal independent f ms, fit?
3 Benen, drive out West Pakistanis. oon, today, take Up oF re
"(slogans being ges stanis, occupy cantonments Ori
* Announcement has brought, the é

7 183
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End)
rties to the side of the Awami League. Mujib likel to announce
independent ea = ambassador keSping close touch
| with Mujib. - “a I - Press conference on president’s
, announcement. | = e ah ge eae as alleged conspiracy.
Declared eet eague would observe Province-wide strike on
March 3. Likely to announce future policy on March 7"126.
: Complete strike was observed in Dacca on March 1, the strike
, was extended to the whole of the province on March 3, ‘which was
; declared a day of mourning. It was the day on which the assembly
session was to be held. The day when the Bengalis, for the first |
, time in the twenty four years of Pakistan’s existence, were to
display their numerical superiority at the Centre. It was a day
| when the first elected Bengali would have been Sworn in as the
prime minister of Pakistan. It was the moment of glory. But
instead of music and dancing on the streets of Dacca there was a
' mass outburst of anger against the ‘Shala’ Punjabis. Portraits of
| {the founder of the nation were burnt, the Pakistan flag was
\) |desecrated, the army was abused and taunted, water and
electricity to the cantonment was cut off and the food supplies
‘stopped, Bangladesh national anthem was played on Dacca TV on
! March 3, now controlled by Awami League volunteers, arms were
' distributed to Awami League workers from government stocks, !27
' Dacca cantonment was besieged, the plaque at Iqbal Hall at the
| Dacca University was removed and replaced by the plaque, Zahur-
_ -ul-Haq hall in honour of the PAF sergeant who was killed while in
| army custody in connection with the Agartala conspiracy. Jinnah
_ Hall was renamed Surya Hall. .
‘All government offices remained closed from March 3,
onwards. There was arson and looting. The army and the para
military forces had to open fire. Several people including
policemen were killed. Radio station, Sylhet was attacked for
broadcasting in Urdu. Lieutenant Nazr-ul-Islam of 24 Field
Regiment Artillery, was shot at near the railway crossing, ig P
€ Dacca cantonment, on March 5". The sitrep of Mare 6)
guided by saying “everything possible should be done to avol
Tontation or escalation’. ‘
The issue was internationalised when an application was sen
tte United Nations for admission of Bangladesh. Oe ae
4 forefront of the United Nations building + cee aves ths
V Pakj ly pulled down and efforts were made to
~stan Embassy in Washington!”8

184
Tragedy of Errors
Sahibzada Yaqub, who had replaced Ahsan as governor of
Pakistan rang up Peerzada to ask Yahya to come to Dacca, He
a favourable reply though no date was specified. He was tole’
keep talking to Mujib and ask him not to declare a UDI, Yah
invited Mujib to attend a meeting at Dacca on March 19 n
Awami League leader rejected the invitation saying “Wikia”
civilians are being killed and that he would be called upon to a
with certain elements (referring to Bhutto) whose dey; sit
machinations were responsible for the death of innocent pear
workers and students!2®. On March 3, Yaqub again urged Yah
to come to Dacca. On the night of 4/5 March Yahya telephones
Yaqub and conveyed his inability to go to Dacca for the time be
"I have changed my mind I am not coming to Dacca” said re
President to the new governor. Yaqub, a disciplined soldier
scion of the Nawab of Rampur (United Provinces, India) breiughe
up in the highest traditions of a noble family, polite, suave a
immaculate in his behaviour to seniors and juniors alike elt th
_he had no other option but to resign. He was too os 7”
| gentlemen, to use military force against his own conviction ;
| against his own people. He did what an officer and a gentl “i
a in such circumstances. "If the President cra fe
ects tok onan be relieved of my responsibilities” wrote
The top secret si from Y. a —
fat Pale cal sy a
itary so ution. I had urged you to i
solution. I did not succeed. There is oh palltaes pol nee
problem. A military solution would lead to large scale killings 0
innocent civilians. It would 0 Zarge scale Ste
not help in achieving th It could,
on the other hand, lead to catastrophi Bees. t
accept a mission which would = Sea ates
hereby offer my resignation"!30, prove disastrous. I, therefore
On March ‘
the President oh ee the signal, General Yaqub rang up
telephone at the president's house Hel, Peerzada picked up ve
convey my resignation to th Pros He heard Yaquh saying bie
off but Yaqub was seriou e President")Peerzada tried to lavg”’
Speak to the President" : at fe pave: “shige eegeln ie
Peerzada asked Yaqub as g ed Peerzada. The reply was "N®
left. Yaqub said that G o who would handle the situation if
Division would do so, eneral Khadim Hussain Raja, GOC 3

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) on
erzada broke the news to Yahya w ;
uae setiat the hell is he talking shout hee anna sak he
president” to his PSO. "No sir he is serious" replied his PSO. =
a while Yahya’s mood changed from bewilderment to . After
against a subordinate who had dared to refuse his instructions
General Yahya was visibly angry with Yaqub. He dowel ts
General Hamid, who was also present, and said "take actio
against Yaqub..Hamid nodded and added that a vepleedinant
would be necessary. The name of Bahadur Sher, a very strong-
willed corps commander was mentioned. It is believed that he like
a few others, politely declined to go to East Pakistan at ‘that
critical juncture.
The only loyal general, who would carry out orders without
uestioning, was Lieutenant General Tikka Khan. He was
despatched to Dacca straightaway to take over from General /
Yaqub.
Yahya, liked Yaqub, but deserting a sinking ship was not what ,
he had expected of his generals. He was visibly angry at Yaqub
and wanted even to court martial him for showing weakness in
command. He was demoted to his substantive rank. Thus Yaqub’s
4-day old governorship of East Pakistan came to an ignominious
end.
}
a wSahibzada Muhammad Yaqub Khan had just turned 51 when
~he decided to resign in protest against the policies of his C-in-C.
Commissioned in the 31 Punjab Regiment (later joined the 18
Cavalry Regiment), in December, 1940, Yaqub had a brilliant
career. As a young officer he had seen active service in the
European theatre in World War II, where he was taken a prisoner
of war by the Germans. While in captivity he learnt German, and
Italian. later he added French and Russian to his linguistic
Vocabulary, |
Immediately after independence Yaqub was appointed = —
rommandant of the prestigious Governor General’s —
In the times of the Quaid-e-Azam. He went on to attend the Eco c
eperieur e de Guerre (French War Course) In Sel and Staff
on as a member of the directing Staff of the ae the
French’ Wr Coneral de Lachanes, ea ‘very brilliant
ofionss War College, considered Yaqub to be

186 Tragedy of Errors
- General Yahya as his vice chief of
He first served Wnrmer was the CGS. Yahya thought hin
be “a officer of a very high calibre with unbiassed views". He was
sess an “exceptionally wide knowledge of his
ateniten ye deep thinker". In 1967 General Yahya, who jy
Pow had become commander-in-chief, always ‘found his advigg
balanced and sensible and rated Yaqub as “highly intelligent ang
clear-headed with an analytical mind which could assess intricate
problems correctly". But yet the same reporting officer two years
| later demoted Lieutenant General Yaqub Khan for not handling a
critical situation in East Pakistan to his satisfaction. Perhaps this
was due to the trait noticed by Lieutenant General Bakhtiar Rana
who in 1963, remarked that Sahibzada Yaqub has a "trend of
mind, behaviour and liking which is more on the staff side than
_/ command”.
It was Yaqub’s moral strength, however, which enabled him to
resign rather than carry out orders of his superiors contrary to his
belief.
To prevent the volatile situation in East Pakistan from going
completely out of hand Farman. was sent to Rawalpindi on March
5. He briefed the CMLA Headquarters about the fact that if no
political solution is found within the shortest possible time East
Pakistan would blow up in flames.
Yahya then realised that he had to go and talk to Mujib and try
to pacify him and make him more accommodative. He spoke t0
Mujib on the telephone on March 6, 1971 and told him “not
take any hasty decision as he will be coming to Dacca shortly and
will discuss details with him"!5!, Belatedly and as a reaction to the
ee in Kast Pakistan Yahya announced March 25, as the fresh
or the national assembly session.
pice ee resorted " - parc 26, (the date on which "alin
burning, looting anitugehi ‘ the. government) there bis s “ay
Bengalis. Some’ Mivee rickbatting and ae aeAOD oak
Pakistanis Kat put the figure of Biharis and
ar ; ed by Awami League militants as 100,000
| including 15,000 at Santahar, 10 000 at Chi d 2,000 2
| Mymensing!33, Thej; sho ae itlagong uae thei!
| | women folk tak PS Were gutted, their houses looted, ie
| “4 pv away and raped and bodies mutilated. A W»°
community had gone heser mutila oe
erk.)The pent up. feelings of yirule”

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 187
inst their so called ‘exploiters’ :
sowed his ‘country men’ tb run pee out in the open. Mujib
would call for reprisal by the law enforcing ag te conditions which
then give him a chance to cty ‘wolf’ and ae for foreigner =
The government of Pakistan, initially played
being wrought by the Bengalis as they did yed down the havoc
impression to the world that East P aia want to give the
against the Centre and hatred for the = was up in arms
reached to an extent that their very pr om Pakistanis had
no longer tolerated. Presence in East Bengal was
Newspapers and handou i
suffered by fon: Haapalis on ake sated - report the casualties
two-nation theory and it would sini Would disprove the
ey Ould provoke reprisals in West
Pakistan’. Both of these excuses were with justificat;
Ethni : vere without justification.
thnic groups and different communities do figh :
other to protect their own rights even if they belon 1 the _
faith. So if Bengali Muslims and Punjabi Musalmans fired oh each
other it no way meant that the two-nation concept was disproved.
Th .
details of the Beret ened in August, 1971 gave the gory
é fisted engall uprising. It was too late as it was taken to be
Pakis cation for the perceived ‘genocide’ conducted by the
woven hina after March 25, 1971 to restore the writ of the
wie, unexpected violent reaction to the postponement of the ,
Bhutte saat shook even the steely nerves of Zulfigar Ali
bn e tried to put up an innocent face to his people, after
the PW in the fateful decision of the postponement of
‘ oe onal assembly session, by telling gullible audiences "Allah
dinwsoaan that all our efforts since the election have been
aR to find a solution to the constitutional problem which
Pakistay only right the injustices done to the people of East
in all m in the past, but also enable the nation to live in harmony
Posty its parts. It is most unfortunate that a necessary
ihdied ee of the national assembly session should have
Leagy 8 disproportionate reaction in the East Pakistan Awami
Session - We demanded postponement of the national assembly
to ae only to provide the two major parties with an opportunity
Hon oe another dialogue" was the sheepish excuse given by the
ot West Pakistan'36, As if just one or two dialogues more
~ www.balochlibrary.com

4
188
Tragedy of Errors
between Mujib and him would have disentangled the Gorg;
knot. which both of them had themselves tied with ir
determination and firmness. ur
These were crocodile tears. Trying to put wool jn Othe,
people’s eyes. If it was a matter of a few days postponement why
did ke not advise the President to announce the fresh date for
summoning the national assembly session as was being requests
, by the authorities in Dacca. If the leaders of the two major Parties
had not come to an agreement outside the assembly in the three
months between the announcement of the election results ang the
calling of the assembly session ) how could the complicated
constitutional issues be solved in the next few days.
It is more likely that Yahya, his close military advisers anq
Bhutto did not expect such a violent reaction. They probably
thought that the threat of "the whole exercise being called off
would bring the Awami League to their senses. Little did they
know that it would only harden their determination to get their
pound of flesh and even more, if it came to an open conflict. The
postponement gave Mujib the solid support he needed to virtually
run a parallel government in East Pakistan. After March 3, his’
was the only authority whose directives were implemented
without hesitation in complete violation of the writ of the
established government. What angered Mujib more was that,
though being the leader of the majority party, he was not
consulted regarding the postponement!®”,
By now the credibility of the martial law authorities had been
lost. Tempers rose, slogans against West Pakistan rented the
Dacca skies as Mujib breathed fire at the Ramna race course
' ground on March 7, in front of the biggest public gathering East
Pakistan had ever seen. According to intelligence agencies 60,000
attended. Bangladesh flags were hoisted. No Pakistani flags we!
seen. People armed with lathis (wooden sticks) and iron rods
shouted in unison "We want the blood of Punjabis. Bengalis,
Biharis, Hindus, Pathans, Sindhi, Balochi Bhai Bhai" (brother:
ujib was at his best. He was totally in charge. No one 1n Bast
Pakistan not even the martial law authorities could oppose him on
that day.
“Amar Janbhomi Maati" (Land of my birth), opening stanzas of
a revolutionary song picked up from Calcutta’s New Theatre A
production company, blared out from the loudspeakers while t
people waited for their leader to come. to the stage.

