Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 149
General Raja flew over the entire area and told governor § M
Ahsan of the enormity of the situation. Chief secretary Shafi-ul-
Azam a Bengali, advised Ahsan that "we will manage it on our
own". General Raja deployed two brigades (three fourths of his
troops) purely for relief work. "Troops waded through waist deep ,~
water to deliver food" he said.
Maulana Bhashani, asked for the elections to be postponed
because of the havoc caused by the cyclone but Mujib was against -
postponement. He had been given a |stick by nature to beat
Islamabad with. he wanted to strike while the iron was hot. He
did not want the tempers to cool down. He thundered at the top of
his voice wherever he went "while we have a substantial army
stationed in West Pakistan. it is left to the British marines to bury
our dead in Patuakali"®°. This was not entirely correct. The army
jawans did bury the dead. It was the Bengalis, who did not want to
touch them. Although they were being paid Rs.10/- for burying
one dead person. Some who did, buried the same person twice to
earn another Rs.10/-°!. This was independently confirmed by
Brigadier Shafi.
Pilots of 4 Army Aviation Squadron flew numerous sorties,
some in very bad weather conditions. Encouraged and guided by
“Lieutenant Colonel Nasirullah Khan Babar, they flew by night
without instruments carrying 4 tonnes of relief goods, in each
helicopter against the specified 3 tonnes cargo limit. They
continued providing help and succour to the flood affected victims.
for two to three months but received no words of praise from the
Awami League whereas much was made of the limited assistance
provided by the foreigners to score political points. Mr Bhutto was
also flown to the cyclone affected island of Bhola in one of the
helicopters. But he was besieged by an angry crowd of Bengalis
which forced him to rush back into the heilcopter®.
Joseph McFarlane, The US ambassador to Pakistan,, arranged
for 12 Huey helicopters which were flown in from Vietnam within
a fortnight®3, Though outside assistance was asked for and was
rae Me deliberately used this natural calamity to gain
Political clout.
The Western press, including the respected Times of London,
blamed West Pakistan for showing neglect in dealing with relief
Operatj h disasters. Armed
Perations and for not taking steps to avert suc

150
Tragedy of Errors
forces of Pakistan were criticised for not performing their jo} With
full zeal and for not utilising their full potential. It complaingy ,
‘not_spending money on flood control in East Pakistan Whil,
spending large sums on the Tarbela Dam in West Pakistan’ I
should have known that such large projects 1n under develo),,
countries are financed by multinationals and international aid
giving agencies. They ensure that only those projects are accept,
which are technically feasible and where returns are promising
(Twenty years after independence of Bangladesh a cyclone
even greater intensity struck the same deltaic regions on May |
1991. Over a hundred thousand citizens of Bangladesh perished
millions were rendered homeless. Begum Khalida Zia, the newly
elected prime minister of Bangladesh, had to ask for assistancg
from the world community. Foreigners once again came to locat,
and bury the dead. But Mujib was no longer on the scene to put
the blame on the West Pakistanis for this sacrilege act. The Times.
of London did not question the Bangladesh Government for not |
‘spending money on flood control instead of other projects of g
more pressing nature. Even the resources of a_super-power were
not able to bring instant relief to their citizens affected by
Typhoon Andrew which struck the south coast of florida in
August, 1992.
Election Results - Expectations
The army and its intelligence agencies did not expect the
Awami league to capture enough seats to enable them to get
clear majority in the House®4. They had estimated that although
the Awami League would get the greatest number of seats ani |
would perhaps be the single largest political party at the Centre, it |
would need the support of the other parties to form a government
That would mean giving up its rigid stance on the 6-Point |
formula. There would then be a ‘bandar bat’ (division without |
reasoning) said General Akber. Those watching the political scet™
iota e Pest ice success in the elections to the Awall
would et aboat 7 Raja, however, estimated that Awami leagut
CMLA HQ ri ut 75% of the seats and sent this assessment to the |
els seanie s time went on Major General Ghulam Jilani Khe" |
was in the Martial Law Headquarters, D hat time and
later became the DG ISI, changed his iphiedl ext io i and gave |
the Awami League 85 percent of the seats eeMmate |

7 151
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End)
The government functionaries were basing their assessment
on the reports being Initiated by the intelligence agencies
operating in East Pakistan. They, it appears, were giving a false
picture of the actual situation on the ground. According to them
those who came to hear Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman went back
somewhat disillusioned. A typical Situation Report (SITREP) read
as follows “Sheikh Mujib addressed public meeting at Nandial
(Mymensingh) June 1 (.) approximately 6,000 attended (.) 50% of
audience left meeting and confusion ensued" comments (.)
incident points to unmistakable signs of some disillusionment of
East Pakistan people with Sheikh Mujib and his Awami League.
(SITREP 030700 June 1970, confd 1535). Another SITREP stated
"massive show on Shaukat - Islam Day by Muslims indicate their
unflicting faith in Islamic-cum-Pakistan ideology” (SITREP June
1, 1970). These situation reports were sent by the DG ISI to the
joint chief of staff (JCS), ministry of defence, chief martial law
headquarters and to the president’s house daily. The ISI staff in ,
East Pakistan were obviously sending reports more in tune with »~
what their bosses were feeding to the CMLA than with the actual
situation.
Even _G. W. Choudhry, the Bengali constitutional adviser to
the President and the minister of communication in his
nominated civilian cabinet, while addressing the Pakistan Society
in London in September, 1970 also said that "there is no likelihood
of any single party gaining an absolute majority either in West or
in East Pakistan"67,
On the eve of the elections General Yahya broadcast a message
to the nation which spelt out the government’s plan for handing
Over power and a warning to those who may try to obstruct the
first phase of the transition to a civilian government:
"Let me at this stage remind you that these general elections
are being held under the provisions of the legal frame work order
and under the overall cover of martial law. The elections are only
the first phase of our plan. The next phase will be the framing of
the constitution and the final phase will be the transfer of power
to the elected representatives. Sovereignty will pass to the
national assembly on the conclusion of this last phase and on
lifting of martial law. I would like to suggest to the elected
"epresentatives and in particular to the leader of the political
parties, that they could usefully employ the period between the

152
Tragedy of Errors
election and the first session of the national sasemnbly in getyj,
together and arrive at a consensus on the main provisions of *
_ future constitution. This will call for a spirit of give and take, t, .
in each other and realisation of the extreme Importance of thig
particular event in our history. All forces. of law and order, as w.
as the armed forces will see to it that those who either deliberatg)
or otherwise obstruct the completion of this first phase of our play
of transfer of power are severety dealt with and are duly
prevented from doing ors
Results of the Election
The elections did pass off peacefully and no untoward incident
or disturbance at polling booths were reported. The allocation of
the 300 seats in the forthcoming national assembly consisting of
one House only was as follows-
Men Women Total
East Pakistan 162 7 169
Punjab 82 3 85
Sindh 27 1 28
NWFP 18 1 19
Balochistan 4 1 5
Tribal Areas 7 7
ence
Total 300-1 13 = 313
nae ee
Election Results
£
and een of seats contested in East and West Pakistan were 78!
sank at in ie bringing the total number of persons Wh
in the national assembly to thousand five
hundred and seventy nine, a ae 1€79
The total votes cast wer ; 1
were from East Pakistan 34,988,311. Out of which 1 7,198, 3
Pakistan, Fity five percent pone (ooh 260_ were from We
’» wing whereas sixty bas = beople cast their votes in the enti |
"im the western half cf tee ee eer eised their right of franch's
._ western half of the country. In «nj ia d
elections in East Bengal the Sot en Se SG Se ally
. : er ' U
voted was higher in WestPakistan. of eagle who |
|

_—_ es
4 ban
. ——=" 463
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) |S | — J
Awami League won 160 seats out of 162 contested for in East
Pakistan. Seven uncontested women seats also went to the Awami
League, making a total of 167 out of 169. However, Awami League
did not win even a single seat in West Pakistan out of the eight
seats contested. It, therefore, remained a purely regional party.
The Pakistan People’s Party won 81 seats from West Pakistan‘ *§)
out of 120 contested. The six uncontested women’s seats in West ~°
Pakistan also went to the People’s Party making a total of 87 &?
seats. The People’s Party did not put up even a single candidate in
East Pakistan and so remained a regional party even more than
it’s rival the Awami League.
The breakdown in terms of percentage of votes polled by the
two major political parties was as follows:
In East Pakistan, Awami League obtained 75.11% of the votes.
The People’s Party did not contest at all.
In West Pakistan, The Awami League obtained .07%, The
People’s Party obtained 41.66% (Punjab); 44.95% (Sindh); 14.28%
(NWFP) and only 2.38% of votes in Balochistan. Detailed Results
aregivenat Table22, = =
Table 22
DETAILED RESULTS OF THE
DECEMBER, 1970 GENERAL ELECTIONS
East Pakistan _
AL PDP INDEP TOTAL
162 (160) 78 (1) 113 (1) 353 (162)
West Pakistan
AL PPP PML PML PML JUI MJUP NAP _ IND
(Q) (Coun) (Conv) WP) I) (W)
Punjab —«-3(-)_'78(62) 35(1) 50(7) 24(2) 46(1) 440) — = 10805)
Sindh 2(-) 25(18) 12(1) 12(-) G(-) 21(-) 19(2) 6+) 46(3)
NWFP 2(-) 16(1) 17(7) 5(-) 1(-) 18(6) 15(1) 16(3) 16(-)
Baloch-
-istan ) 1) 46) 2) - 4) 2) 33) 66)
Total 8(-) 120(81) 68(9) 69(7) 31(2) 89(7) 80(4) 25(6) 170(8)
Note Figures without brackets indicates seats contested.
Figures within brackets indicates seats won.
Source: Report on General Elections, 1970-1971, Vol. Il, by the
Election Commission Government of Pakistan, pp 14-
122.

154
Tragedy of Errors
Analysis of the Election Results
A cursory survey of the election results show that: (1) they,
was no party which could be called national in character. The i‘
major political parties (AL and PPP) remained confined tp the
respective wings; (2) The Awami League in East Pakistan, thoug,
claiming a landslide victory, got only 75% of the votes. Twenty fi
percent of the East Pakistani electorate, did not favour the 6
Points programme,This is not a small number; (3) In Wey,
Pakistan the PPP did not get an absolute majority in any of the
four provinces. In all the political subunits, PPP fell short of 5)
percent votes, gaining only 2 percent of votes from Balochistap,
| Bhutto could, therefore, not justifiably claim to be speaking fy,
« wt Pakistan,
The December, 1970 elections conducted by the martial law
authorities have been acknowledged by the Awami League
leadership and independent western observers as being fair, free
and impartial. They fulfilled their promise to the nation. However,
Major General Rao Farman Ali’s remarks that the "elections were
~ free for all" are not totally baseless. As the political adviser to the
deputy martial law administrator in East Pakistan ; he could not
have been unaware of the high handedness of the militant group
of the Awami League which played a rolé in ‘coercing’ people to
support Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman. Farman also must. have
known about the futile attempts of the national authorities of
handing out money to the Islam-pasand (Islamist) parties.
An election is generally termed fair if the government agencies
do not interfere in the election process but if they fail to prevent a
dominant political party to use pressure tactics to achieve the
desired results, should they still be accepted as a fair election’
' Thor an 1. Malungod Ali Awami League shad two advantages.
wa, ~olence and they had the monéy which they had
deree wee from foreign sources®®. But one cannot
€ tac att : .
army and against oe Pengalis bad turned against?
Barrister Amin-v). ;
wrong Wht ed hat hey were a ca tt
and neither Maulana Bhashani’ cairn I sendeiod
pouring of money by th Stan's boycotting of the election-nor the
final results Y by the central leadership had any impact on the

Political Quagmire (Beginn; aia
eginning of the End)
After the Elections
In countries where democracy has taken root and democratic
traditions have been well established the frenzy and emotional
outbursts by opposing candidates subside after the elections.
Every one gets back to business as usual The defeated politician
does not wait a second longer to congratulate the winner as soon
as it becomes certain that he has secured the majority vote. On
the date specified the newly elected head of government or head of
state 1s sworn in with all the fan fare and jubilation reserved for
such occasions. The outgoing chief leaves the office with grace to
pursue his academic activities.
Unfortunately in most developing States the fight goes on even
after the election results have been announced. The results are a
challenged. Statements are made by both the winning and losing
candidates which heighten tension. Victory celebrations taunting
the losers are arranged. Attempts are made to disrupt the transfer
of power by the newly elected loyal opposition. Frustrated
politicians threaten to use street power to negate the verdict of the
people. Fears are expressed that the victorious party will act
against the interest of the state. Such was the state of affairs after
the December, 1970 elections,
The result of the election put the military junta in a quandary
as neither of the two major parties were national in character. _
Two masters had emerged each a lion in his own den but a mouse ae
when in the others territory; each uncompromising, selfish to the |\
extent of breaking up the country if need be.
The CMLA Headquarters, based on the reports being received
through the various intelligence agencies, was aware of the fact
that the Awami League would turn out to be the largest single
. Majority party in East Pakistan. But they were almost certains that
it would need the support of the smaller parties to fon re -
government. According to General Peerzada a total victory a
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman was never expected, nor was suc .
Possibility ever considered. With the result that no arene 0
handle such a situation had been carried out at the highest level.
However Peerzada maintained that the election results did not
‘cular reaction by General
cause any terror. There was no particular ave also the
Yahya. He was no doubt, somewhat surprised, as w concerned
Paticipants’?, said Peerzada. But the President was

156 |
Tragedy of Errors
about the fact that Mujib had not won a single seat jp W
Pakistan and similarly Bhutto’s men in the national assem}.
would all be from the western wing. y
» When elections are held by an administration the deci,
contains a commitment. The authorities have to also accept the
consequences of the result of the election. The Awami League bad
won. They were expecting a transfer of power to their leadey A
new dawn had appeared for them bringing in new hopes and
aspirations. Any undue delay in handing over the reigns
government to the majority party was bound to create anxietig,
and suspicion amongst them.
The initial reaction of General Yahya was as it should haye
been. "As far as I am concerned my job is finished"”!, said the
President immediately after the election result had been
announced. Three days later at Dacca,he even mentioned casually
-, that Mujib was going to be the future prime minister of the
' country. "When he comes and takes over I won’t be there?it is
going to be his government soon" declared Yahya”?,
“. But Mujib’s victory was not accepted by many in the military
~ hierarchy including the director general of the powerful inter
services intelligence. "We will not let that bastard rule the
country’" said General Akber. According to Farman twelve/
generals were against handing over of power to Mujib. The
military were afraid that the Awami League, when in power,
would adopt a conciliatory attitude towards India, relegate
Kashmir to the back-burner and direct funds from defence to
“ economic development of East Pakistan. The Bengali
representation in various government departments and
autonomous agencies would be increased with no regard to merit,
qualification or seniority. The authority of the president, which
helped in exercising a check on the policies of the majority party,
would also be eroded. ©
The defeated candidates in East Pakistan accepted their defeat.
The provincial election on 17 December also passed off
peacefully”. Awami League’s clear victory went into the head of
Mujib. He felt all powerful. He lost all sense of proportion. "East
Pakistan had elected a demagogue" said professor Abdul
Qayyoom, a Bengali intellectual. He became a victim o
haw teenie dle was no longer absolutely free as he now, W4S
g controlled by his partymen’®. On 29 December. Dr Kamal
me |

. : 157
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End)
Hussein, who had been elected a member of the national
assembly, urged the people to remain prepared for the
implementation of the six and eleven points through a struggle in
case the constitution is not formed within 120 days’6,
As expected Bengali troops in the armed forces were jubilant
on the success of Mujib. They felt that they would get a greater
representation in the military and that Naval Headquarters may
be shifted to Chittagong’’ which would enable them to serve
longer in their own province.
| Bhutto assumed political control in the West. He was not “
~ prepared to sit in the opposition. "No constitution could be made"
said the civilian dictator and feudal landlord "without PPP’s
cooperation". Ignoring PPP meant ignoring West Pakistan roared
the self_styled Quaid-e-Awam (leader of the masses),;The real
power lay in the Punjab said the strong man of Sindh. PPP and
Awami League should share power at the Center’®, was what ZAB
wanted. His lust for power and his determination not to be over-
lookedsmade him make statements which increased tension in
Kast Pakistan. Counter statements by the Awami League
leadership brought matters to a state of confrontation between the
two major, though regional, parties. Post election politics became ,
a power struggle between Bhutto and Mujib with the military) /
regime playing the role of an arbitrator. Neither of the two'
politicians were by now interested in maintaining the integrity of ©.
Pakistan if that is what would come in their way. The rulers were
saddled with a situation which had gone out of their hand.
__ The major cause for the political impasse after the election was
» the absence of a constitution under which the country was to be
administered. The previous two constitutions, (1956 and 1962)
had been abrogated by the military generals. Pakistan was once
again under martial law and before handing over power to the
newly elected parliament a new constitution had to be framed. the
Awami League was insisting that this should be done inside the ,
assembly which could meet initially for this purpose alone. PPP
Which was the second major party but confined to West Pakistan
alone,was insistent that the principles of the new constitution be
“greed upon between the PPP and Awami League outside ,the
“ssembly. The president and his army generals were inclined to
Support Bhutto on this issue.

158
Tragedy of Errors
Three weeks after the election results were announced B},
: ' esi ith regards t tty
gave three proposals to the President wl gards to the framip
of the constitution; (1) The President, the Awami League anq the
Pakistan People’s Party should sit together and work oy _
agreed constitution or (2) The PPP and Awami League only pa,
together and hammer out a consensus or (3) let the two Make
separate constitutions each for their own wing”. He Was
determined that ‘no constitution could be framed_ nor any
government at the Centre be run without PPP’s cooperation’?
The more he emphasised the role of his party and his ow,
} importance the more rigid became the East Pakistani politicians
The general secretary of the Awami League Mr Tajuddin wag
equally capable of paying Bhutto in his own coin. "The Awan
League is quite competent to frame a constitution and form the
central government without PPP’s support’®!, shouted the
militant and pro-India Awami League leader. "Punjab and Sindh
are no longer bastions of power. Awami League with an absolute |
majority is quite capable of framing a constitution. Cooperation
with parties other than PPP will be sought*?, but there will be no
compromise on fundamental matters of policy. 6 points and 11
Points are no more his (Mujib) or his party’s (Awami League)
properties’*’, blurted Tajuddin and his colleagues.
The Awami League held their first meeting after elections on
January 3, 1971 at the Dacca race course ground. About a million,
people attended. All MNAs and MPAs took a pledge of loyalty*.
They were, however, not in a mood to give in on any of their
demands which had formed the plank of their electioneering |
campaign. They continued to arouse the people to be prepared for |
greater sacrifices if the 6 points were not incorporated in the
constitution.
The Hindu students of the Jagan Nath Hall at Dacca
University raised the ante by organising parades and raising
slogans of ‘Quit Bengal’ and ‘Jai Hind’ (Victory of India). The two
leading students being Dulal Chander Mujamdar and Puremé
Chander Guha**,
al Bhashani also now began holding rallies and meeting
tosh he fad Orel the deco, adi
independent Kast Pakistan“. Slogans like ‘revolution is the or
‘onl a . aunch a guerrilla war’ indicated the changi"’ |
extremist elements. Speakers began to warn Mu)! |

