Causes of Alienation M
Table 8
SELECTION OF CANDIDATES FOR
A REGULAR COMMISSION IN THE PAKISTAN
~ARMY REGULAR COURSES
Qualified Recomm- % Passed
Year "See cota st soy cae al out ~~
ere
Went East West East Wet aw war
West East W.
Pak Pak Pek Pak Pak Pek Pak con pe Pak
966 538 106 179 29 = 33% += 28% «219 ag 156-23 |
1967 1187 163 321 50) 27% ~=— 81% ~= 807g 246 36
1968 1215 122 209 33) «17% = a7% 0-209 «9g 184 26
1969 1132 82 287 40 25% 50% 285 49 241 37
Total: 4072 473! 996 152 29.4% 39.1%2 1020 150 827 1922
Notes
1. The number of candidates who applied for a commission in the
Pakistan Army was much lower in the case of Kast Pakistan.
2. The average percentage of candidates recommended by the
ISSB was higher for East Pakistanis than for West Pakistanis. _
The charge, therefore, of any discrimination as highlighted by,~~
the Bengali leadership was unfounded.
Source: Adjutant General’s Branch, GHQ, Pakistan, letter .
number 05/797/PA-3(a), dated 4 June, 1992 in reply to
a request by the author.
One of the demands brought out by Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman
in his famous 6 Points, which has been discussed in greater detail
in subsequent chapters, was that East Pakistan’s.share in. the JS
defence budget should be in accordance to its strength in t
defence force. It would be useful to recall here the situation in pre-
Independence India. The revenue of the Central Government of
India amounted to Rupees 121 crores in 1944. Out of this Rupees 41/9)
51 crore was spent on the Army. "The bulk of this amount was y
Provided by the provinces which did not provide the manpower for
the Army as will be seen from the following table :

78
Tragedy of Errors
Table 9
CONTRIBUTION TO THE CENTRAL EXCHEQUER, 194
NWFP Rs. 9,28,294
Punjab Rs. 1,18,01,385
Sindh Rs. 5,86,46,915
Bengal Rs. 12,00,00,000
Source: Ambedkar, B.R, Thoughts on Pakistan, Thatcher any
Co, Bombay, 1941, p. 87
Note: Bengal providing. 60% of the outlay with only 2%
- representation.
The reason for a very small number of Bengalis entering the
armed forces was not so. much_beeause of discrimination against
them but because not_many Bengalis-were keen_to join the
military. They were also reluctant to join the armed forces as they
had to serve away from their homes and in a region so far
unfamiliar to them. Lieutenant General Muhammad Atiqur
Rahman, former chief of army staff of the Bangladesh army,
admitted that very few Bengalis wanted to come to the army
before the independence of his country. In his own 9th PMA long
course (1952-1954) there were only 6 Bengali Cadets out of 100. In
the subsequent 10, 11 and 12 PMA long courses there were not
more than 11 from the eastern wing in each course.
There was a Pre-Cadet. Training Sehool in East Pakistan but
not many applied for entry into the armed forces. Those who did
preferred the navy and air force expecting a more sedate life 0
these two services. A similar situation exists in Sindh where !”
spite of forming a Sindh Regiment very few Sindhis want to jo!
the armed forces. Although GHQ had issued instructions that
Sindhis living in rural areas were to be inducted irrespective of
merit, the response was not very encouraging (GHQ lettet
4316/2637/PA-3(a), dated 18 November, 1991).
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman and other Awami League Leadets,
ai made this as another issue to arouse the sentiments of
the Bengalis against the West Pakistanis.
In “hie were justified in feeling insecure during the 1968
P Ree war as there were not enough forces in Eas!
n then to beat back an attack by India. Bhutto’s stateme™
a |

Causes of Alienation 79
that East Pakistan was saved by China was not appreciated by age
East Bengalis. The New York Times reported a ‘Bengali
intellectual as saying "If we owe our salvation to China what need
do we have for Pakistan”. The war over Kashmir highlighted the
fact that East Pakistan could be exposed to an attack by India on
an issue which did not affect their material well being.
Economy
The most vociferous complaint by the intellectuals and the
politicians of East Pakistan was the so-called economic domination
of their province by West Pakistan. Indian writers like K.
Subramanyam, an internationally known defence and political
analyst of India, and Major General D.K. Palit referred to this
phenomena as ‘internal colonialism’*. East Pakistan was taken to |
be ‘a colony of West Pakistan. Western authors accepted this
“theory lock, stock and_barrel. Bengali economists went to great
pains to highlight the imbalance in the trade between the two
wings, the transfer of capital from the East to the West, the
increasing gap in the per capita income and the slow rate of
economic growth in East Pakistan. .
G.W. Choudhry, a senior Bengali civil servant, who was
associated with decision making at various levels, considered
economic disparity as the "most serious challenge to the unity of |
Pakistan". According to him “East Pakistanis felt that their |
interests were not safe with West Pakistan controlling the
economic resources"®’, Self interested political leaders made full
use of the figures quoted by them to bring out the dire need of
' having two separate economies for the two halves of Pakistan.
Most of the statistics mentioned were indeed correct. However,
differences in the standard of living, and a gap in industrial
development did exist even before Independence between the
provinces of Punjab and East Bengal. It continued to remain and
even widen during the twenty four years of a United Pakistan. It
_ Still exists even after two decades of the emergence of Bangladesh.
The question that needs answering is as to why that was so?
Was it a deliberate act of the central leadership to deprive East
« Pakistan of its due share of economic development? Was it due to
} the Policy of a free market economy? Have other nations been able
to wipe out their economically backward areas and achieve
the utopia of a homogeneous development throughout their
countries?

3
a Tragedy of Errors
Raunagq Jahan, acknowledges that much of this was due ty ,
historical legacy**. East Bengal was underdeveloped and WAS th
hinterland of Calcutta. It could only provide raw materials for 4,
industries in West Bengal. Sir Fredric Burrow, Bengal’s last
British governor, predicted that "East Bengal was condemned in
the event of India’s partition to turn into the greatest slum jp
history - a land seared by droughts that alternated With
frightening typhoon-whipped floods”®’, His predictions did not
come true as East Pakistan did come out of the rut after 1947 ang
made a reasonable stride towards progress and prosperity, albeit
not as much as West Pakistan.
Out of a total of 1,414 factories in undivided Bengal only 314
were in East Bengal at the time of Partition. Even these were
owned by the Tatas, Birlas and Dalmias, all Hindu industrialists
who closed their businesses when Pakistan came into being.
In 1947 East Pakistan had no jute mills at all, although all the
jute consumed by the Jute factories in Calcutta was grown in East
Bengal. The 8 cotton and 4 sugar mills which existed in this part
of the province belonged to the Hindus. They were the ones who
lived in mansions, owned shops, ran schools and hospitals and
lent money. Bengali Muslims owned none. they, therefore, lacked
skilled labour, managerial ability and capital®’. There were only 4
few Muslims landlords. Khwaja Nazimuddin and Sir Fazli Rabbi
being amongst them". Rice eating Bengalis had even to depend
on West Bengal for their staple diet as they grew almost no food at
all®’. It was primarily for economic reasons that the Muslims of
“Bengal voted for Pakistan. The Muslims were tailors, barber’,
cobblers and Kummis (low caste). They were fed up with the
economic domination of the Hindus and their almost total
‘ dependence on Calcutta.
f :
1959 they ae the owne sof noe 2 single firm, in 1947.
The tabl ~ ners of 11 percent of all industrial assets”:
e below gives the distribution of industrial assets 1
percentage of the various communities j , us ae
n Pakistan in 1959:

Causes of Alienation 81
Table 10
DISTRIBUTION OF INDUSTRIAL ASSETS
BY COMMUNITIES IN PAKISTAN, 1959
Memon (Khojas and Boras) 29% of all firms
Sheikh and Syeds 12%
Bengalis 11%
British 7.5%
Chinioties,” 6%
Pukhtuns 5.5 .
Others 17% (extrapolated)
Public sector » 12%
Note: The share of Bengalis was higher than all others except
Memons (who are a dedicated, well knit business
community unattached to any other ethnic group) and
the Sheikhs and Syeds who were only 1% higher.
Source: Syed. K.B. Politics in Pakistan - The Nature and
Duration of Change, Praeger Publishers, New York,
1980, p. 47
Industrial development no doubt had moved ahead at a much
faster pace in West Pakistan than in East Pakistan. This was so
because the concentration of industries in an area where the
infrastructure already existed ensured quicker and higher
returns. Also, because there was a structural change in the type of
industries that came up after Partition. Industrial growth took
place in sectors other than those which East Pakistan could
) Support viz:- textiles, leather goods, chemicals, food, cement and
Aertilizer. This meant greater investment of financial resources in
West Pakistan than in East Pakistan.
The total government outlay initially was indeed heavily tilted
towards West Pakistan. In the first seven years of Pakistan the
al wing received Rs. 8,017 million while the figure for the
rn wing amounted to Rs. 2,750 million only®.
K. Subraman --willi t ‘ove his point about
‘Su yam, ever-willing to prove
Pakistan treating its eastern half as a colony, says that mn the
twenty years they stayed united $2.6 billion was transferred from
Bu.

82
Tragedy of Errors
East Bengal to West Pakistan. This has been confirmed by th
figures given by Mahboobul Haq, a former minister of finang, h
the government of Pakistan. He accepts that there was @ ne
_ punter of resources from East Pakistan to West Pakistan to tp,
{une of Rs. 210 million annually during the pre-plan period an,
Rs. 100 million per annum in the plan period”.
The trade figures given at Table 11 gives credence to the
complaint that East Pakistan was being deprived of the benefits ¢
its export earnings. But what is forgotten 1s that resources
generated in one region of a country is not necessarily spent on
that region alone. It is utilised in places where maximum returns
can be obtained. This maxim no doubt can and has heen misuse
to develop areas in which the leaders have some personal or
ethnic interest.
Table 11
EXPORT AND IMPORT FIGURES OF
EAST AND WEST PAKISTAN 1947-1967
| Exports Imports
East Pakistan Rs. 20,982,391,000 Rs. 15,183,796,000
West Pakistan Rs. 15,704,714,000 Rs. 34,388,211,000
Source: Monthly trade statistics of Pakistan June, 1967, Central
Statistical office Karachi, (Tariq Ali, p. 85)
Another issue on which the sentiments of the Bengalis could
be easily aroused was the question of price difference of essential
items between East and West Pakistan. The price of rice which
F was the staple food of Bengalis, was alleged to be four times
_— in East Pakistan than in West Pakistan®’. Edible oil was
. Selling at Rs. 2.50 per seer in the west whereas its price was Rs. 5
per seer in its eastern wing.
ane Wade between the two wings was not only unfavourable ©
East Pakistan it also w. eT eceScct’ first
j as sometimes ‘illogical’. Rubber was ™
imported from the Far East to Karachi and then ‘ned t0
Chittagong®® which raised the ov rachi and then re-shippe
ich raised the price unnecessarily. Even if the!
were some technical reasons for this li thes?
could have been r imi Soma Uontad, paakecanT® f
; emoved. Similarly camoufla ts made out?
Jute in East Pakistan used lage nets made
adi used to be sent for dyeing to West Pakista”
and then re-shipped to East Paki eee: es 48

Causes of Alienation oe
not such a complex problem that it could not be done in the area
where it was being manufactured.
Trading with India had been alwa S a thorny ;
bitter relations between the two count Fe ate the ot
emotional and an economic problem. Having separated from India
and believing that its powerfyl neighbour remained bent on
harming Pakistan, any attempt to increase commercial contacts
was not favourably accepted by the central leadership. West
Pakistanis, in particular, have always been afraid of a cultural and
economic invasion from India. Both the government and the
private sector were afraid of an open trade with India as the
nascent industries in Pakistan needed protection. Indian goods
/were generally cheaper than the corresponding ones produced in
Pakistan. Even an intellectual and a liberal minded Zulfigar Ali
Bhutto could not give up his anti-India stance and continued to
see grave dangers in economic Cooperation with India. To him a
move in this direction could result in joint ventures, joint
participation in hydro-electric schemes, collaboration in
agriculture and industry. As a bitter opponent of appeasement to
India this was totally unacceptable to him®,
East Pakistanis on the other hand did not have the same bitter
feelings against India as the Kashmir problem did not affect them
directly. They were not so emotionally involved as to foergo the
€conomic benefits which could be derived by trading with India.
East Bengal wanted to open up trade with its neighbour and saw
no sense in importing coal from China at Rs. 172 per ton whereas *
it could be bought from India at Rs. 53 per ton. Similarly cement
ftom West Pakistan was costing Rs. 16 per bag when it was
available at Rs. 8 per bag from Assam”,
For a long time the Bengalis were fed with the venom of West
pakistan gaining all the benefits from the jute grown in East
akistan, They were told that jute and tea produced. 70 percent of
the foreign exchange earnings but the Bengalis received only =
itis hard earned money’!. It was also proved that since the jute
ower of East Pakistan was paid in Pakistani rupees he a
being deprived of half the price as the dollar was ee values
According to them the main beneficiary was the ae
oh merchant’ who got Rs. 8.61 for every dollar wo !
ch was exported,

= Tragedy of Errors
It was also true that East Pakistan did not get the same bey, fh
of the industrial development that took place in the Ayub Ejy .
did West Pakistan. The spread effect was not there said Profes,,
Emajuddin of the Dacca University. That is why when the deca,
of development was celebrated on Ayub s orders the Bag
Pakistanis displayed a skeleton on their Shaheed Minar ;,
Dacca",
Foreign aid was another bone of contention, as most of it wa,
being utilised in West Pakistan. Munir-ul-Hussein’s, maj,
complaint against the central ledership was that there WAS greater
industrialisation in West Pakistan; that more foreign aid wa,
given to West Pakistan than to East Pakistan and that his
province was treated like a colony. The term colonial exploitatioy
has been used quite often by Indian, western and Bengali writers
-) Colonial exploitation, however, implies importing raw material
|| from a colony and exporting manufactured goods to it. No figures
are available to prove this fact in the East Pakistan/West Pakistan
equation. On the contrary raw cotton was sent to Kast Bengal ani
turned into cloth in the factories at Mymensingh. Raw jute was
exported not to West Pakistan but to other countries”.
Military assistance primarily benefited the armed forces and
defence related industries which were nearly all located in West
Pakistan. It must, however, be borne in mind that economic aid
had strings attached as they were project oriented. Donor
countries would only give aid where infrastructure and expertise
existed. That was more so in the West than in the East. lt
therefore, became a vicious circle as far as East Pakistan wa
concerned. Rapid development could not take place because of
lack of foreign assistance and foreign aid was not being provided
noose of economic under-development. . , ;
fi he result of all this was and two thirds of the nation’
be "ustry and four fifths of the bafking and insurance assets wel
eng controlled by West Pakistan’, Before ind ependence the
Hindus dominated the industries After the creation of Pakist#”
the Hindus were replaced b - e creation fe) ~
re-called ed by the West Pakistanis. Dr. Dh@”
ec’ a remark by a Hindu Bengali in early August, 1947, W!"
was his companion in a train journey. On b ing teld & fess!
Dhani that he was going to the Dace, Urine ent istoth
; e Dacca Univer h histo!)
The Hindu gentleman sponta ey Stee re
/ *eplacing us’. pontaneously remarked "so you ~

Causes of Alienation 85
Rahman Subhan, economic adviser to
presently head of the Bangladesh Toadies ‘eague and
Economics, continued to maintain that ‘there: waa eve opment
difference in the allocation of resources between ; the eral
and there was ‘visible evidence of disparity". He ecmea ome u
‘widening gap". He reiterated that "he was not concerned *i h
absolute progress but progress relative to each other". When vor
by the author as to what should be the criteria ‘he iden
4 . urce
allocation, numerical strength or absorption capacity he gave the
standard reply that it is the numbers that count?5.
Causes for Slower Economic Growth in East Pakistan
Rashid Amjad, a well known economist, accepts that "almost
all countries in the world find themselves faced with the problem v
of regional in-equalities, as the gains and the momentum of | .
growth tend to get concentrated in certain areas"’6, Infact |
economic inequality is considered essential for economic growth
by most western économists. Even in West Pakistan industrial
areas continued to expand around Karachi and Lahore. It was a
difficult task to encourage the private sector to move away from
these two magnetic poles. .-
Roads, availability of power, nearness to markets, supply of
raw material, closeness to centres of power were various factors
which made such concentrations necessary. Slowly and steadily
more and more industrial cities like Faisalabad, Hyderabad, Wah
and Nowshera came up. Even now large tracts of Balochistan, .
interior Sindh, the entire Makran Coast, the Thal desert all lack
industries. East Pakistan was not the only province, therefore, not
to have benefitted from the so-called industrial development. The
effect was felt more because of the geographical separation.
The main_reasons for the comparatively slow economic growth
in East Pakistan were: (1) incorrect economic policies whereby an
integrated economic approach was adopted without giving =
regard to the geographical division of the country and the tein
socio-economic structure of East Pakistan; (2) lack of adequa !
aS. . call d energy; (3) insufficient
infrastructure mainly communications an rgy a
allocation of funds initially by the Centre. abome x nin the
economic peparity between the two wings was a ear plans
1962 Constitution and mentioned in the a, ~ slo did not
but these were not fully implemented; (4) East
|

,
86
Tragedy of Errors
s+ "possess the absorption capacity of the. funds allotted fo, th
purpose of economic development; (5) the educational leyg] Weg
comparatively low and the managerial skill was lacking; () th
East Pakistani entrepreneur was, in the initial stages, less aWary
of commercial complexities than his western counterpart; (7) mog
of the Muslim entrepreneurs of undivided India came to Weg,
Pakistan, Only a few went to East Bengal; (8) although the Outlay
in the public sector was not too inadequate, the private secto,
investment in East Pakistan was less forthcoming. This was 80
because of a ‘hostile_environment’ for the West Pakistan;
industrialist in East Pakistan viz:- lesser opportunities for quicke;
and greater returns; fedi of natural calamities more common in
East Pakistan than in West Pakistan; considerable ‘'Hindy
influence which discouraged ‘encroachments by dynamic Wes
Pakistani Muslim entrepreneurs; limited ‘availability of raw
materials; head offices of all financial substitutions like PICIC,
~ IDBP, HBFC, ADB, NIT and ICP being in West Pakistan and an
V-unhealthy political and social climate in East Pakistan; (9)
unchecked and unhindered free market forces; (10) the
investment capacity in East Pakistan was much less than in West
Pakistan because of a lack of major industrial families in that
province; (11) foreign donors were more easily persuaded to give
assistance to industries being put up in West Pakistan than in
Fast Pakistan because of the already existing industrial base in
the western wing; (12) USA’s interest in improving the defence
and prosperity of West Pakistan being closer to the Soviet Union
and an important clog in their objectives of containing Soviet
expansionism. (China no doubt was also to be contained and in
that context East Pakistan was significant but India after 1962
__ was to provide this bulwark for USA, The House Foreign Affairs
Committee in its report of March, 1961 stated "Defence of the
borders of West Pakistan against Soviet aggression is a majo
purpose of US military assistance to Pakistan"’7; (13) synthet¢
fibre began to replace goods previously made out of jute thus
reducing the foreign exchange earnings from jute; (14) with the/
capital being in West. Pakistan most of the industrialists wel
attracted to concentrate their resources in the same wing and 4
j “sa to the Centre as possible. It helped in getting loans, import
censes and permits for putting up factories; (15) the more the
bitterness and animosities increased in East Pakistan against the
Punjabis (a term used for all West Pakistan’s by the Bengalis

