‘
36
Tragedy of Errors
Fazlul Haq sensed the mood of the rural population of Benga)
and changed his tactics. He played to the tune of the farmers ang
the labour class. His Krishak (farmer) Sramik (labourer) party
gained strength on fertile ground. He blamed all the ills on the
Muslim League and promised them heaven on earth. His rural
background; his vernacular appeal and his oratorical skill
succeeded..The elite Bengali politicians of the Muslim League, on
the other hand, remained cut off from the masses resulting in
their humiliating defeat.
During the electioneering campaign of the 1954 provincial
elections in Bengal Fazlul Haq played on the emotions of the
people by talking about independence of East Bengal and
establishing closer ties with India. This attracted the Bengali
Hindus and the secular elements amongst the Muslims of Bengal.
~ )Fazlul Haq claimed that Independence will be the first thing to be
‘taken up by his ministry"’*. He is also reported to have told
‘representatives of Reuters and the New York Times in Calcutta
that the "true solution of the problems of East Bengal was
independence”. With these slogans he succeeded in weening away
the erstwhile Muslim Leaguers to his fold. This was Fazlul Haq, a
:\ Bengali first - a Pakistani afterwards. .
Though Mahmood Ali does not subscribe to this assessment of
Sher-e-Bangla. Prime Minister Muhammad Ali Bogra (himself a
Bengali) called Fazlul Haq a “self confessed traitor" and dismissed
his ministry, only after a few months of it assuming power,
though it still commanded the majority. The immediate cause
being the riots in the Adamjee Jute Mills in which 400 people
_/were killed. Section 92 A (governor’s rule) was imposed in the
province.
Suharwardy’s Attempt at National Integration
The 1956 Constitution prepared by Suharwardy and accepted
by the national assembly had overnight removed the numerical
superiority of East Bengal over the province of West Pakistan
combined. He was the only politician in East Bengal who could
give up the claim of Bengali majority and accept the principle of
parity between the two wings of Pakistan without being declared 4
traitor to his people. There were protests in East Bengal but
because it was Suharwardy who had accepted parity the majority
of the Bengalis refrained from protesting against it. By grouping
4

37
Geographical Characteristics
the four provinces in West Pakistan into One Unit, the 1956
Constitution did create two distinct identities: East and West
Pakistan which later became the cause of alienation between the
two wings. Suharwardy, who was expecting to be prime minister
after Muhammad Ali Bogra, was visibly disappointed when
Choudhry Muhammad Ali from Punjab was appointed instead.
He issued a statement saying "I accepted the principle of parity in
the hope that such parity will forever get rid of the distrust and” |
suspicion and that the loose talk by certain irresponsible top
politicians that East Pakistan wanted to secede from Pakistan
would cease once for all"29..... but that was not to be.
Choudhry Muhammad Ali, however, soon there-after resigned,
and Suharwardy was, befittingly, made the prime minister. 13
members of his ministry belonged to the Awami League and 29
were from the Republican Party. IB4+297 t_ i
’ A = i
~~» Suharwardy, after becoming the prime minister of Pakistan, »,
~~ held the view that regional autonomy for East Pakistan was no
longer an issue as the interests of the Bengalis had been
safeguarded in the 1956, Constitution. Although the Constitution
still proposed a aa Centre some other issues had been
amicably solved. Bengali’had been accepted as an official language
and both the wings had been given parity thus removing the fear
of "all against one". At that time he was the only leader who could
_- have kept East and West Pakistan together.
In 1957 Bhashani and Suharwardy parted company.
Suharwardy supported parity and military pacts and was pro-
American: Bhashani and other East Pakistani leaders were
opposed to all of these.
Suharwardy’s ministry, however, like those before his, did not
last long. He was forced to resign. This was yet another blow to__’ |
the work of national integration. In the words of Charles Burton
Marshall, adviser to the prime minister of Pakistan during 1955-
57, "The removal of Suharwardy sent out of office the only
available man with aptitude as a politician and giving reasonable ,
promise of national leadership". On October 18, 1957 I. 1+
- Chundrigar became the prime minister. A month later Sir Feroze
/*Khan Noon took over from him. Politics became a play thing for
‘\) the politicians. Governments were made and dismissed. Violence
increased to such an extent that the deputy speaker of the East

38
Tragedy of Errors
Pakistan provincial assembly was injured in a fight between riya)
groups within the assembly in September 1958 and died the next
day.
The deteriorating law and order situation gave the military the
excuse to take over the reigns of government. On October 7, 1958
General Muhammad Ayub Khan, who was then the commander.
in-chief of the armed forces and the defence minister, was asked
by Sikander Mirza, the then governor-general of Pakistan, to take
over the country.
Suharwardy was EBDOE’d (Elected bodies disqualification
order) for 6 years (1960-1966) and arrested on January 31, 1962,
on the orders of the Field Marshal, from Karachi. Later, on
release, he formed the National Democratic Front against Ayub,
Unfortunately Suharwardy, the only leader of significance in East
Bengal who had a national outlook, died on December 5, 1963 at a
- Beirut hotel.
Awami League - New Leadership
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman was born in Gopalganj, Faridpur in
the 20s in a middle class family. He was still very young when,
after the death of Suharwardy, the mantle of leadership of the
Awami League fell on his willing shoulders. Mujib was not,
academically, very well qualified nor did he posses a high degree of
intelligence. Though he lacked comprehension he possessed both
intuition and political perception. He understood mass psychology
and became a past master in playing to the gallery. Mujib at the
age of 40, unlike his mentor, was a man of the masses. He was
articulate, volatile and emotional, possessing all the qualities
», required for a rabble rouser. His deep throated voice, added even a
greater appeal to his fiery speeches. Though, as a student leader in
the 40’s, he had initially worked for the creation of Pakistan he
remained a devoted Bengali nationalist at heart. The interest of
East Bengal remained his prime concern for which he was
prepared to go to any limit. He was jailed several times for his
_ Tadical views but never yielded to pressure,
gi inal Pacing Msi be bated
“international issu hi oon malig ae 8 - ato os ais
the government es his views were at cross purposes with those of ;
and the people of West Pakistan, The Kashmir 2
problem was not of any great significance to him as it had no effect

39
Geographical Characteristics
on the security or well being of East Bengal. He was against an
anti-Indian stance and felt that it would be useful for his province
to have good relations With its western neighbour. He was
* generally anti-United States and pro-Moscow in _ his
pronouncements. In the relationship between the Centre and
provinces he believed in complete regional autonomy with only a
few subjects at the federal level.
Mujib did not have an abiding commitment to the integrity of
Pakistan but his love for his Own people and his patriotism
towards his own province cannot be denied.
Six-Points Formula
The origin of the 6-Points formula remains obscure. It appears
to have taken its roots in & paper read out at Lahore by a member
of the Awami League in 1961. The author in question, at that
time, concentrated on the economic disparity between the two
wings*!, This encouraged Sheikh Mujib to establish a think tank
involving a number of teachers of the Dacca University who
drafted a regional-autonomy-formula for East Pakistan32,
Later Mujib took the assistance of several Bengali civil
servants to formulate concrete proposals along the guide lines | .
given by him which would form the basis for future negotiations ~
with the central leadership in Islamabad~ Prominent amongst
them were Rahman Subhan, the chief economist, Habib-ur-
Rahman from the planning commission, Ahmad Fazlur Rahman,
CSP, M. N. Huda, Anees-ur-Rahman, Shams-ur-Rahman, Abdus
Samad Azad, Enamul Haq Choudhry, Ruhul Quddoos, Professor
Abdur Razzaq, Professor Nur-ul-Islam and Mahbub-ul-Alam
Chishty?*,
Rahman Subhan provided the expert advice on what later
became known as the 6-Points formula for regional autonomy
_ bordering on secession*4, Some writers have mentioned that the
- 6-Points Formula was drafted in Calcutta. There is, however, no
concrete evidence to prove that was so. When confronted with this
allegation by the author Dr. Kamal Hussain, the well known
constitutional lawyer of Dacca and the seal ad viier of the Awami
League, denied that 6-Points were drafted in India®>,
The 6-Points Formula included the following: (1) election to
the national and provincial assemblies should be direct and on the
basis of universal adult franchise; (2) the Centre should be

40
Tragedy of Errors
responsible for defence and foreign affairs only; (3) currengy
should be controlled by regional reserve banks; (4) federatj,
units to provide money to the Centre on a pre-determings
procedure; (5) federating units to maintain their own foreign
exchange accounts and (6) federating units can raise their ow,
military and para military forces.
These 6 points were first enunciated by Sheikh Mujib-yp.
Rahman in a pamphlet "Our right to live"’®. It was first given oyt
by the Sheikh at the Al Pakistan National Conference jy
February 1966, at Lahore®’. Although Rahman Subhan insisteq
that the Awami League formula created a basis for autonomy in
decision making and in the control of resources in actual fact it
amounted to a demand for a confederation between two
autonomous regions. ~
The significance of these issues became greater in the eyes of
the Bengalis after the 1965 war when they realized that they could
be easily isolated from West Pakistan. Mujib’s arrest in 1966 on
charges of anti-state activities and his subsequent open trial in the
Agartala Conspiracy in 1968 made him a stronger advocate of 6-
Points. In addition to the 6 Points there was also the 11 Points of
the Bengali students framed in 1969 which together formed the
basis for demanding regional autonomy for East Pakistan.
The Controversy over the Interpretation of the
Lahore Resolution
The Lahore Resolution (later to be known as the Pakistan
Resolution) moved by Fazlul Haq at the 27th Session of the All
India Muslim League, at Lahore on March 23, 1940 stated "that
geographically contiguous units are demarcated into regions
which should be so constituted, with such territorial adjustments
as may be necessary, that the areas in which the Muslims are in 4
majority, as in the north-west and eastern zones of India, should
be grouped to constitute independent states in which the
aru nee shal be autonomous and sovereign". Fazlul Hat
ne Sr von Bie the Resolution, however, did not in any wa)
og ven int at the formation of two different Muslim
- His words "I earnestly appeal to my Muslim friends
throughout India to remain united and be pr , d on
their own feet" indicated that h : prepared ee jim
country. at he was talking of one Mus!
.
j

Geographical Characteristics =
However, since the word states instead of state had been used
a controversy has since arisen whether the two wings which later
became part of Pakistan were meant to be_two different states 7
independent of each other or was it merely an oversight or
printing error. Even earlier in 1938 Sir Abdullah Haroon moved a
resolution for establishing independent Muslim states in the
north-west and eastern zones. Here too the word state was used
in the plural*®.
The word states continued to be used in subsequent sessions of
the All India Muslim League. Although Pakistan began to be
mentioned as the goal of the Muslim League giving credence to
the fact that only one country was envisaged with two separate
wings. "We have defined in the clearest language our ‘goal... and
the goal is Pakistan" said Mr. Jinnah at the 28th Session of the All
India Muslim League held at Madras on 12-15 April, 194139,
It appears that in the initial stages the wording were not being
used in precise terms for the Quaid used the word state both in
the plural and in the singular in his presidential address at
Madras.
By 1942 the demand for Pakistan became more positive. For the
first time the slogan "Pakistan Zindabad” was raised at the 29th
Session of the All India Muslim League at Allahabad in April,
1942. Nawab Sir Muhammad Yusuf, chairman of the reception /
committee said "Muslim League has formulated a scheme in the ~
shape of Pakistan"’’. The map of Pakistan showing the two
regions as part of one country was first displayed behind the dias
at the 30th Session of the All India Muslim League held at Delhi
between 24-26 April, 1943*'. However, surprisingly, the word
states continued to be used in the same session without any
concern that this might lead to confusion whether the two zones
were meant to be autonomous and sovereign or parts of one
Pakistan.
Maulana Akram Khan, Maulvi Tamizuddin, Begum
Shahabuddin and Begum Ispahani, representing the Muslims of
Bengal and Assam, were present at these sessions but none ever
wished to have this matter clarified as perhaps it was never
intended that the Muslim majority zones in north-west and
eastern India would form two independent countries.
|

'
42 |
Tragedy of Errors
Sardar Amanzeb, a member of the All India Muslim Leagy,
Council from the NWFP made the matter very clear when in
December, 1943, at the 31st Session of the AIML held at Karach;
he said "I am prepared to fight for the freedom of India if Hindyg
promise us self-determination in the six provinces of Pakistay
(NWFP, Punjab, Sindh, Balochistan, Bengal and Assam)‘, Again
at the same session Nawab Bahadur Yar Jang referring to the two
zones said "This demand is now called Pakistan",
The correspondence between Mr. Jinnah and Mahatam,
Gandhi of September, 1944 also clearly brings out the thinking of
the founder of the nation on the question of the creation of one or
more Muslim states after the independence of India. Toa question
posed by the Hindu leader that “are the constituents in the two
zones to constitute independent states as an independent Member
in each zone", the Quaid replied “No they will form units of
Pakistan". Again replying to Gandhi’s query about the provision of
defence Mr. Jinnah replied "There cannot be defence and similar
matters of common concern when it is accepted that Pakistan and
Hindustan will be two separate independent states"
Of course the contradictions between the Visualization of
Pakistan being a federation and then using the words sovereign
When describing the units of the federation remained
unexplained‘,
Sir Stafford Cripps mentions that "the integration of these two
states into a single entity was taken for granted when the demand
for Pakistan was pressed on Gandhi"46.
Abul Hashim, a Bengali politician, did raise the demand for a
Separate Bengal state at the council session of the All India
Muslim League in 1946 basing his argument on the interpretation
of the Lahore Resolution which according to him envisaged two
Separate states. However, in the several meetings of the Muslim
League Council and at the Muslim League's Legislator’s
Convention the geographical contours of Pakistan were precisely
spelt out. Mr. Hussain Shaheed Suharwardy, while presenting the
resolution for Pakistan on March 24, 1946 at the All India Muslim
League Legislator’s Convention at Delhi, stated that whereas the
Muslims are convinced that with a view to saving the Muslims.of
India from the domination of the Hindus... it is necessary t0
constitute a sovereign independent state) comprising Bengal and
4

Geographical Characteristics =
Assam in the north-east zone and the Punjab, North West
Frontier Province, Sindh and Balochistan in the north-west
zone"’, Mr. Mahmood Ali, chairman of the national council of
social welfare, government of Pakistan and a former political
leader of East Bengal when questioned, by the author, on the
psyche of the Bengali Muslim leaders Vis-a-vis Ge or two
independent Muslim states firmly stated that they had visualized
Bengal to be part of Pakistan and had never thought of a
sovereign state of their own when the Lahore Resolution was
moved**,
This should lay to rest the contention of those who feel that
originally the two zones were meant to be autonomous and
sovereign and it was only when the British and the Hindus
insisted that Punjab and Bengal were also to be partitioned that
Pakistan began to be talked about as one state. The partition of
these two provinces was indicated in the Mountbatten Plan of
June 3, 1947 and the All India Muslim League Council approved
this partition at its session at Delhi held on 9-10 June, 1947, ,-
Pakistan as one complete whole was being advocated much earlier
than the decision to partition the two provinces.

“4 Tragedy of Errors
Notes
1. Azad, A. K. India Wins Freedom, An autobiographical narrative, Boma,
1959, p. 227.
2. Hunter, W. W. Sir, The Indian Musalman. First printed in London, 187)
reprinted in Lahore, 1964, p. 127.
3. Interview, Major General Khalil-ur-Rahman
4. Choudhry, G. W., Last Days of United Pakistan, G Hurst and Company
London, 1974, p. 85.
5. Ambedkar, B. R. (ed), Thoughts on Pakistan, Thatcher Co, Bombay, 19.11, Pp
7, 8.
6. Pakistan Historical Society, Karachi History of the Freedom Movement, Vo)
IV Parts I and II, 1970, p. 303.
7. hid, p. 309,
8. History of the Freedom Movement, p. 303.
9. Gandhi, R. M. Understanding the Muslim Mind, Vikas Publishing House,
New Delhi, 1987, p. 200.
10. Pirzada, S., (ed), Foundation of Pakistan, All India Muslim League
Documents 1924-1947, Vol I and Vol II, National Publishing House, Karachi,
1970, p. 284.
11. Ibid, p. 285.
12. Ibid, p. 314.
13. Ibid, p. 287.
14. Thid, p. 309,
15. Ibid, p. 405.
v 16. Ikramullah, Shaista, (Begum), Hussain Shaheed Suharwardy - A Bi h
Oxford University Press, Karachi, 1991. y tography,
17. Ibid, p. 48.
18. Seervai, H. M., Partition of India Lege
Publications, Bombay, 1989, p ! egend and Reality, Emanem
19. Tkramullah, p. 63.
20. Singh, J. Brig Dismemberment of Pakistan, 1971 ] ,
International, New Delhi, 1988, p. 18. aPakistan War, Lancer
21. Pirzada, S., p. 68.
22. Ibid, p. 515.
23. Ikramullah, S., p. 68.
24. Ibid, p. 69.
25. Ibid, p. 74.

Geographical Characteristics ™”
2 eosin kbar p ake Masia: Publishers,
27. Ibid, p. 5.
28. auton ae ag a sg aes heen and Direction of Change,
29. Ikramullah, p. 83.
30. Saveed, p. 46.
31. Interview, Rahman Subhan.
32. Interview, Professor Shamsul Haq,
33. Interview, Mr. Murshid, Chairman Bangladesh Institute of International
and Strategic Studies (BIISS).
34. Interview, Brig Abdul Hafeez, Director General, BIISS.
35. Interview, Dr. Kamal Hussain.
36. Subramanyam K. Bangladesh Documents, p. 66.
37. Singh, J, p. 42.
38. Ibid, p. 313.
39. Ibid, p. 361, 362.
40. Ibid, p. 379.
41. Ibid, p. 399.
42. Ibid, p. 161.
43. Ibid, p. 183.
e441. History of the Freedom Movement, p. 109.
45. Ambedkar, p. 17.
46. History of the Freedom Movement, p. 29.
47. Ikramullah, p. 48.
48. Mr. Mahmood Ali’s letter to the author dated July 8, 1992 in reply to the
author's query.

