PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Pakistan had been described by many western and Indian
writers as a geographical nonsensity and a country disfigured at
birth. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the well known Muslim
nationalist leader and the president of the All India Congress,
predicted that Pakistan, in its present shape, would not last more
than a-quarter of a century. His prediction came true. But not
because of the unique shape of the country, not even because of
the differences in language and culture of the two wings but
because of the follies of its people and because of the selfishness,
insincerity and short sightedness of its leaders. The most
important of all because of the ignominious role played by India 1
during the East Pakistan Crisis,
Come December each year, the nation is reminded of the
break-up of the country and the humiliation suffered by its armed
forces at the hands of its bitterest adversary. Unfortunately none
of the actors, dead or alive, who strutted about on the stage during
those crucial days, accepted that they faltered in advocating or
implementing the policies which led to the tragedy of the
disintegration of Pakistan.
The political leaders blame the army junta. The army generals '
blame the politicians, Independent political analysts blame both.
Indian writers harp on the tune of the exploitation of East Bengal
by the West Pakistani leadership. Pakistani authors highlight the
statements of a large number of influential Indians, including
Indira Gandhi, that the dismemberment of Pakistan would be in
India’s national interest and that India should not miss the
‘opportunity of a life time’ provided to them in 1971.
It is an irony of fate that the very people who were in the
)) Vanguard of the Pakistan movement, whose area was the only
Muslim majority province of undivided India which had a Muslim
League ministry and whose illustrious son had not only moved
but, allegedly, drafted the Lahore Resolution, fought a bitter
Struggle, thirty years later, to destroy a country which -they
themselves had helped to build.

16 :
How did this happen? what were the causes of the alienation of
the Bengalis from their co-citizens in the western wing? Why was
it not possible to stop the widening gap between the two halves of
Pakistan? Was the separate homeland for the Muslims of the
subcontinent merely a stepping stone for the Bengali politicians,
towards an independent Bangladesh? Could the armed forces have
avoided a humiliating surrender? These and many other related
' questions came to my mind during my research into the causes of
the tragic outcome.
This is the result of nearly three years of hard labour. It is
based on a deep study of documents, newspapers, articles, books
and personal interviews of those who were then at the helm of
affairs. The book focuses on the geo-strategic implication of a
country divided by a thousand miles of enemy territory. It brings
out the causes of the progressive alienation of the Bengalis from
West Pakistan. It highlights the political bitnglings of the civil and
military leadership during the first twenty-four years of Pakistan’s
existence. It analyses the war plans of India and Pakistan in 1971.
It focuses attention on the yole of India in this sordid drama and
finally it looks into the impact of the dismemberment of Pakistan
on India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. :
I have tried to disprove a few generalizations. The important
ones being that the dismantlement was a foregone conclusion
, because the only thing that was common between East and West
Pakistan was religion and the only link the PIA. The second ,
theory is the oft repeated accusation of the exploitation of East
Bengal by West Pakistan. I have tried to prove by facts and figures
that it is not entirely true. The third fallacy which does not stand
scrutiny is a fact often quoted by Indian academicians that there
was a deliberate attempt by the Punjabi hierarchy to keep the
East Pakistani’s out of the civil service and the armed forces. It is
true that the Bengalis did not have a share in the government in
~ proportion to their population but the causes lay elsewhere.
Ny Lastly I have tried to put the Indo-Pakistan War of December,
camp bli a lott El it was neither a lightening
was it a ‘clean war’ hetwann com athe ats Se Gras ta eliawesnio
, Clean War ersaries.
wee subject of my thesis at the National Defence College, in
separation of ie deo of the. geogeap hice
measures needed to nullify its “ ~ aint n and the remedial
: ullify its negative impacts. Unfortunately, |

17
pefore my thesis could be presented, the college had to close
because of the war with India and the issue no longer remained
valid soon thereafter. My thesis lay in my shelf under a pile of
numerous other papers.
In 1974, the late Lieutenant General Agha Ibrahim Akram,
well known author of the book, Sword of Allah, told me about
writing his second book on the advent of Islam in Iran. On my
saying "why do you not write about the dismemberment of
Pakistan?" he replied "I do not write about defeat". I too felt the
same way, when it was suggested to me that I should write about
the Indo-Pakistan War of December, 1971, particularly because it
would mean treading on the toes of many of my senior colleagues —~
with whom I had developed a close friendship after retirement.
But then I recalled Brigadier S. K. Dalvi’s book the ‘Himalayan
Blunder’ where he had candidly criticized his own authorities for
the mistakes made during the Sino-Indian Conflict of 1962 in
which the Indian Army was humbled. The Indian leaders
benefitted by the criticism.
I picked up courage to try and analyse the events that led to
the break-up of Pakistan with no axe to grind. The dust-en-gulfed
NDC thesis was taken out of the shelf and re-read.
I was fully aware of the enormous difficulties 1 would face in
reaching the truth. President Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan,
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, General Abdul
Hamid Khan and Admiral 8. M. Ahsan had all passed away,
taking with them many facts, the disclosures of which would have
helped in unfolding the truth further.
Researchers and historians have to fall back on the written
word when they wish to carry forward their learned profession.
Nations must learn from past mistakes. Younger generations
must not repeat the errors of their elders. It is in this spirit that I
have chosen to carry out an independent analysis of the reasons
for the break up of the country. Nearly all those directly or
indirectly involved in the decision making process in the critical
years between 1968-1971 have been interviewed. Some several
times over and for extended periods of time.
__ After a lapse of twenty three years a lot of facts have come to
light but not all have been published. Most of the writers are from
across the border. Not many Pakistani authors have attempted to
recall bitter memories. Pakistan’s case has gone by default. It is
hoped that this book would encourage, other writers, specially

18
those who had witnessed the changing scenes from close quartey,
to put down, for the sake of prosperity, the true picture.
As one who was not directly involved but who had seen even},
unfolding themselves by being physically present In East Pakistay
just before the volcano erupted, | consider myself in a betta,
position to record the happenings in a detached and objectiy,
manner.
The author cannot claim in this exposition to have solved ajj
the mysteries. Many questions have remained unanswered, many
issues have not been dealt with in all their manifestations. It jg
hoped that others would carry forward the research and add to
the archives further chapters of the ‘last days of a United
Pakistan’.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to General Mirza Aslam Beg, the former chief of
army staff (COAS) of the Pakistan army who encouraged me to
write about the East Pakistan crisis. His successor, the late
General Asif Nawaz, was gracious enough to permit me to contact
some branches at General Headquarters for obtaining unclassified
material pertaining to the Indo-Pakistan War of December, 1971.
My thanks are due to Major General Mian Ahmad Mushtaq
Tariq, director general of combat development at GHQ, who
provided me with all the facilities needed to carry out my research
in a very comfortable environment. It was very considerate of the
Late Lieutenant General S. G. M. M. Peerzada, who was the
principal staff officer to President Yahya, to have agreed to talk to
“ me for long hours over several sittings, in spite of his failing
health, about General Yahya’s policies during the East Pakistan
Crisis. Major Generals M. Rahim Khan, Rao Farman Ali Khan,
Khadim Hussain Raja, Nazar Hussain Shah, Qazi Abdul Majeed,
Ghulam Umar and Jahanzeb Arbab were all very helpful in giving
their individual accounts and their perceptions of the
developments in East Pakistan. Former Brigadier Bagqir Siddiqui,
COS Eastern Command, gave his side of the story Which proved
ey eee Fe nner Commander Eastern Command Lieutenant
| Bie on ae : Niazi and Lieutenant General Gul Hasan Khan,
oes : of the general staff, excused themselves from being
interviewed.
Sanihies da Yaqub Khan and General Tikka Khan spared theif
valuable time to recount the military situation j East Paki in
1970-71, Mr. Agha Shahi, wh an Egy Pasunee
na Shahi, who. was Pakistan’s permanent
|

19
representative at the United Nations in December, 1971
recounted the cuts and thrusts between Pakistan’s allies and its
adversaries during the Security Council meetings.
Ali Yahya Khan, who is my neighbor at Westridge, was very
kind to allow me to see some of his father’s documents which‘ he
_ has preserved.
My thanks are also due to the numerous military officers of
various ranks who agreed to give me the details of the war in the
Eastern Theatre.
Mr. Mahmood Ali, Khwaja Khairuddin, Professor Abdul
Qayyoom, Major General Khalil-ur-Rahman, shared with me
impressions of their ‘Sonar Bangla’ which they had left behind.
The Bangladesh Institute of International and Strategic Studies
were over generous in arranging my visit to Dhaka and allowing
me access to the various literature available in its library. It
helped me in getting interviews with many distinguished
personalities who played a role during their independence
movement. I am greatly indebted to Chairman, Mr. Murshid and
the renowned director general of the BIISS, Brigadier (retired)
Abdul Hafeez for the assistance they provided.
Pakistan’s High Commissioner in New Delhi, Abdus Sattar
and Air Commodore (retd) J asjit Singh, director of the Institute of
Defence Studies and Analysis, New Delhi, were a great help in
making my visit to New Delhi fruitful where I was able to
interview a large number of gentlemen who had executed the
policies of their leaders during the East Pakistan Crisis including
Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Aurora, army commander of
India’s Eastern Command.
Mr. Tariq Mahmood, worked for long hours typing and re-
typing the numerous drafts for which he deserves my
appreciation,
The responsibility of the views expressed in the book is, of-
course, entirely mine.
k. : j2 ao4tw rch herd
Kamal Matinuddin
Rawalpindi
February 10, 1994.

Background
Geographical Characteristics
East Pakistan, lying at the eastern extremity of the Indian
subcontinent, differed from its western wing in its geographic
location, physical features, socio-economic conditions and in its
security environment. Separated from the rest of Pakistan by
1,600 kilometres of Indian territory it was more easily vulnerable
to internal and external pressures than the rest of the country.
Abul Kalam Azad opined that Mr. Jinnah did not seem to realize
that geography was against him!. He was not too far wrong.
With an area covering 143,998 square kilometres it was
smaller in size than almost all other provinces of Pakistan. Its
population of 40 million in 1947 was, however, greater than all the
four administrative units in the west combined. This numerical
superiority coupled with the volatile nature of an ever increasingly
frustrated community shifted the dynamics of power to the streets
of East Bengal. .
East Pakistan, except for a very small border with Burma, was
surrounded on all sides by India. In the west lay the Indian state
of West Bengal. In the north was Magalaya and Assam, in the east
Tripura and Mizogram and in the south the Indian dominated Bay
of Bengal. Geography, therefore, very much favored India if and
when it decided to use its military instrument to achieve its
political objective. Pakistan’s eastern wing could easily be cut off
from the other half, in fact from the rest of the world, by India
because of its peculiar geographic location.
The three main river systems, each broad enough to look like a
sea of water, divided the country into four isolated regions. The
western sector lay between the Bay of Bengal and the
Ganges/Padma with Khulna, Jessore and Faridpur being the
main towns. The northern portion was wedged in between the
Jamuna and the Brahmaputra/Meghna. Saidpur and Rangpur in
the north and Bogra further south were the nodal points. East
and south of the Meghna lay the tea gardens of Sylhet and the
- undulating ground around Comilla and Chittagong.

22
Tragedy of Errors
Strategic Implications
These formidable water obstacles, unbridged except in very
few places, alongwith a maze of interconnecting water channels
split the defenders into isolated pockets and gave advancing
enemy columns secure flanks. They presented no obstacle when
moving along them but were almost insurmountable to those who
dared to cross over them against opposition.
The 6,000 square kilometres Deltaic region, along the coast
with its numerous creeks and water inlets, with its swamps and
thickets, was impregnable to friends and foes alike. The forests of
the Sunderbans, along the southwest coast, immortalized by the
famous English novelist, John Masters, and those of Mahdopur
near Dacca restricted movement in those areas. The Chittagong
Hill Tracts, in the east rising to heights of 2,000 feet, forested and
mountainous, was ideal for guerrilla actions.
Mention must be made of the area around Dacca, known in
military circles as the Dacca bowl or the Dacca triangle. A flat and
open country about a 100 kilometres wide and 60 kilometres deep.
It lay between three major river systems with the mighty Jamuna
and Ganges in the west, the Dareshwari river in the south and the
Meghna in the east. The only approach to Dacca which did not
need the crossing of a major river was from the north,
Communications .
Communication infrastructure was poor. Roads were narrow,
and few and far between. Most of them frequently ended on river
banks from where the loads had to be transferred on to steamers
and back again on to the single lane asphalt highway. Chittagong
and Khulna were two sea-going ports with Chandpur providing
only an inland water transport (IWT) facility. A railway line did
connect the capital to Rajshahi in the west, Saidpur in the north,
Sylhet in the north-east and the port of Chittagong in the south,
but not without the restriction of unloading and loading on to
ferries as construction of railway bridges across the rivers was
only possible in one or two places. Most of the movement, both
civilian and military, was along rivers and streams by naukas
(country boats) and steamers. With cross country movement
difficult, even during the dry season, all major traffic had to be
confined to the few available metalled roads, interdiction of which
became comparatively easier during war.

23
Geographical Characteristics
Although the communication network in East Pakistan was
generally poor the roads and railways leading to the international /
border from Indian West Bengal were well] developed. Calcutta, “
the largest city of India and the headquarters of India’s Eastern
Command, was only 100 kilometres away from the Pakistani town
of Jessore. It was connected to it by several metalled roads and
broadguage railway tracks. Assembly of forces on the Indian side
was easier.
Vulnerable Salients .
The geographical configuration of East Pakistan created a
number of salients and narrow necks of land which, while making
them vulnerable to attacks, also provided opportunities to disrupt
India’s vital lines of communication. Patchagarh salient in the
north-west jutted into the Siliguri gap connecting West Bengal
with Assam. Even a small thrust northwards could create
difficulties for India’s Eastern Command. Though 40 kilometres
long it had a width of only 10 kilometres. A major road from
Jalpaiguri (India) to Tatulia ran through it. Kurigram salient a
little further east had only a width of 6 kilometres. Belonia east of
Comilla was surrounded on three sides by India and posed a
serious problem for the defenders. The most vulnerable neck of
land in East Pakistan was Feni which was only a stone’s throw
away from India. An advance of only a few kilometres ‘could severe
Chittagong port and a large tract of East Pakistan, without any
major effort, from the rest of the province.
Climate
East Bengal, lying astride the tropic of cancer, had a hot and
humid climate. Temperatures in summer rose up to 33 C°
(91 °F). Not very hot from South Asian standards but what made
the living uncomfortable was the humidity. Bengal catches the full
blast of the south-west monsoons. With an average rainfall of over
2,500 millimeters (100 inches), concentrated during the period
between April and September, major military operations could
take place during the winter months only.
Demography
The Bengalis came from a different racial stock than their co-
citizens in the north and north-west of India. While the latter felt
proud that through their viens flowed the blood of the Aryans

24
Tragedy of Errors
from Central Asia the Bengalis were quite content pty ene
the original inhabitants of East Bengal.. Althoug Bengal t :
Persians, Turks and Mughals also ventured as far be ce " » the
500 years of Muslim rule injected only the Muslim ~ eee
not change their physical characteristics. Unlike ine fete Ss and
the Pathans the Bengalis were relatively Bnei arker and
thinly built. The difference in physical features gave the
northerners a false sense of racial superiority which was reflecteg
in their attitude and social behavior towards their brethren in the
east. About 87 percent of the population of East Bengal were
Muslims. Around 10 percent were Hindus and the remaining 3
percent was shared between Budhists and Christians.
The Muslims in the eastern wing, unlike the West Pakistanis,
, were not split into castes and sub castes, and were more
» | homogeneous than the rest of their countrymen. They could,
therefore, put up a more united resentment against statements
and policies which they perceived to be damaging to their self
esteem and interest.
There is no doubt that the Bengali Muslims, who constituted
57% of the population in undivided Bengal, were greatly
influenced by the Hindus who had achieved a position of
dominance under the British rule. This was so because after the
unsuccessful war of independence, known generally as the Great
Indian Mutiny (1857), the British distrusted the Muslims of
Bengal. Sir W. W. Hunter, a British civil servant, writing in 1887,
noted that the Bengali Mussulman was thoroughly dejected and
frustrated as "every honourable walk of life was closed to him and
that he was excluded from the share of power and of the
emoluments of government which he hitherto almost monopolized
and saw them passed into the hands of the hated Hindus".
During the 190 years of British rule the Hindus dominated the -
Bengali landscape. Lands, business, education, government |
service all were in their hands. Major General Khalil-ur-Rahman, |
a Bengali officer from Khulna, recalls the environment in.his city |
during his school days. He remembers the Hindu festivals of
Durga Puja, Holi and Devalj being celebrated on the streets. The |
birthday of the Holy Prophet {Peace Be Upon Him) and other
tl one festivals were confined to within the walls of the

25
Geographical Characteristics
Islamic subjects were not taught in the schools at Khulna on
the contrary the curricula included aspects of the Hindu faith.
Islamic education, became the responsibility of the parents and
not of the teachers, who in any case where mostly Hindus*®. The
term Bengali meant a Hindu Bengali. Muslim Bengalis were
simply known as Muslims. "Though not actually social outcasts
they were not allowed into Hindu homes even after independence"
said General Khalil. Slowly, however, this treatment had its
negative impact and the Muslims of Bengal began to resent the
overlordship of their Hindu neighbours - which eventually led to
their demand for a separate homeland along with the rest of the
Muslims of India.
_ Historical Perspective
Bengal was conquered by the Mughals in 1202 AD by
Muhammad Bakhtyar Khilji, a subordinate commander of Sultan ,
Qutubuddin Aiybak‘*. It was the first province of the Mughal (
Empire to pass fully into the hands of the British. Since the
British had snatched power from the Muslims they were
apprehensive of any attempt by them to try and regain their lost
kingdom. They, therefore, made a concerted plan to suppress the
‘Muslims and encourage the Hindus in their newly acquired
domain of Bengal.
Partition of Bengal and its Annulment
The dominance of the Hindu landlord, businessmen and
traders increased to such an extent in Bengal that the Muslims
demanded the partition of the province so that they could free
themselves from the Hindu Bhadrulok (landlord). Bengal was
partitioned in 1905. and the districts of Dacca, Rajshahi and
Chittagong (later to become part of Pakistan) were separated from
Western Bengal. "The Hindus considered the partition of Bengal
as an attempt to create a Muslim state in Eastern Bengal"®. Most
of the Hindus, resented the breakaway and forced Lord Curzon,
the then viceroy of India, to annul the partition of Bengal. The two
frontiers were united again by a proclamation made by King
George V at the Delhi Durbar of 1911.
Even after the annulment of the partition of Bengal the
’ Muslims continued to work towards creating better opportunities
for themselves. To compete with the Hindus in the field of
education, the Muslims of Bengal demanded the establishment of

