Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre =
an amphibuous landing in 1943).
55,000 civilians were taken prisoner 7. mover POW can mn |
India where they remained till 197458 The casualties ; he Toa; a |
army according to Brigadier Jagdey Singh were ] 500 rail eet |
4,200 wounded in East Pakistan. ; illed and
The total casualties includin Pakicte.: |
Bahinis and civilians were ‘ind oe ee ~ , |
— rom a couple of hundred thousand to more than. a |
Opening of the Second Front
The decision to open the second front was extremely difficult N
as It was bound to have far reaching consequences. There were |
only two options available to the military leadership in Rawalpindi
(1) Remain on the defensive in West Pakistan; take up the matter
with the United Nations and try to arrange for an immediate
cessation of hostilities with the promise of handing over power to
the elected assembly (India, of course, would not have agreed to a
cease fire having sensed victory. They would not have let the
‘opportunity of a life time" slip by. Russia, its mentor, ever ready
to punish Pakistan for siding with its arch rival - the United
States, would certainly veto any resolution of a cease fire in the
Security Council unless it was on terms suitable to India).
The second option was to take the offensive across the Indo-
West Pakistan border. It would be in keeping with the declared
principle that the defence of East Pakistan lay in the West. Not
attacking in the West would have meant keeping the bulk of the |
army out of the war while the eastern wing was being over run. |
History would never have forgiven the military rulers for not |
Performing their sacred duty of safeguarding the territorial
integrity of the country. Attack on any part of Pakistan i
mean an all out war. No government can twiddle its ims bs a
an open aggression of its borders have been committed, wherever
it may be. An attack on India’s western borders could, . _
*xtent, reduce the pressure on East Pakistan; it would wi en the
“onflict forcing the United Nations and its members to act.
Another reason for opening the second front was the re
Paki i erals that they wou
‘sessment of some of the Pakistani gen d forces in the West
able to inflict a severe blow in the Indian arme a re and seek a
Which would force the Indians to accept a cease fi

432 Tragedy of Errors
peaceful settlement to the East Pakistan a Roedad Kh ‘i
then information secretary, confided ae the ‘senior civilian
officials supported the attack in the western theatre because they
believed that the Pakistan army would be able'to overrun. large
chunk of Indian territory in the west which would force India to
give up its evil designs.
On the other hand, so far, the Indian armed forces were
engaged in a clandestine war in support of the Mukti Bahini. War
had not been declared and regular army units with their full
complement of artillery support had not openly participated in the
operations. The Indian air force had restricted itself to the border
areas. India concious of the reaction by certain countries friendly
to Pakistan, had not yet made deep penetrations nor had they
posed a direct threat to Dacca by air and ground forces. Eastern
Command had successfully kept the Mukti Bahini at bay for eight
months. Even after India’s open aggression on 21 November only
border areas had been overrun in the two weeks of fighting.
Although the outcome of the conflict was a foregone conclusion
Eastern Command had the ability to keep the Indians embroiled
for a longer period of time if an all out war was not declared. An
attack across the western border of India would give India the
excuse to invade West Pakistan using its superiority in men,
weapons and material to telling effect. India could make its
supporters believe that it was Pakistan, not India, which started
an all out war. The onus of proving otherwise would be on
Pakistan.
Both China and the United States were advising General
Yahya not to widen the conflict.
. The decision to open the second front, therefore, was a difficult
one for General Yahya. The pros and cons were discussed at
General Headquarters. General Abdul Hamid, Air Marshal
Rahim and Major General Gul Hasan were preseitt at a crucial
meeting on 30 November. The Naval Commander-in-Chief was
out at sea and could not attend. He was briefed the next day. No
joint operation plans were, however, conceived or executed. The
navy was only informed of the decision a day before the attack was
to go in. Commander Eastern Command was not kept in the
picture. If he was told early and directed to do so he may hav¢
ledpnated fine flung units and formations on to Pr&

Indo-Pakistan War . 197] Eastern Theatre 433
navy had been Studying the Situati... -
bea dain actions on its own in case tht Pakistan and
nlarged. None of these actions Were, however 000 Pena was
the other two services. vo"nated with
fficers of Pakistan Navy maintain ‘ .
&L have sunk four or five Indian naval ships Submarines
war, in the north Arabi Very first
day of the , . an Sea, Which Would have b
disastrous for the Indian Navy. (Pakistan’s Naval Operations hare
been covered in more detail Subsequently) ae
Some critics, have also €xpressed a view that Pakj
have opened a second front on 2] November, the =e =
army came out openly in support of the Mukti Bahini ang not wait
for 3 December. That may have imposed Some caution on the
Indians. Eastern Command, however, have a different View. They
feel that by turning the conflict into an all out war the Indians,
used their armour, artillery and air in East Pakistan with
impunity, which assisted them in their designs to dismember
Pakistan. General Niazi still maintains that he could have
contained the Indian advance if it was only clandestinely done to
‘Support the Mukti Bahini60 There is some truth in this but the
‘Pakistan armed forces would not have been forgiven by the people
of Pakistan if the major portion of its strength stood idly by when
Dacca capitulated.
Major General D. K. Palit claims that it was not India’s
intention to invade East Pakistan but to go only as far as deep as
16 to 25 kilometres to occupy areas which could be used as
toward bases for raids and attacks by the enemy. He eo
that it was only when Pakistan attacked India on oe °r nck
India Moved into East Pakistan with full force - T ri the
“ported by the actions on the ground. As menione to East
“atlier chapter the decision to send Indian forces the river
7 kistan was taken as early as April eee dive had been
lines, Which was the Indian army’s minimum eo moved far
finaliseg by May. Indian forces, by 3 December,
dene, than 16 to 25 kilometres.

434 Tragedy of Errors
Notes . * P|
1. Interview, Maj Gen K. H. Raja, GOC, 14 Infantry Division, Pakistan Arny,
Dacca, in 1971.
2. Ibid.
3. Maj Gen Raja’s briefing to armed forces war course - October, 1970,
4, Praval, K.C., Maj., Indian Army After Independence. Lancer International,
New Delhi, 1990, p. 317. |
5. Interview, Lt Gen Jagjit Singh Aurora, army commander Indian Eastern |
Command, in 1971. |
6. Praval, p. 361. |
7. Kathpalia, P.N., Lt Gen, Mission with a Difference, Exploits of 71 Mountain
Brigade. Lancer International, New Delhi, 1986, p. 52.
8. Palit, D. K., Maj Gen, The Lightening Campaign. Comptan Press, Salisbury,
1972, p. 70.
9. Interview, Lt Gen Aurora.
| 10. Ibid.
11. Statement made by Lt Gen LS. Gill, director military operation, Indian army
to Brig Sadiq-ul-Rashid Abbasi, director military operations, Pakistan army,
| on March, 1972, when the two met, after the war, on the Sialkot border.
| 12. Interview, Lt Gen Aurora.
13. Ibid.
14. Ibid.
15. Interview, Maj Gen Lachman Singh Lehl, GOC 20 Indian Mountain
| Division.
16. Praval, p. 336.
17. Interview, Lt Gen Aurora.
18. Praval, p. 340.
19. Interview, Lt Gen Aurora.
20. The story of the battle of Hilli has been constructed after interviewing the
two opposing commanders Maj Gen Lachman Singh and Brig (later Mal
Gen) Tajammul Hussein Malik and i ie veceett k
| and studying their respective books.
21. Praval, p. 336.
| 22. Palit, p. 114.
23. Kathpalia, p. 83. |
24. Ibid, p. 85.
25. Ibid, p. 105. |
26. Interview, Lt Gen Aurora.

Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre #95 |
a1. ol Brig Muhammad Hayat, brigade commander, 107 Infantry
98. Ibid.
99, Interview, Lt Col (later Lt Gen) Imtiaz Warraich, Co, 21 Punjab Regiment
(R&S).
40. Interview, Brig Hayat.
31, Praval, pp. 333, 334. i
| 99. Ibid, p. 334.
33, Interview, Brig Hayat.
31, Riza, Shaukat, Maj Gen, Indo-Pakistan War, 1971. Wajid Alis, Lahore, 1991.
35. Praval, p. 335.
96. Interview, Lt Gen Aurora.
37. Praval, pp. 330, 331.
38. Interview, Lt Gen Aurora.
39. Ibid.
40. Interview, Maj Gen Qazi Abdul Majeed, GOC 14 Pakistan Infantry Division,
in 1971.
41. Praval.
42. Interview, Maj Gen Majeed.
43. Interview, Lt Gen Aurora.
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid.
_ 48. Interview, Maj Gen Majecd.
| 41. Ibid,
48. Interview, Brig Saleemullah.
49. Praval, p. 340.
50. Tattiew, Maj Gen M. Rahim Khan, GOC 36 Pakistan Infantry Division, in
M71,
51. Ibid,
52. Ibid.
53, Interview, Brig S. Liagat Asrar Bukhari, CO Army Aviation Squadron in
East Pakistan, in 1971. ;
5. Interv ew, Maj Gen Rao Farman Ali Khan, Maj Gen, Political Affairs, MLA
HQs Dacca,
5B. Interview, Lt Gen Aurora.

i Tragedy of Errors
Interview, Rear Admiral (later Admiral) Muhammad Sharif, Flag Op
°° Commanding East Pakistan (FOCEP) in 1971. or
57. Interview, Lt Gen Aurora.
58. Adjutant General’s Branch, General Headquarters, Pakistan Army.
59. Sisson, R., and Leo E Rose, War and Secession. Pakistan Indian and the
Creation of Bangladesh. University of California Press, Berkeley, USA, 1999
p. 306. ’
60. Unpublished manuscript of General A.A.K. Niazi’s proposed book.
61. Palit, D. K. Maj Gen, p. 76.
|

| Naval and Air Operations .
Naval Operations |
From the naval point of view the Most signi
ecg nificant feat |
Pakistan's geography was the Peninsular shaped land quae : |
India jutting into the Indian ocean which gave New Delhi the
inherent capability of disrupting the Sea lanes between the two
wings of Pakistan It was evident that in the event of hostilities
seaward movement between East and West Pakistan would be cut
from the very outset. There was, therefore, a requirement of
maintaining a reasonable naval force in. Chittagong which could
keep the sea lanes open to friendly countries on the border of East
Pakistan. Unfortunately, Pakistan’ resources were not adequate to |
have two naval fleets. In keeping with the dictum that the defence |
of East Pakistan lay in the West no naval ships were earmarked |
for the eastern wing.
Relative Strength of the Pakistan and Indian Navies
December 1971
Units Pakistan Navy Indian Navy
Aircraft Carrier . .
Cruisers 1 2
Destroyers 5 ’
Frigates A/S 2 ; .
Tankers 1
Mise: 6
ssile Boats OSA Class . 4
Submarines 4 .
Midget Submarines 6 8
Minesweepers 8 1
Repair shi -
. P 2
Landing ships ——
Source: Military Balance {1971-72 p-50.

« 438 Tragedy of Errors
Eastern Theatre ‘
in East Pakistan was virtually non-
‘The Pakistan Lana faced an aircraft carrier supported by
existent. Four gu he Indian navy in the Bay of
destroyers, and submarines of the le niittle boy Davi
Bengal. It was even more adverse a situation cohen y David
facing Goliath the giant. The lone destroyer ee Nii
used to be docked in Chittagong had sailed for Karachi on 3
August, 1992.
Rear Admiral Muhammad Sharif, Flag Officer commanding
Fast Pakistan (FOCEP), assumed command of the naval
establishment in the eastern wing on 9 June, 1971. His
headquarters was at Dacca. His total naval strength consisted of
eight Chinese coasters, four converted gun boats and two landing
crafts (LCTs). Eventually with local assistance he managed to
increase his force to 24 converted boats and 20 coasters. With this
in hand he had to defend East Pakistan against any external or
internal threat.
FOCEP’s tasks in East Pakistan were numerous. They
included: patrolling of sea and riverine routes to meet external
and internal threats; assist the army in amphibious operations
and provide naval gunfire support when needed; move troops and
stores by sea or by river; ground defence of naval installations and
vital port facilities; keeping ports of Chittagong and Chalna
functioning; ensuring safe movement for all riverine traffic
throughout East Pakistan and advising Eastern Command and
the martial law headquarters on all matters pertaining to inland
water transport (IWT) and maritime problems. The tasks were,
quite obviously, much beyond FOCEP’s capabilities which was
pointed out to the higher naval authorities by Admiral Sharif.
Throughout the period from June to late November FOCEP
continued to patrol most of the waterways, clearing them of
limpet mines which were being laid by the Mukti Bahini frogmen.
Naval gun boats also escorted river convoys carrying troops;
ammunition and supplies. Anti-smuggling operations to prevent
weapons being smuggled from India, Hong Kong and Singapore
were also carried out. From June onwards and right upto
November the naval gun boats cargied out combined operations
with the army to clear various areas of armed rebels.
Mukti Bahini armed with rifles, automatic weapons, 2 inch
mortars, stenguns and grenade-launchers operated, from the

Naval and Air Operations 439
panks of the rivers oe ee and often ambushed naval gun |
ts and troop convoys. In order to ensure a safe |
hoa n waterways over 80 naval oper, Passage for own
ae 1 June and 21 November The waHons were carried out
be Bahini strongholds bombard wnt opened: destruction of |
wukti B seit titea Ment of areas held by Bengali
webelS; preventing - ooting and plundering of villages by anti-state
jlements; ambushing miscreants operating on Naukahs (count
boats); carrying of troops to comb Mukti Bahini concentration |
‘reas; evacuation and clearing under-water mines},
When the all-out-war broke out on 3 December i |
allocated his gun-boats to the western, central and sac cocnes
to cater for the needs of the local divisions in each area. The
Indian air force, however, destroyed a large number of them as
the war progressed. For the Indian Pilots it was a duck shoot
whith the added advantage that the duck could not fly,
After the withdrawal of the remnants of 39 (Adhoc) Division to
Dacca on the night of 8/9 December Admiral Sharif became
despondent. His personal, optimistically assessed, situation on
that day in reference to the Pakistan army was that their heroic
effort may not last more than a week, This was conveyed to the
naval C-in-C by FOCEP at 6 p.m. on 9 December”. The war ended
on 16 December exactly after 7 days as visualised.
Admiral Sharif also succeeded in getting one of his gun boats
out of Chittagong immediately after the surrender. PNS
RAJSHAHI managed to go through the minefield and LAE
int nn Ag i
» one PIA official and 37 sailors
Penang (Malaysia) safely.
Air Operations (Eastern Theatre) —
" = Commodore, Inamul Haq, a he Sistan en base
% © over as Air Officer Comman ry Commodore Masood
Mien once. He bad -paplace emoved because he had
een” who is reported to have pees eae be taken in East
Paki ended that no military action ut of control. Masood
taj Stan as the situation . could om vaetitl in the eastern hen.
Wome that the small air force e aie support in the event 0
an ob ne be able to provide eon Air Marshal Rahim ae
then eu Conflict with India. eset! put he could not alter the
thai C-in-¢, accepted the argumen
" Of events that, followed.

. : ¢ 14 Air Force Squadron of 12 Fg
Inam, found himself hen ireraft 5 the ground Ware azirensle
Es. with no hardene “ attacks The civilian airport of Dacca Was
vulnerable to oe ar _— nis avers could operate. The
the only ——— dy. Out of the 12 aircraft, one w:
Kurmitola-strip was not yet reaay dia had el as
lost due to an accident before the war’. India had eleven combat
squadrons deployed around East Pakistan os aircraft). In
addition PNS Vikrant the aircraft carrier, with 35 Alizes,
operating in the northern waters of the Bay of Bengal could
augment the number of sorties. | |
The PAF base had 40% Bengali elements many of whom had
deserted causing a heavy strain on the remaining West Pakistan
air force personnel. However, squadron Leader Rabbani from
Chittagong and Flight Lieutenant Ata-ur-Rahman, both Bengali
officers, remained loyal to the squadron’. Two F86s of the PAF
were brought down by enemy action while providing close air
support to the army in the Jessore Sector on 21 November. The
pilots baled out. Flight Lieutenant Mehdi and Flying Officer
Khalil landed in their own territory but were picked up by —
Bengalis who handed the pilots over to the Indians”. |
The IAF launched an all out attack on 4 December. A total of
21 enemy raids were launched against Dacca and Kurmitola |
airfields. Six aerial engagements took place in which the PAF shot
down 9 Indian aircraft losing three of their own. The raids
continued at night as well. Enemy raids on the airfield persisted
for the next two days till the ranway was made non-operational.
Since the remaining aircraft could no longer become air porne the
plot were flown out to Burma along with some PIA officers 00°
: er six F 86s were scuttled®. |
igthte ne to fly 25 sorties from 4 to 6 December
98 aircraft. El y 4,000 sorties. In East Pakistan the Indians |
sccurate i even in aerial battles and seventeen due 10 - |
choalitieh, PMV Aircraft Regiment deployed 900"
craft due to enemy action’. |

