India’s Role in the break up of Pakistan 301
o interview, Maharajkrishan Rasgotra.
sg, Inteview, S. K. Singh.
er, Nayar, Kuldip, p. 15-4.
Hindustan Times, 8 March, 1971.
‘ Government od Pakistan, White Paper, August 1971, p. 46.
" en 900. indian Army After Independence, Lancer International
i. Salik, Siddig, p. 116.
(2. Sisson R, and Leo E. Rose, p. 118.
3. Kissinger, Henry, Dr, p. 855.
44, Sisson, R, and Leo, E. Rose, p. 119,
i, Kissinger, Henry, Dr, p. 855,
(6. The Hindu, Madras, India, 4 April, 1971. ,
(7. Economist, London, 2-4 April, 1971,
(8, Sisson R, and Leo E. Rose, p. 152.
0%. Ibid, p. 137.
10. Hindustan Times, 7 July, 1971.
Al. Interview, K, Subramanyam.
72. Interview, Kuldip Nayar.
13, Kissinger, Henry, Dr, p. 872.
: Government of Pakistan, White Paper, August, 1971, p. 18.
15, Sisson R: Leo E. Rose, p. 119.
6. Thid, p. 186,
". Thid, p. 150.
18 Interview, K. Subramanyam.
a Sisson R, Leo E Rose, p. 151.
A. Praval. K, p. 317,
Bh Interview, Khushwant Singh.
m Singh, Jagdev, Brig, pp 4, 5.
& Sisson R, and Leo E Rose, p. 187.
‘i Nationalist, Tanzania, 30 October, 1971.
. i Karachi, 18 August, 1972. 96, 1971, p. 250.
Sabha Debates, Vol 8, Nhs 6-8, 22 November-26,
: St Hens Bop Balochlibrary.com

302
Tragedy of Errors
88. Ibid.
_A9. Ibid, p. 881,
90. Candeth, K. P, Lt Gen, The Western Front Indo-Pakistan War, 1971, Ajj
Publishers Ltd, NewDelhi, 1984, P- 167. ted
91. Kissinger, p. 893.
92. Ibid, p. 894.
93. Choudhry, G. W, p- 200.
91. Story of the Pakistan Air Foree, Shaheen Foundation, p. 453.
95. The New Re public, Nos 5, 6 August, 1974, p. 163.
96. Interview, Mahrajkrishan Rasgotra.
97. Sisson, R. and Leo E. Rose, p. 201.
98. Tid, p. 202
99. Kissinger, p. 868.
www.b.balochlibrary.com

Role of Other Countries
US Role
Pakistan - US relations took a downward tr ;
after the 1965 Indo-Pakistan War. The — | Ms mk et tee
were over aS Washington believed that it was Islamabad which
had started the conflict. Being a member of the US-sponsored
anti-communist pact Pakistan had enjoyed, till then, the benefits
due to a staunch ally. India, however, due to its size and
geographic location, its veneer of secularism and democratic
tradition had acquired a number of devotees in the US Congress.
It was, therefore, not surprising that there was a major split
between the White House and the Administration on how to
handle the crisis in East Pakistan in 1971.
Although the delay in handing over power by the military
leadership in Pakistan to the elected representatives of the
majority party was looked at with disfavour by both the President
and the Congress they treated the political developments in
Pakistan, till then/ as an internal matter. It was only after the
military crackdown by the Pakistan army that the differences
between the two power-bases in the US came to the fore-front.
India’s virulent propaganda against Pakistan for forcing
millions of refugees on their soil; the formation of a Bangladesh
svernment in exile and the exaggerated stories of atrocities being
‘ommitted in Fast Pakistan, had internationalised the issue. Jack
inierson, the noted investigative reporter bar Oe lbaiae
ema columnist, went overboard in pect - March 26.
ign eat the Indo-Pakistan war really stat a vcaive role soon
there he United States began to take a mor een aia
atch “fier in avoiding the possibility of a wal
alsin South Asia on the Bangladesh issue. rors of
eae Ne ‘ridors
ro tush there was no difference of opinion eS hinfem GD
- ein Washington on the eventual break up -on differed with
“arly as March, 1971, President Richard Nixon <M dl
Member . ‘pe taken to bring an en
S of the Congress, on the steps to

aii Tragedy of Errors
to the volatile situation which had now developed in the
subcontinent. While the State Department openly expressed thei,
sympathy with India and were bent upon punishing Pakistan for
using force to suppress a democratic movement, Nixon and his
National Security adviser, Dr. Henry 5S. Kissinger, wanted the
breakaway of East Pakistan, to come about through a politica) :
process.
President Nixon, according to Agha Hilaly, who was they
Pakistan’s ambassador in USA, “had ordered that the
Administration should maintain an attitude of “absolute
correctness” towards East Pakistan affairs. Hilaly went on to say
that Nixon would see to it that US government did nothing to
embarrass President Yahya’s government”. However a bill
sponsored by Mondale and senator Clifford of New Jersy proposed
that USA should cut off all military assistance to Pakistan until
the government halts armed aggression against Bangladesh
seperatists. The bill went on to say that US should ask other
donors of foreign aid to do the same.
The president of the most powerful country of the world,
however found himself being by-passed by a pro-India Congress.
While New Delhi was busy equipping, training and organising
terrorists to carry out acts of subversion in East Pakistan,the US
Congressmen, without clearance from the White House,* cut off $
35 million military aid to Pakistan instead, for trying to suppress
an insurgency within their own country. Supply of non-lethal
weapons to Pakistan was also stopped and the economic aid wa
slowed down. Pressure was being put on Robert MeNamal®
president of the World Bank, to stop all aid to Pakistan except that
for humanitarian assistance to the refugees’. The International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development was also asked by the
bso aes sian all economic assistance to Pakistan an
could do,was to ond te eo ool action} al
hands Bo not sque a Dove to his Administration sa weal
anfroad ot ee Yahya at this time’’, The directive pat |
issuing instruction a conpralitent Chad we ae the
President’, S contrary to the proposals made "
. ’ to
cennean oa dees in Washington wrote a i
appeared to be ‘ne 20, 1971 informing him tha yahy?
genuinely concerned about the difficulties

Role of Other Countries ame
ing in East Pakistan..... He wa ;
vee = mossible though the entire Amen ‘0 help Pakistan as
nue" enraged owing to ‘é: Public, press and
Congress wes Yop beerated Stories of army
vrutalities — because of the flood of refugees entering India. H
was, however, sending messages to friendly connteles not to
succumb to pressures of public opinion. His delegation at UN had
neon asked to cooperate”®. a
The difference in the attitude between the White H — ,
the State Department was due both to Persdnality duties ot the
top and the varying amount of significance each attached to the
integrity of Pakistan. Secretary of State William Rogers and
Kissinger did not get along with each other. Even before the East
Pakistan crisis they had been at logger heads on several other
issues. President Nixon was never at home with Mrs. Gandhi
whom he considered to be haughty, arrogant and condescending.
According to Kissinger "Nixon’s comments after meeting her were
not always printable”,
While Nixon and Kissinger felt that a ‘helpless’ Pakistan would
become an easy target for India whose collusion with the Soviet
Union would harm US interests in the South Asian region, Rogers
and his colleagues on the 7th floor of Capitol Hill were willing to
condone India for exploiting a situation which, according to them,
was the result of the military junta in Pakistan flouting
democratic values.
It was in November, 1970 that President Nixon requested
President Yahya, during his visit to Washington for the UN
anniversary celebration, to convey to the Chinese leaders his
desire for establishing direct secret contacts at whatever level they
considered appropriate. Nixon wanted direct high level
negotiation between USA and China to resolve issues dividing the
Wo countries. +)
Chou-En-Lai had suggested that President sone Peking
for direct conversation, In order to prepare for such a es
Nixon proposed a secret meeting between Henry Kissinger ~
Premier Chou-En-Lai. General Yahya took a personal interes in
wanging the secret visit of Dr. Kissinger to Peking 5 tke
| Slamabad. The US National Security advisor De wns
| ‘kistani capital on July 8, 1971 from Jakarta and Delhi. =
Made out to b ‘outine port of call. He was, however, fully
Nepated fe e a routine poi ahead. Consequently Kissinger
bought i. the “ettcate scot hi double but also some others
Wh along with him not only his a ae
}~ looked Similar to his important staff mem
ke

306—iy Tragedy of Errors
. s on his own pad
General Yahya’s ee on — 9, 1971, siidtitionet n!
government house Hes while in New Delhi just a day eaniio,
Kissinger's peer af bitterness, hostility and hawkishnes,
"Kissinger foun am ‘th an impression that India was likely tg)
and he came away VW" " te General Yahya on his pad, 9
start a war against Pakistan , wre .__ bad, He
further noted"USA has conveyed a strong warning to India |
inst starting hostilities but she may not pay heed thinking tha
Se present hostile attitude of the press and Senate againg
Pakistan offers her a good opportunity".
_) While in Islamabad it was given out that Kissinger had fallen
'*°"in and will be recuperating in the hill station of Nathiagali. In the
early hours of the morning of July 9, when it was still dark, Major
General Ghulam Umar, national security chief, however, drove
Kissinger to the PAF base at Chaklala where some Chinese
navigators had already arrived. While it was still dark the PAF
aircraft roared into the night sky on its way to Peking.
When day broke Kissinger’s double and other look-alike US
staffers were driven to Nathiagali in full view of the international
| press. The return visit of Henry Kissinger from Peking was also
| kept a guarded secret. This paved the way for the eventual Sino-
| US rapprochement. So grateful was president Nixon to Genera
| Yahya that he wrote a two page letter of thanks, in his own
han owiehe ee type-written), acknowledging the vital rol
Net p Liste = Se president. He was also aware of the fact
| subcontinent whieh — eae “en only equally © a
if they were inteatted keep the Soviet Union and India at bay
| ‘ae y the United States, Knowing the militaly
| superiority enjoyed by India the president k vent the
| out break of an all out war between the wo heater evalsi
| South Asia which could end etween the two traditional rv ‘i
| armed forces of Pakistan end up with the total destruction of
communist Russia ine and the elimination of a bullwork aga!”
So deep, h outhwest Asia,
ship in USA that while Ni the division between the top ear
Washington Senior Review Was ‘tilting’ towards Pakista? ie
option papers for the presigereUP (WSRG), which preli,
intervened in an Indo-Pak ent, recommended that if ‘ol
extend military assistance iar .War, the United States and
national integrity, as fay 0 India - Pakistan’s independent’, i
consequence. as they were concerned, was Y

/ 74 -
| Role of Other Countries 307 i‘
| ixon, however, continued to
wi . political solution to the Bast Pakisne® he ans ta
| went out of hand. In his letter to the Pakistani «, atone mevers
98, 1971 he impressed on Genera] Yahya i pod
political solution as soon as possible. He should have k meatier
- having pushed the top Awami League leaders os. mewn Chart
i thane < the bosom of
Mrs. Gandhi, there was no way under which Yah
solution tothe political crisis short of givin te could ane @
Fema age, 8 away East Pakistan to
Nixon also wrote to Indira Gandhi i
assistance to lesson her so-called bier ee ie aside
prepared to bear the major cost of refugee relief. But he etd act
have been unaware that was not her real concern. She sod
| dreaming of the day when her grateful citizens would lace a |
| crown on her head for dismembering Pakistan which had bens |
| reluctantly conceded to by her illustrious father. She was |
determined to invade Pakistan - come what may! |
The response to the Indo-Soviet treaty of friendship and |
_ cooperation also drew contradictory comments from the pro and |
| anti-Pakistan lobbies in the United States. Kissinger considered
this as a step towards escalation of hostilities whereas policy
analysts accepted Mrs. Gandhi’s explanation that by signing the
| tteaty with the Soviet Union, she had reduced the threat of war.
| To Kissinger, however, it wag" a lighted match which was thrown
into a powder keg"!1,
_ While India continued with its preparations for war,Nixon and
tis advisers tried to re-start the political negotiations which had
broken off after the military action, between the government and
a League teams, in the hope that war would be averted. The
j ‘onsulate in Calcutta established contact with a low level
wami Leaguer by the name of Qayyoom who agreed that the
ay may settle for less than total independence if Sheikh Mujib
‘Sallowed to participate in the meeting!”
he Yoseph McFarland, US ambassador to ore ae He, Z
Gene visitor at the President’s House in a a - . “thex
‘Ity al Yahya had developed a good understanding 0 e =
tn °S; therefore, not too difficult for him to convince Yahy h
| he yo meet the Awami League leaders secretly. as akg " onvey
S Consulate in Calcutta met Qayyoom again

308 Tragedy of Errors
’s agreement,he placed additional demands, The immea;
rs oa ws eno ead he Pking
also leave East Pakistan and thé United Nations should BUarante,
the security of Bangladesh.
When the US representative wanted to discuss the Matter wit,
either the acting president or the foreign Minister of the|
provisional government of Bangladesh in Calcutta he Was told
that all future contacts would be handled throughNew Delhils
Later the Awami League, acting on instructions from India tolj
the US consulate that the Soviet Union should Participate in all
future talks. Such illogical and ever escalating demands by the
Awami Leaguer was indicative of the fact thaty fully supported by
India and the Soviet Union, they were Smelling total Victory and
were in no mood to discuss any other political alternative,
Indian Ambassador to the United States, Mr. L. K. Jha,
shrugged away the suggestion by Kissinger that India should not
try and settle the issue by war, even though Nixon had made a
statement earlier that the US would cut off aid to India if it
attacked Pakistan. On September 27, when Joseph Sisco, US
under secretary of state, proposed to Jha that direct negotiations
be held between ‘Tepresentatives of Pakistan and Bangladesh
leaders in exile without any pre-conditions, Jha dismissed the ides
without giving any serious consideration to the US proposal!*, The
Indian ambassador was aware that even Nixon had by now
realised that East Bengal would no longer remain part of Pakistal
and that United States would put pressure on Yahya Khan
accept the 6-Points formula of the Awamj League. But India was
how working for the total diamodfeecieent of Pakistah
humiliation of its armed forces and the dismantling of the 1
nation theory, No Proposal which would hinder India’s nat”
alms and objectives would be acceptable when it had got Pak
by the throat and 4 superpower by its side.
pe i
. Nixon then tried to persuade the Soviet Union e ae
influence over India to prevent a war in the subeontinen ta
Soviet Foreign Minister, Andre Gromyko, in Washingt? ‘o wat"
him that India "should be discouraged from golng mpiniste!
Kissinger met Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet deputy scl attacl?
on October 9, and informed him that President Nixe
utmost importance to avoiding war.

| a
Role of Other Countries 809
Congress, the people and th a i ; j
earned against. Pakistan an in tar age in the United Hy
states which was not following the demo le dean ih Was
pakista which was committin auc path, and it was
jhe Pakistan army wi itlng atrocities and forcing a
vy burden on India because of the millions of refugees which *!
1 ai ng to their country. The Washington Post of Octob oe
ma column which said, "Pakistan is almost entirely responsible
gor the threat to peace bécause it is exporting an internal political
voblems in the form of refugees into India and that Pakistan
ust be induced to halt the persecution of it’s own people”. No
mention Was made of India exploiting the political development in
, neighbouring country, nor could they see the arming, training
and launching of guerrillas across an international border with
impunity. The virile propaganda against Pakistan by the Indian, |
jadership was swallowed by Western columnists hook, line and |”
sinker.
The United States continued to put pressure on Yahya to give a
civilian and more humane look to his government. He was advised
toreplace the military governor in East Pakistan by a civilian. Dr.
Abdul Mutalib Malik, who had been a member of Yahya’s cabinet,
was appointed, but he remained a titular head of a province
engaged in a civil war. A promise was also obtained from Yahya
that he would not execute Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman who had
been sentenced to death by Brigadier Rahimuddin Khan, the
president of the special court trying the Awami League chief. "11
Senators and 58 members of the House of Representatives wanted
President Nixon to ask General Yahya to show compassion and
not to execute Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman. On August 11, Rogers
‘onveyed their concern to ambassador Agha Hilaly. Farland also
had ‘counselled Yahya not to kill Mujib and Yahya is reported to"
‘ae ea US envoy "you have convinced me he will not be
€cuted"!6.
1 ot told Indira when she met him in eae o a
lade Succeeded in persuading Yahya to talk to the Pen -
lth ot? again. On his advice Yahya had also given amneey ©
heated who had violated the laws of the land. But none
actions could satisfy the chief executive of India.
| we White House was getting concerned —_—
ijn eet of the conflict when it came to ae - ~ skiatatt
| tegular army units had begun crossing the
L i

310 Tragedy of Errors
border on October 30!7. As the military situation began to worse,
along the Indo-Pakistan frontier, Nixon sent strong cables to Now
Delhi, Moscow and Islamabad cautioning them against an
outbreak of war. The cable to New Delhi, according to Kissinger
was delayed by the US Senate giving time to the Indian Prime
minister to give the final orders for the invasion of a neighbouring
country without any qualms. sc ae advised the Us
President not to ask for the conveying of a Security Council
session as "such a move would", as she put it, "obstruct the path of
the solution we jointly seek". She was correct to some extent as
both India and the United States had the same solution in ming .
ie the separation of East Pakistan from the rest of the country.
Only the route to be adopted was different. Nixon wanted to tread
__ the political path while Mrs. Gandhi was prepared to use her
~ military instrument. The hawkish Indian ‘iron lady’ was
determined to crush Pakistan’s pride under her high heels. In this
she was being supported by the State Department for even on
November 24, when Indian forces had occupied chunks of East
Pakistan territory, Rogers was saying "we have no independent
information either to confirm or to deny Indian complicity in the
~ armed attack"!8,
Silver haired Ambassador Kenneth B. Keating was, however,
keeping himself well informed in New Delhi. He could see the
clouds of war gathering, being closer to the scene, and as early as
November 12, he sent a signal to the State Department saying
that the war was imminent!9.
The movement of six additional Indian divisions into West
Bengal, the development of infrastructure upto the Indo-East
Pakistan border, the equipping, arming and training of the Mukt
Bahini by the Indian army, the bellicose statement of the Indian
leaders, the,frequent shelling by Pakistani villages by the India?
artillery was enough evidence for the State Department to come
the conclusion that the Indian forces had finally crossed the
international border. That is if they were looking for positiv® .
evidence! f
Yahya sent a letter to Nixon on November 22, 197)
immediately after India sent its troops formally into Ess
Pakistan, in which he is purported to have requested Nixo? :
personal intervention. He described the military situation eA \
noose round the government’s forces which is being tightened,”
| TG) |

