Causes of Alienation
The most significant effect of the geographical separation of the
two wings of Pakistan was the alienation of East Bengal from the
rest of the country. Many were the reasons put forward by the
_ Bengalis for_the bitterness they felt towards their co-citizens in
the west. Some were, of course, exaggerated to achieve the
objective of selfish individuals. A few were completely false and
part of a disinformation campaign. But none of the issues were so
great, in the beginning, to be unsurmountable.
What was needed was a clearer understanding of the unique ;
nature of Pakistan’s geography and its peculiar demographic ~~
characteristics. A sincere effort was also required, not only to
devise, but to implement, policies which could have removed the ~
suspicion and mistrust which had crept into the minds of the
people on both sides. The politicians, military leadership, \
bureaucrats and businessmen all shared this responsibility. «
Tragically they failed to deliver. Mistakes were made soon after
independence. Regional _ political leadeys and frustrated
intellectuals capitalised on them. Errors kept multiplying;
emotions kept rising; demands and their suppression kept
growing till it was too late to prevent the dismemberment of the
country aided and abetted by a hostile neighbour.
/
What were the main causes for the glienation? These could be
grouped under cultural, economic, political and military. Behind
some of them was a foreign hand initially hidden and towards the
final phase brazenly open.
Language Issue
A major factor which alienated the Bengalis from the rest of
the Pakistanis was the language issue. National authorities failed
to understand the deep attachment the Bengalis had for their
mother tongue.

|
48
Tragedy of Errors
The Bengali language was formed as an ee ate betwee)
Sanskirt and Pali. In the distant past the inhabitants o thie land of
Bengal spoke their own dialect which had soe eer ms the
two ancient languages. As Islam spread ovel - 4 eon ersian
and Urdu began to be spoken‘amongst the urban elite. Bangla
however remained the means of conversation in the rural areas, j;
was nurtured and nourished over the years by extremely talented
Bengali scholars and became, without doubt, a rich and beautify
language.
A.M. K. Maswani, goes to great length to prove that Urdu was
the language of the Muslims of Bengal earlier in the century and
that modern Bengali was introduced by the Hindus. Colonel Syeq
Faroog Rahman, president of the Freedom Party of Bangladesh,
maintains that the Bengali script was introduced by Ram Nivas
Banerjee, principal of Hindu College Benaras (India) in 1862!
Raunaq Jahan, the well known analyst of South Asian Affairs,
accepts that the "secular renaissance of Bengali started in the 19th
and 20th century due to the contribution of Hindu writers?’
Azizur Rahman Mullick, a one time ambassador of Bangladesh to
India, also writes in his Ph.D thesis on the ‘British educational
policy for the Muslims of Bengal’ that the court language of
Bengal was Persian in the days of the Moghuls.
It is also true that in all the All India Muslim League sessions
held since its inception in 1905 the representatives from Bengal
spoke in English or Urdu. None spoke in Bengali. However, this
_ does not take away the fact that the Bengalis were very proud of
~ their language and literature be it from a Muslim or a Hindu pen.
Written Bangla remained the domain of Hindu Bengalis which
reached its heights because of the writings of Sarat Chander
Chatterjee, Bankin Chander Banerjee and the legendary Rabinder
ath Tagore. These luminaries on the cultural stage of Beng
;) Projected mainly Hindu emotions and secular feelings which
‘unwittingly permeated into Muslim minds in Bengal.
in February, 1948 (less than a year after the creation of
Pakistan) Mr. Dhirendranath Dutt, a Hindu member of the East
Bengal Congress Party, moved an amendment to the proposed
anne eee that Bengali should also be made the official
guage 0 akistan. Instead of giving the proposal some cod!
consideration Liagat Ali Khan, the prime minister + tan
er of Pakista!
opposed the motion saying that Urdu was the cultural heritage 4
the Muslims of India and hence should be the only nation#!

Causes of Alienation ia
language. By not accepting the proposed amendment to the
constitution by the Congress member he gave a_stick to the
Bengali politicians to beat the West Pakistan leadership with.
Professor Ahmad Hasan Dhani, an internationally accepted
authority on the history and archaeology of the subcontinent, a
one time professor in both Rajshahi and Dacca University and the
curator of the Dacca Museum, gave a very valid reason for the
gradual change that took place in the schools and colleges on the
question of the place that Bengali should occupy in Pakistan.
According to him, while the Bengali elite, specially those that
came from Calcutta spoke Urdu, along with a smattering of
Bangla, the rural population in East Bengal, who were now
entering the academic world, did not know Urdu and it is they
who were in the forefront in demanding the acceptance of Bengali
as the second national language. Since they could not read or
write Urdu it is they who insisted that Bangla should be accorded
its rightful place in East Bengal and that Pakistan should be a bi-
lingual state? C. . ion § .
Dr. Aafia Dil, a Bengali lady with a Ph.D in linguistics from
Michigan, USA, while tracing the history of the Bengali language
movement felt that the spirit of independence in Bengal was
expressed in the form of having the freedom to make their mother
tongue the means of all communication. According to her the
demand for Bangla to be made an official language of Pakistan
was initially made by a small group of communists’ When the
communist party was banned the Bengali language movement
entered the Dacca University (Fazlul Haq Hall) from where it
spread far and wide and assumed a volatile configuration.
Mr. Jinnah made a statement in the Constituent Assembly on ,
25 February, 1948 that Pakistan being a Muslim state Urdu would “
be its state language. Quaid-e-Azam was to visit the Dacca
University during his stay in East Bengal in 1948. The students
asked Khwaja Nazimuddin, the then chief minister of East
Bengal, to put forward their demand for Bengali to be accepted as
one of the state languages of Pakistan. But apparently he did not
Convey that to Mr. Jinnah or could not convince him to accept
their demand‘. The students could not have been very happy
When the founder of the nation told them during his speech at J
Dacca on 19 March, 1948 that "Urdu and Urdu alone will be the
lingua franca of Pakistan".

50
Tragedy of Errors
Hearing it from the lips of one who had single handeq)
worked towards the creation of Pakistan and fully away, ‘
Jinnah’s honesty and sincerity of purpose no one raised a hue ang
cry at that point of time. However, an under current of
dissatisfaction and disappointment did start and the first signs Of
crack in the edifice began to be visible. Khondkar Mushta,
Ahmad, a leading lawyer of Dacca and an active politician, wy,
had served jail sentences during the Quit-India movement of 1949
was among those who raised a silent protest against the Quaid, o,
the language issue, in 1948. Though belonging to a religioy,
family of Deshpara, Daud Kundi in Comilla and a supporter of ,
United Pakistan he was willing to go to jail again in support of hig
mother tongue.
On 27 November, 1948 Liagat Ali Khan, while in Dacca,
repeated that Urdu alone would be the state language” which only
served to heighten the feeling of animosity against the central
leadership.
Language riots broke out when the National Educational
Conference recommended only. Urdu to be the national language,
Khwaja Nazimuddin had promised that the East Bengal Assembly
would adopt a resolution making Bengali the official language of
the province and would request the central government to adopt it
as one of the state languages but he failed to keep his word".
Matters came to a head after the deaths of the Quaid-e-Azam and
Liagat Ali Khan. Nazimuddin, who had by then become the prime
minister of Pakistan, made a statement in February, 1952 about
Urdu becoming the only state language of Pakistan. He is reported
_ to have said “except for a few persons none in East Bengal
demanded to make Bengali a state language’."
Immediately an agitation was mounted in East Bengal in
favour of Bengali. There was a strike in the Dacca University
which spread to the rest of the city. Curfew was imposed on 2!
February. The next day section 144 was violated. The provincial
assembly hall at Dacca was attacked. The police unable to contrd!
the crowd opened fire. Professor Dhani, heard the sounds 4
firing. Wounded students rushed into his house for safety®. Two
students, far removed from the scene, were killed by stray. bullets
in a hostel of the university. The unfortunate students became
Martyrs. A shaheed minar was soon erected to commemerate thel!
‘sacrifices’. Choudhry Nur-ul-Islam, a Bengali lecturer at th?

51
Causes of Alienation
Dacca University, along with a professor of political science, were
jailed for propagating the demand for Bengali to be also given the
status of a national language. Both of them were later re] eased. A
language Day began to be celebrated year after year to recall the
1952 Language movement. A platform Was now available for
Bengali politicians to whip Up propaganda against their West
P akistani counterparts. Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, then a non-
entity, took up the cause of the Bengali language, an issue which
touched the hearts of all Bengalis, and soon became a hero.
The significance of this event can be judged from the fact that
the first stamp issued by the government of Bangladesh comm-
emorated the two students who died during the language riots.
Brigadier Abdul _Hafeez, the director of the Bangladesh
Institute of International and Strategic Studies (BIISS), felt that 7
Nazimuddin became extremely unpopular in East Bengal because
he had not supported the Bengali Language movement?. The
bitterness against him, for not giving Bangla its due status, still
exists in a section of the Bangladeshis so much so that they are
demanding that his body, lying buried along with Maulvi Fazlul Bun
Haq and Hussain Shaheed Suharwardy in Dhaka, be removed
from its final resting place.
"The seeds of the secessionist movement were sown in the
1950s when Urdu was declared to be the only national language!
said Professor Shamsul Haq, a former minister in the Yahya
Cabinet and later chairman of the BIISS, The view was supported
by Enamul Haq Choudhry, Secretary Planning, Economic
Resources division in the government of Bangladesh!!.
Nazimuddin, was dismissed by Malik Ghulam Muhammad,
the eccentric and paralytic but powerful governor-general of
Pakistan, for being soft towards his people and for not handling
the language agitation in East Bengal in a more firm manner.
Ghulam Muhammad's answer to the language riots was the
language of bullets, a response which comes easily to a
government servant. This further alienated the Bengalis. Field
Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan, as president of Pakistan, also
could not rise above parochial issues when he said "It is quite clear S
to me that with two national languages we cannot become one
nation!2." He should have known that there are three official -
languages in Switzerland and two in Canada. Their states are
allowed to retain their respective mother tongues.

52
Tragedy of Errors
It was only after the spilling of a lot of bad blood between the
two wings that the 1956 Constitution accepted Bengali as one ¥
the state languages. Had the demands of the Bengalis beg,
accepted in 1948 a major plank from the disgruntled Benga}
politicians would have been removed.
The importance of Bangla in the life of the Bengalis can },
judged from the fact that almost all the sign posts, name plates
- pill boards, graffiti, road signs and number plates on automobiles
in Bangladesh are in Bangla unlike what is seen in West Pakistan
where English sign boards are even more prominently displayed
~ than those in Urdu.
A remark made by Mr. Khondkar Mushtaq Ahmad, a
prominent and senior Bengali politician who later became the
president of Bangladesh, aptly described the importance Bengalis
attached to their language. When I visited him in Dhaka, during
the course of my research, I was greeted by him in polished Urdu.
Later he began speaking in English in which he was equally
fluent. Hearing him speak both Urdu and English I asked him
politely. "In which language shall we carry on the conversation. In
English or in Urdu as I do not know Bangla". Pat came the
spontaneous remark "Janab Isi wajhe se Pakistan toot gaya".
- (that is the precise reason why Pakistan was dismembered). The
_- schwerpunkt (linchpin), according to Professor Abdul Qayoom,
president of the Institute of Regional Studies, Islamabad, lay in
the language issue".
Culture
When the Muslim majority provinces were grouped together to
form the new state of Pakistan it did not mean the creation of an
entirely homogeneous society. Pakistan, like the country it had
broken away from, was also multi-racial and poly-ethnic. The vast
oat hen of the Pakistanis were indeed followers of the same faith
a there was much in common between them. But ae
Pakists ad there a of India the areas that became part °
rasaria? None of f mceageent cst hich they had every right
domination of one om, wnt SEhbly so, was veilling io accept, the
attemipuat takeatl set over the other. When ever that we
arial ermine he” hagas helmet
groups concerned.

Causes of Alienation =
No where, in Pakistan, was this more apparent than in its
eastern wing. The Bengalis came from a different racial stock.
Their dress, diet and social customs differed from the rest. Their
love for dance, music and poetry brought them closer to the
Bengali Hindus. It is also true that the Hindu elite had dominated
the social and economic life of Bengal and there was much greater
fusion between theitwo religious communities in that province. So
be it!
In India the West Bengalis are very different to the East
Punjabis and more so because they belong to different faiths.
Their religion, outward appearance, dress and dietary habits are
not the same. the Madrasis differ considerably from the Hindus of
the United Provinces in race, colour, language, customs but yet
they are all Indians. Why then should such differences have
become a cause for the separation of the two wings of Pakistan?
None of the demographic dissimilarities would have altered the
loyalty of the Bengalis towards Pakistan if they had not been
) treated as inferiors.or if they had not been deprived of their
legitimate rights.
The language riots had already resulted in a bitter feeling
against the Centre. Emotions were again aroused when Governor
Abdul Monem Khan of East Pakistan and Khwaja Shahabuddin,
the minister of information and broadcasting, himself a Bengali,
but from the urban elite, banned the songs of Rabinder Nath
Tagore from being broadcast from Radio Dacca and other radio
stations in East Pakistan. A very unwise step indeed as by then
Bengali had been accepted as the official language of Pakistan. °
Tagore (1861-1941), was born in Kushtia, East Bengal, which
added to his credentials in the eyes of the East Bengalis. He
occupied a place of pride in Bengali literature. The Bengalis must
have tuned in to Calcutta to listen to his poems which was what
Pakistani officials wanted to avoid. His poems could have aroused
feelings of Bengali nationalism but so did the writings of Khushal
Khan Khattak in the Frontier and his poetry was not banned in
West Pakistan. I do not agree with Maswani that "an attempt was
bing made to wean away the Bengalis from their religion by their
‘eaders!5" just because they were being exposed to Bengali
literature from across the border.
No better words can express the attachment of Tagore’s poetry
to the Bengalis (Muslims and Hindus alike) than what Professor

= Tragedy of Errors
Abdul Qayyoom, a Bengali by birth and a Pakistani by choice ,.
the author, while recalling his sentiments on seeing the ne
Kaaba (House of Allah) for the first time. He said that he was Oly
~ reminded of the verses of Allama Iqbal in praise of the Al] Mighy
at that instance but it was a stanza from Tagore’s Gitanjalj Whig
came to his mind. "Prabhoo (Hindu name for Allah), please =
me just a little more strength to be able to reach you so that | sin
put this mala (garland), which I have brought for you, around
your neck before its flowers wither away'®" recited Qayyoom, no
because he did not know Urdu well enough. He was well verseq j,
several languages including Arabic but it was Tagore’s beautify)
expression of a man’s devotion to the Supreme Being that struc,
him most. The admiration of Tagore’s poetry by the people of Eagt
Bengal can be judged from the fact that his famous poem Amar
Sonar Bangla (My golden Bengal) depicting the beauty of the flora
and fauna of Bengal is the national anthem of Muslim Bangladesh
today.
No amount of Pakistani patriotism could move them away
from their reverence to the writings of Rabinder Nath Tagore. An
eminent Bengali writer is reported to have said "how can we turn
‘! away from our cultural Kaaba".
A gradual change, however, did begin to take place in Muslim
society towards the beginning of the fourth decade of the current
century. Stories of Rama and Sita weré replaced by Yusuf and
Zuleikha in many Muslim households but only amongst the well
educated. Qazi Nazrul Islam (1893-1976) gave an Islamic tinge 0
the Bengali literature but he did not write much.
If it was desired to re-orient the East Bengali culture the
answer did not lie in using repressive measures. “Muslim
intellectuals could have been encouraged and supported
financially to produce literary books of equal quality and with §
greater Islamic tinge than those produced in Western Bengal and
greedily devoured by the Muslims of East Bengal. Jadu_Nath
— wl A sence and authentic rae: me ‘
rnla in Bengt gl a more accurate picture_of the Mus
conte the el in East Bengal were prone t0 -
>) average Bengali Muslim, contrary to what is gene!”

55
Causes of Alienation
believed, was as strong in their faith as those in West Pakistan.
The proportion that fasted and said regular prayers were not less
than the Punjabis or Pathans. But what irked the conservative ‘/
elements in West Pakistan was their social customs which they
considered un-Islamic. Professor Dhani recalls that the West
_ Pakistani considered the Bengalis to be less religious because their
women folk wore sarees and placed a teeka (a decorative spot) on
their forehead’*. "Have we to give a certificate that we are good
Muslims"!9 was Kondkar’s comments on the statements of some
West Pakistani government officials that the Bengalis had merged
themselves with Bengali Hindus.
Dr. Aafia Dil was quite categorical in saying that the culture of
East and West Pakistan was not the same in all respects. She felt
that fact should have been accepted. "They wanted to impose a
cultural uniformity based_on Islam as interpreted by them20"
wrote G. W. Choudhry a former adviser to General Agha
Muhammad Yahya Khan. Indian authors, of-course, played up the
culture gap between the Bengalis and the rest of their co-citizens
while describing the same state of affairs in India as unity in
diversity.
Brigadier Hafeez, a thinly built Bengali officer with a scragy
beard, wore his traditional. Pyjama (loose trousers) and Kurta
(shirt) on Eid day and went to offer his prayers at the Eidgah
(place for congregational prayers) in the Sialkot cantonment -
(West Pakistan) where he was posted. Brigadier Ata Muhammad,
his superior officer at that time, is reported to have told Hafeez
"Ye Kiya maskino wali shakal banai hui hai". (why.are you looking
like one who is about to ask for alms)?!. Hafeez did not appreciate
the comments about his traditional dress from his Punjabi boss.
Khalid Bin Sayeed, a well known author, correctly points out
that it was the semi-literate religious leaders in West Pakistan
who thought that the Bengali Muslims needed “purification’.
Little did the half educated, narrow minded mullas in West -_
Pakistan realise that Islam does not have the same cultural values v\ 5
in all parts of the world. The Indonesian Muslims are quite ‘J
different to the Saudi Arabians in their dress and festivals. Even |
their national symbol is the Garuda a mythical figure in the
Hindu religion. The Turks are as good or as bad Muslims in their |
beliefs as Pakistanis but they are thoroughly westernized and
would not accept being told what to wear and how to pass their

- '
Tragedy of Errors
leisure hours. Even the word Assalam-o-Alaikum. which ;
common form of greetings in most Muslim countries is not alos :
so in the Arab world where Ahlan wa Sahlan or Saba-al-Khgir ws
V more in use. at
According to professor Dhani, "there was a clash betwe
Bengali culture and orthodox Islam", Soon after gaining
independence there was a revival of Bengali national culture |
_ East Bengal. A Bengali Academy had come into existence; ,
national college of arts was founded and Zain-ul-Abideen Wis
using his brush to propagate Bengali landscape and culture. Th,
Bulbul Academy was reviving the performing arts of East Benga]
_ )"Every week there was a seminar on Bengal’s history, geography
music, literature or arts" recalled professor Dhani.
Dance and music, which the conservative elements of Muslim
society consider un-Islamic, was very much part of Muslim
Bengali culture. I remember attending a musical function in
Saidpur in 1969. It was a gathering of the elite of the city and
several programmes of dance and music were being presented.
The Muslim deputy commissioner, who was also witnessing the
show, turned round to me and said "My daughter too can dance
the Bharat natyam very well. She would be the next on the stage’.
Bengali girls (both Muslims & Hindus alike) were required to
be profficient on some musical instrument. Knowing how to
perform a classical dance was an added qualification for marriage,
Strange as it may seem by conservative Muslims that was and still
_is the culture of East Bengali Muslims. No one has the right to
~ | force them to give up their way of life.
General Rao. Farman Ali Khan who had served in East
Pakistan for several years got unnecessarily perturbed because he
saw Bengali girls dancing when the ceremony for the opening of a
jetty at Chandpur was being conducted??. Major General Fa!
Muqeem who had also served in East Bengal blamed the East
Bengal government for not checking the Hindu oriented culture!
activities in East Pakistan?3, Such a policy would certainly hav?
alienated the Bengalis even further and the point of no retura
would have come even earlier.
G. W. Choudhry, himself a Bengali, writes that "East
__-Pakistani’s began to look more and more towards West Bengal for
cultural affinity’4, According to him "the Bengali Muslim

