Role of Other Countries saat
appealed }6 Nixon to use his Personal] initiative at this critical
| juncture.
Pakistan and the United States had gj ed
"fain 159 n which Washington hag aeoment
| e to Pakistan's aid if it was attacked,
com The US Congress took
the view that the US was to Intervene only if Pakistan was
threatened by a communist State. Dr. Kissinger, however
contends that in separate letters issued from the White House to
the government Of Pakistan it was indicated that the United
States ‘would defend Pakistan in the rase of aggression even from
India”. But the Karachi Agreement was given no importance.
Even superpowers wriggle out of commitments when it comes to
~ the protection and promotion of their own national interest in
changed circumstances. Article ] of the Agreement of cooperation
between United States and Pakistan signed at Ankara on March 5,
1959 states. "The Government of United States will take such
appropriate measures including the use of armed forces .... in
order to assist the Government of Pakistan at its request"2!_ (no
condition was attached to this article, although it was in the
context of CENTO),
After receiving Yahya’s appeal Nixon sent letters to Mrs.
Gandhi and Prime Minister Alexai Kosygin in which he advised
them "not to widen the conflict but to co-operate in finding a
political solution". He also ‘warned’ Yahya not to attack from the
West. US ambassador to Moscow Jacob Beam visited the Soviet
ministry twice in November to urge the Russians to have the
fighting stopped. US Senate majority leader Mike Mansfield
wanted the United Nations to come into the picture "This is the
time, now, today, not tomorrow for the Security Council to act"
Said Mansfield, But Pakistan had not taken up the matter at the
Security Council.
Nixon showed his displeasure towards India for it’s direct
military intervention ,by a token suspension of the supply of some
War material to India. Shri Swaran Singh, India’s external affairs
minister, informed the lower House of the Indian Parliament that
Wie to the deteriorating situation in South Asia and acetone
Military engagements between India and Pakistan ithe of a
States had of December 1, 1971 susp Aone bed h a cancelled
“munition, No new licences would be —_—* a
those already issued which were worth $2 million”,

312 Tragedy of Errors
t possible for the head of state and the commander.in.
shie ‘of any army to sit back and see the destruction of pq
country. Anyone would have used all the arrows in the quive,
before conceding defeat. So it was with President Yahyay mating
, - the set backs in East Pakistan and the ever increasing Pressure
of the Indian armed forces on Eastern Command he, in spite of
warnings and advice to the contrary, decided to open the western
front in the hepe that it would lesson the pressure in the East, "If
that es (Mrs. Gandhi) thinks She can cow me, refuse to take
it. If she wants a war,I will fight it’, said the President at a late
night dinner in Islamabad. Brave but empty words!
When an all out war broke out between India and Pakistan on
3 December 197 1.N ixon’s main worry was that the war should not
result in the disintegration of West Pakistan also. He wrote to
president Leonid Brezhnev to exercise utmost restraint and to
take a most ‘urgent action to end the conflict and restore the
territorial integrity in the subcontinent. This time, on 6”
December, the State Department ordered the cut off of both
military and economic aid’to India, valued at $ 11.5 million and $
87.6 million respectively. Though too late to have any effect on
the outcome of the war, even this late reaction to put some check
on India was criticised by the Washington Post which considered
e stoppage of aid to India as "puzzling and laughable’4,
hs = “se war contionel, Nixon increased his pressure on the
told Viademir ‘Mae ig the conflict. He is reported to have
Soviet Uuien hares evich, Soviet minister of agriculture sIf the
You must homie er with India we have one with Pakistan.
settlement of the conflict" urgency of a ceasefire and a political
With the US sti P .
iiMeseaiten aati we owt et L- Vietnam, and because of the
the ensuing Indo-Pakista Ww ‘ation, on whom to support, 1n
; n War, Nixon’s word ld not have
been tak . ords cou
€n seriously by the Soviet leadership
Radi
December @ at Lahore, made a cryptic announcement oD
, about the US government’ sat US
7th fleet closer to the war zone. B = > Raine eT
come to the conclusion that th 1 then the United States had
East Pakistan in the next f, Wy daen’ Would be able to overrun
additional fi whi day S,and would then transfer
ace “~ to the western theatre, and try to occupy Azad
mir and render the Pakistan army totally in-effective in the

Role of Other Countries oie
ess. To prevent this from happening yn;
em force to move towards the Bay of Bon ruered a US
inder the command of Rear Admiral D. W. Cooper . Force 14, ,
USS Enterprise (a nucl p » comprised the =
90,000 ton ’ Uciear powered aireraft cafti
with a complement of 5,000 and laden with 7
helicantar ; 5 planes and 5
helicopters), @ pter carrier, a supply ship, an oil tank
ided missile destroyers and , ol tanker,
three gull Se oyers and four gun destroyers. The task
force Was orn sail into the Bay of Bengal ostensibly for the
evacuation of 75 American citizens reported to be in East
Pakistan. Four hundred and thirty-seven international personnel “+ -
including ten UN officials iad already been flown out of East
Pakistan on December 12, by a British aircraft,in cooperation with
the United Nations after three unsuccessful attempts?5,
The Indians, however, had been informed by Moscow about
the movement of the US fleet about which the Soviet military had
obtained information by deciphering a coded message being sent
to the 7th fleet”®. D. P. Dhar, chairman of the policy planning
committee and General Manekshaw’ dashed to Moscow. They
were accompanied by Venkatesvaran, joint secretary at the Soviet
Union and East European countries desk, at the external affairs
ministry of India.
When Dhar informed President Brezhnev and Prime Minister
Alexai Kosygin about the movement of the US fleet towards the
Bay of wae 4 Kosygin is reported to have said "do’nt you worry,
our vessels are following the US fleet"2”.
This move by the United States was actually to warn India that
Washington could intervene military if her interests in the region
Were seriously threatened. It was also meant to put some steel in
Yahya’s back, Though it was hoped that India would be compelled
to divert some of it’s air and naval effort to watch the movement
of the US fleet, it was more of a bluff as there was no a
i cither establishing a beach head or lifting the blockade of
Chittagong pr even diverting the nin wy 100 : ies away //
Fast Pakistan coast. USS Enterprise was still 1, ato hill any
When the war ended. A day later it was instructed to
furth Jear that India was no longer
er movement as it became c akistan after East
planning to continue the war against West P ole
Pakista ied. The 7th Fleet played no r
n had been occupied. ving East Pakistan,
Whatsoever in preventing India from es ie Gandhi and
pough it may have had some sobering effect 0
resident Brezhnev...» . |
Ma

314
Tragedy of Errors
Although Nixon and Kissinger were wanting to Prevent th
disintegration of Pakistan but their concern was confined only na
the territory of West Pakistan which was still 8€0-politically of
significance to the United States. The State Departmen; ig
reported to have asked Ambassador Farland to find out from,
General Yahya if he was willing to seek a cease fire in the West, jg
he did so,United States would make a major effort to preserve
Pakistan’é territorial integrity and armed forces”*. Of course this
referred to West Pakistan alone. They had written off the eastern
half well before the war had ended.
When an offer of ceasefire was made by Pakistan’s Eastern
Command, Kissinger called General N. A. M. Raza, who had by
then replaced Mr. Agha Hilaly as the ambassador of Pakistan in
Washington, and asked him not to give an unconditional ceasefire
offer to India but to demand a ceasefire in both sectors. According
to Kissinger if that is not done, India would then try to dismember
West Pakistan as well29. A méssage was also sent on the hot line
to Moscow that India should accept a ceasefire. The Soviet replied
that India had no designs in the West.
Jack Anderson’s contention that a superpower confrontation
could have taken place in the Bay of Bengal because of Nixon’s tilt
towards Pakistan, only betrays his personal animosity against
Nixon and his pro-Indian stance. Neither the Soviet Union nor the
United State’s vital interests were at stake in East Pakistan. Nor
were the assembly of forces and the dispositions during the Indo-
Pakistan war such,that a conflict between the two superpowers
could have taken place. When the US naval flotilla crossed the
straits of Malacca a ceasefire was already being negotiated. It was
only a question of time when the obvious results would be known.
A nuclear holocaust at this stage, as envisaged by Anderson, was
,ho where on the cards. It is a pity that internationally known
columnists cannot tear themselves away from personal rivalries
and pre-conceived ideas.
After the war was over , William Rogers, who had been
opposing Nixon’s so-called tilt towards Pakistan, did realise that
the use of force to solve a political problem in the neighbourhood
was not justified. He is reported to have said on January 5, 1972
If every political problem that is created in the world justifies the
use of force then there is no end to war'29, |
|

Role of Other Countries 319
was too late for him to come t : _—
osx integrity was concerned. ° this realisation as far as
USSR’s role
The relations between the Soviet Unio
get sour ever since Pakistan joined CNG nt ee
were designed to keep the Soviets in check. Pakistan had also
allowed the United States to operate U2 Spy planes over Soviet
territory till Garry Powers was shot down over USSR’ and an
Nikita Krushchev put a red 3 )
angry : ring around Peshawar
indicating that the Frontier capital has been included as a nuclear
target. Pakistan’s friendship with the People’s Republic of China
also irked the Soviet Union. In May, 1969 when Premier Kosygin
visited Islamabad »he warned Yahya that a simultaneous
friendship with Moscow and Peking would not be tolerated
Implying that Pakistan’s policy of getting closer to China was not
appreciated by the Soviet Union.
When Islamabad totally rejected Brezhnev’s Asian Security
Plan and instead continued to remain aligned towards
Washington in the 60s,the Soviet Union was bitter against
Pakistan for acting as a tool of its rival superpower. In spite of
this, President Nikolai Podgorny would not have supported India’s
objective of breaking up Pakistan,had General Yahya accepted his
advice in March 1971, calling for a political solution to the East
Pakistan crisis. Even the joint communique issued after the state
visit of Premier Kosygin to India,.the stress was on a political
solution which would answer the interests of the entire people of
Pakistan*! [not only people of East Pakistan].
Even, when Yahya rejected Podgorny’s appeal and used force
to suppress the insurgency on a very large seaie phe Soviets did
not outrightly condemn Pakistan. In fact till the end of June,
Kosygin is reported to have told the Pakistani ambassador in
Moscow that it considers the development in East Pakistan as an
internal matter of Pakistan. Slowly the attitude began to change.
The tilt turned into open support of India’s aims when they son
to know about Kissinger’s secret trip to Peking through Islamaba
in July, 1971. When India,therefore, approached Moscow ine
a treaty of friendship and cooperation‘which would a <a
from intervening militarily in support of bagi ‘broveht
leadership readily agreed. General Yahyas inl

316 Tragedy of Errors |
Nixon and Kissinger closer to Pakistan but 1t pushed rr pi ever
closer to India when a crisis was brewing in In <A solated Wing of
Pakistan. The US-China detente, according to many politica
analysts, spurned the Soviet Union to support india on the
Bangladesh issue. _— nk
ot interests in South Asia at that time were: reak up
sig Uh anna anti-Soviet alliances; to prevent a US/ China
rapprochement and to show the inability of China to help its
friends when its own security was threatened. It wanted to evict
‘USA and China from South Asia and bring India more and more
into its fold.
With this end in view,the Soviets went all out to support India
in breaking up Pakistan. The military crackdown by General
Yahya provided the excuse. General Yahya’s abrasive retorts to -
Soviet President also contributed in hardening his attitude
towards Pakistan. In reply to Podgorny’s letter of April 2, 1971
advising him to solve the complex problem without use of force j
Yahya sent a terse note back saying "Pakistan was determined not
to allow any country to interfere in its internal affairs"??. Ironically
General Yahya was prepared to accept the advice given to him
frequently by Joseph Mc Farland who met him often over the cup
that cheers. 7
The Soviet Union, initially, was not keen that India should
enter into a military confrontation with Pakistan. Podgorny was
advising Mrs. Gandhi not to go to war and limit her objective to
demanding the release of Sheikh Mujib. He was afraid that the
Soviet Union could get sucked in if the war expanded whith could
lead to an eventual nuclear confrontation with USA. “He was
wanting a political solution in East Pakistan which would allow
the pro-India Awami League to gain power. Podgorny did not
want to get involved too soon in the conflict. He is reported to
have refused even to accept a letter in June, 1971,from the self-
i acting president of Bangladesh appeuiieolio the Soviet
nion to recognise his country.
dene visited Moscow in September, and met Premier
osygin. It was then that he went along with her when she
- the entire blame on Yahya for the tension in South Asia. He
so promised that if Pakistan or China attacked India,USS®
would airlift military equipment to India. The total military 204
economic aid promised was around $1 billion?3. |

Role of Other Countries 317
Mrs. oxha Soviet eal on only a month after her
vapor had met General Yahya ope inet ct Mile
- odgorny) had rejected Yahya’s offer of ‘GhE ae
pakistani armed forces from the border if India maulK op
supporting the Mukti Bahini. A week later he came over to New
Delhi and reinforced the total support of the Soviet Union to Indi
in its so-called hour of crisis. Later in the same month ‘Soviet
Deputy Foreign Minister Nikolai Firyubin visited Delhi. It was no
surprise, therefore, that the Soviet reply to the proposals b
United States to work towards a peaceful solution to the political
crisis in East Pakistan was the same as that of India ie: release of
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahfnan and come to a political settlement
acceptable not only to the Awami League but also to New Delhi.
‘The aim of both the Soviet Union and India was to isolate
Pakistan and not to let it get the support of the international
‘community.
On November 1, the Soviet airlift of military equipment to
India started. Marshal Pavel S. Kutakhov, deputy defence
minister and chief of staff of the Soviet air force, was also in New
Delhi to assess for himself if any more assistance was needed.
After the invasion of East Pakistan by India on 22 November
the Soviets concentrated on preventing the Security Council from
passing a resolution fora ceasefire and the withdrawal —— to
their respective border On November 26, the Soviets blocked a
Japanese feeler to call a Security Council meeting. Moscow,
according to Henry Kjssinger, had-made it clear that the Howick
Union would support én end to military operations only if there
_— e
was a political solution satisfactory to India”. The same strain
was repeated by TASS on December 5, which opposed a ceasefire ) |
unless the lawful rights of the people of East Pakistan were met.’
This condition for a ceasefire was repeated in a Soviet reply =
Nixon’s letter of December 6. Since the top tnaeralily 60 Se
Awami League were in Indian Se oa ea vt
political settlement according to the dictates of India.
During the visit of D. P. Dhar and Genera! bape
Moscow on December 10, Kosy gin ee nee Brezhnev was
nention about pursuing the war in oe Bat al,.sineé he wanted
Pressing India to get on with it a et! 1 tte was building
the conflict to end quickly as considerable ca ns
Up against the Soviet Union at the United Riatinne

a Tragedy of Errors |
Throughout the India-Pakistan conflict, the Soviets did not
waver in their unqualified support to India. According to Jack
Anderson the Russian attach’e told Chao Kuan Chih, the Chinese
attach’e in New York, that if China got serious about a military
intervention in the ongoing wat, USSR would react*®, To put
further pressure on China the Sdviet Union 1s reported to have
moved its troops further‘towards the Sinkiang border. Niko}aj
Pegov, the Soviet ambassador in New Delhi, assured Indian
officials that if China attacked India, Russia would mount g
. diversionary — in Sinkiang”®.
After it became clear that the Indian army would soon be
overrunning East Pakistan, Vasily Kuzetzov, deputy foreign
minister of the Soviet Union, was sent to New Delhi to arrange)a ~/n
satisfactory outcome of the conflict. This was to make it clear to _
the Indians that the Soviets also have an interest in the affairs of
South Asia. em
China’s Role
After the 1965 Indo-Pakistan War, the United States had cut
off all military aid to both India and Pakistan. This had hurt
Islamabad more than New Delhi as the armouries of the former
were mostly stocked with American arms,while only 10 percent of
the weapons held by the latter were of US origin. This thoughtless
action by Washington had forced Pakistan to look elsewhere for
assistance.
Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, who was then the commerce minister
in Ayub’s cabinet, achieved the breakthrough with China and
succeeded in establishing ties with Peking in 1966. China’s
friendship with Pakistan matured over the years,in spite of the
differences In there” systems of government, and ‘in their socio-
economic conditions. China had supported Pakistan in every
forum. It had dispatched massive supplies of mili hardware
| and helped to establish defence-oriented j i mg
its part, had” helped + : ented industries. Pakistan on
Washingt Pee to build bridges between Peking and
nhgton and had consistently defended China’s policies
towards other nations. China did not ook f
instabili : want a situation Oo .
ability to be created in Fast Paki ct!"
Indian, Soviet and American ; (akistan as it would attract!
aid told Toy Be can Intrusion into that area. Bhashan!
Y Mao that he should not conti : nst
Field Marshal Ayub as, accord ontinue his struggle agal
strengthen the hands of Ru oreing to the Chinese, “it will only
ssia, America and India"37.

+
Role of Other Countries ae
ing the East Pakistan’s crisis, Maid :
oe Pakistan, China remained fie ng seacoeded ti
isolating Pak a T™M™ in its support of the
government 1n power in Islamabad. Brigadier Iftikhar who was
Pakistan’s military attach’e In China recalls how Mr. Chou-En-Lai |
refused to see Mr. Qaiser, Pakistan’s ambassador in China, as he
was pro-Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, On the contrary the Chinese
leader met the military attach’e quite often and conveyed through
; g
him to the government of Pakistan that General Yahya could ~
count on China’s friendship, short of getting directly involved in
an Indo-Pakistan War. It is for this reason that Mr. Chou-En-Lai
continued to advise General Yahya to find a political solution to
the problem in East Pakistan. In his letter of April 11, 1971
addressed to the Pakistani president,he supported the unity and
territorial integrity of Pakistan; referred to the on-going conflict
within East Pakistan as a struggle by a handful of people;
criticised India for gross interference in the internal matters of a
neighbouring country,and pledged full support to Pakistan in the
event it is attacked by India**. However, the type of assistance was
not indicated. Anwar Hussein, a Bengali language expert at Radio
Peking, claims that the letter from Chou-En-Lai did not appear in
full in the Pakistan Times. The sentence "The question of East +
Pakistan should be settled according to the wishes of the people of ‘
Kast Pakistan was omitted*?,
General Yahya’s noting on his personal pad dated July 14,
1971 indicated that the President was expecting China to pose a _
threat to India in the event of an Indo-Pakistan Conflict. He wrote
‘Chou-En-Lai_ indicated to Kissinger. In case india vated 4
Pakistan,China would not be an idle spectator but will support
Pakistan"40,
However, according to Brigadier Baqir Siddiqui, chief of =e
Eastern Command, the Chinese consul general met Lt. Genera t
A. K. Niazi several times and informed him that pred wee
ae he: Pakistan should
planning on any physical intervention and that
v Woid a war with India. if
; r r
A very high level Pakistani delegation ae late a
Bee utto, who had been nominate ve hited ‘Peking from 6 to
ent Yahya’s special representative, delegation were Air
8 November, 1971. Other members of of the Pakistan air
iétshal Rahim Khan, commande’ inv jet of the general staf,
‘tee, Major General Gul Hasan Khan, cle

320
Tragedy of Errors
Rear Admiral Rashid Ahmad, chief of staff of the Pakistan Navy
and Foreign Secretary Sultan Ahmad Khan. He was assisteg by
the director general of the foreign office Dr M. A. Bhatty ang a
couple of other directors including Tabarak Hussein (a Bengali
foreign office official). While Bhutto had a separate meeting with
the Chinese premier,parallel talks were held between the military
“leaders of the two countries.
Though nothing is known about the private talks between
Bhutto and Chou-En-Lai,the discussions which took place in a
larger gathering had been fully recorded and its summary was put
up to the President when the delegation returned back to
Islamabad. The Chinese premier, it is reported, was very
conscious of the fact that since Pakistan had played the middle
man in arranging a rapprochement between China and the United
States,the Soviet Union had over reacted was trying to. break up
the country. sy
Chou-En-Lai accepted that Pakistan was going through a very
difficult period but he made it quite clear that President Yahya
should solve the problem politically and not by military means. He
even sent a film in English on the Japanese Admiral Yamah-moto.
The movie was against the use of military action to solve political
disputes, Chou-En-Lai even asked Bhutto at the banquet whether
he had seen the film wid? he sent him a night earlier. The
message which he wanted to convey to Pakistan should have_,
become quite clear. He made it clearer by telling the delegation we |
_©@ill not be able to come to your help as we did in 1965*!. In other |
words no sheep would this time stray across the Indo-Chinese
border / }
on te about have understood the Chinese predicaments in
Satie | Ay ee pune ( 1965-1968) had just ended and
| hetween Chin seas for his own survival. The cold se
deployed one a USSR was at its height. The Soviets ha
Manchurian Mon - 0“ backed by nuclear wear stent -
pteatnniihe wider mane Sinkiang borders. Possibility .A
forced them to build ae i ‘ - eaten aprale ene ia
nuclear shelters in im san ae ground ee eat
warning to Peking to stay we othe ia atl “The
signing of the Indo-Soviet Tr ly rdo-Pakistan amet
Besides this China had nee Baik meinfowentt warn
just become a member of the Security

