108
Tragedy of Errors
Bidis (poor man’s cigarettes).
Dacca Rs. 7.93 per 1000
Karachi Rs. 15.50 per 1000
Cigarettes J
Dacca Rs. 32.05 w
Karachi Rs. 32.40
Cloth Poplin per yard
Note: Except for Rice medium quality and Sugar the prices
of all other essential items were lower in East Pakistan
in 1970 when Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman was blaming
West Pakistan for all the woes being faced by the East
Bengalis.
Source: Economic Survey of Pakistan 1969/70 Table No. 38,
Central Statistical Office. pp. 80, 81.
The economic performance of a country can be judged from.
different criteria. It could either be a comparison of gross domestic /:
product over the years or the difference in per capita,income or
the quantum and value of foreign trade or the development in the
social sector, All these could also be seen from two different angles
ie: Progress from a certain date or a comparison with another
area.
The Bengalis were told by their leaders, who were determined
to arouse emotions against the West Pakistanis, that “they should
not accept the absolute growth but the increasing gap"2!. No one
was there to explain to them the basic laws of economics that a
region with a low ‘starting point and with hardly any assets for
economic growth cannot achieve the same growth rate as 4
relatively economically advanced region even if a greater amount
of cash is inducted. It takes time to catch up as an already
developed area continues to surge ahead.
— ay, ae oe area of the Five Year Plans were not
bureaucratic red Si i ai y seturity _eoncerns
See, ependence on foreign assistance, lack of
nf
|

109
| i Regional Inequality - Remedial Measures
\V _
appropriate institutions, shortage of competent planners,
corruption, inefficiency, nepotism and lethargy, frequent shifting ,
of sectorial priorities due to domestic and foreign pressure targets /~
laid down targets are seldom achieved.
For twenty years after independence Bangladesh has been
, master of its own affairs. The Srowth rate is still slower than in
West Pakistan which was deprived of its So-called ‘colony’, It still
| buffers from over population, natural calamities, an unstable
" political situation and lack of scientific education. Internal divisive
issues continue to retard economic progress in Bangladesh.
Nothing can describe the condition of the ordinary Bangladeshi
citizen, twenty years after breaking away from Pakistan, than a
photograph appearing in a local newspaper in 1992 showing a
Bengali family in tattered clothes Scraping banana stems to
augment their diminishing quota of rice for their daily meal.
Hundreds of thousands of Bangladeshi men and women still
come to Pakistan to find work in the Karachi metropolis. They
send their earnings back to their kith and kin. If they can do so
now they could have come in much larger numbers in a united
Pakistan and benefitted from the economic development that was
taking place in West Pakistan. ‘Capital’ is now being transferred
in the reverse direction. 3
Administrative Steps taken to
remove the feeling of Alienation
Several administrative steps were taken both during the Ayub
era and the shortlived Yahya regime to remove the grievances of
the East Pakistanis about not having been given adequate
Opportunities to join the government. (1) forty percent seats were”, . ,
reserved for the East Pakistanis in the civil service in addition to
the twenty percent taken on merit, (2) a Bengali candidate for the
central services of Pakistan could be chosen down to the eightieth
Position whereas a Punjabi applicant could only be considered
upto the twentieth position, (3) in 1966, sixty percent of all
government seats were reserved for East Pakistanis, (4) snare
Yahya appointed an equal number of secretaries in the ae
from East and West Pakistan, and (5) the recruitment riigmaer m
the armed forces was reduced for the East Pakistanis to enable a

110
Tragedy of Errors
larger number of them to join the services. Even the Pakistay,;
baiting K. Subramanyam acknowledges that by 1968 the Benga);
representation in all government posts had risen to 36 Percent |
from less than 1 percent in 1947*. v
Major General Muhammad Rafi Khan, the military secretary
of Field Marshal Ayub, recalls that in 1963 there were 99
vacancies for the central services of Pakistan. All of the top 22
who appeared for the CSS examination were from West Pakistan,
The Bengalis, however, got their share of the quota although the
highest position obtained by the Bengali officer was 60th on the
merit list. Since only 22 had to be taken that year many deserving ,
applicants from West Pakistan had to be dropped. The son of an
ambassador, whose name was included in the merit list, could
only be accommodated by raising the vacancies to 23. The quota of
East Pakistanis was not reduced to include the envoy’s progeny’,
Merit should be the criteria for selection to government posts if
quality and efficiency is the objective. A quota system satisfies the
‘backward’ regions to some extent no doubt but it is not conducive
|i better adminjstration. Quality is sacrificed for the sake of
distributive justice. It also breeds dissatisfaction and frustration
amongst those who are better qualified but are deprived of their
chancés just because they happen to have been born in an area
which is more developed than the others. No quota was allotted to
Karachi for decades. Citizens of the largest city of Pakistan could
not enter the civil service except on merit whereas a Balochi,
Pathan or Bengali could do so even if he paid no attention to his
studies.
By_1963, only 20 percent candidates for the superior civil
services were being taken on merit, 40 percent seats were being
se for Bengalis and the other 40% being shared between
ochistan, Sindh and the Frontier. Because of this the
oe of Bengali civil service officers began to rise. In 1947
figure had “ret 40 | : hae = = Bengalis and by 1969 the
seats were res 2 percent*'. By 1966 sixty percent of all
erved for East Pakistan.

Regional Inequality - Remedial Measures Mt
Table 21 gives the number of officers of Grade 17 and above on
1 July, 1971. F rom only one class 1 officer in 1947 the Bengali
,. representation in the superior services had reached the figure of
~, 196. Only three short of the number from Punjab, It is worth
” noting that, contrary to what was being propagated, East Pakistan
was given preference over the West Pakistanis in the
administrative services..Their rate of climb was much higher than
their counterparts in the Western Wing:
Table 21
PROVINCE WISE LIST OF OFFICERS OF
GRADE 17 AND ABOVE - JULY 1, 1971.
Punjab 199
Kast Pakistan 196
Sindh 62
NWFP 40
Balochistan 6
Total 503
Source: Compiled from Civil List, July 1, 1971, Class 1 Officers
Government of Pakistan, Cabinet Secretariat,
Establishment Division, pp. 381-424.
Note
Though Punjab still had a larger share of the cake Kast
Pakistanis were not given the crumbs. If it all there was a cause
for complaint it should have been from the smaller provinces of,
West Pakistan who got a much lower quota then their population “_)
figures demanded.
In the important ministries of foreign affairs, finance,
education, home affairs, planning division, economic coordination
and external assistance, East Pakistanis had either a eee
number of Class 1 officers in 1971 or only marginally less "ee
those from Punjab. In the Jute Board of which Ayesha Jalal Mh ~~
book, ‘The State of Martial Law’, makes so much of a fuss, all n

| |
2
Tragedy of Errors
sineolors were from East Pakistan: (Source: Civil list July 1, 197)
class 1 officers, G of P, Establishment Division.)
Social Measures aimed at National Integration
Education was given priority in the development of East
Pakistan. 67,000 schools, 225 colleges and 5 Universities wey,
raised in East Pakistan between 1947 to 1971. The Rajshahi
University was established in 1953 followed by the Agricultural
University in Mymensingh and the University of Engineering and
Technology in 1961. The Jahangirnagar Muslim University north
of Dacca came up in 1964 and the University at Chittagong in
19667».
Compulsory inter-regional postings was introduced, frequent
cultural exchanges took place and a council of integration was
established by the Field Marshal. Although the disparity between
the two wings in all sectors was not totally eliminated by 1971 it
_ ) will also be unfair and incorrect to say that East Pakistan was
|being treated like a colony and its people and its resources were
being deliberately exploited for the benefit of the provinces of
| West Pakistan.
.
|
|

j . ; 113
Regional Inequality - Remedial Measures
Notes
1, Mahmood, Safdar, Pakistan Divided. Ferozsons Ltd, Lahore, 1984, p. 18.
Ayub, M.; Subramanyam, K., The Liberation War. S Ch
2. Pethi, 1972, p. 57. and and Co Ltd, New
_ Khan, Muhammad Ayub, FM, Friends Not Mast - if
« Autobiography, Oxford University Press, 1976, p. 23. = S Piel
4, Shehab, Rafiullah, Prof, Fifty Years of Pakistan, Maqbool Academy Lahore
1989, p. 112.
5. Sayeed, Khalid Bin, Politics in Pakistan - The Nature and Directi
Change, Praeger publishers, New York, 1980, p. 57. —_eee Oe
6. Khan, Muhammad Ayub, p. 223.
7. Mahmood, Safdar, p. 35,
8. Economic Survey of Pakistan, 1969/70, p..
9. Interview Mr. Mahmood Ali; Ahmad Emajuddin, Bureaucratic Elites in
Seqmented Economic Growth in Bangladesh and Pakistan, University Press
Ltd, Dhaka, 1980, p. 152.
10. Khan, Fazal Mugeem, Maj Gen, Pakistan’s Crisis in Leadership, National
Bank Foundation, 1973, p. 9.
11, Khan, Muhammad Ayub, p. 228.
12. Mahmood, Safdar, p. 36.
13. Jahan, Raunaq, Pakistan, The Failure of National Integration, Columbia
University Press, 1972, p. 180.
l4. Choudhry, G.W., Last Days of Uniled Pakistan, C.Hurst and Company,
London, Indian University Press, 1971, p. G1.
15. Ibid, p. 30.
16. Shahab, p. 192.
17. Ali, Mian Kifayat, Pakistan versus Bangladesh, Lahore. 1971, p. 24. Budget
in Brief Table XIII, Section II, p. 36.
18. Economic Survey of Pakistan 1969/70, p. xxx.
#19, Choudhry, G. W., p. 64,
20. Feldman H., From Crisis to Crisis Pakistan 1962-1969, Oxford University
Press, London, 1972, p. 168.
a1. Wileox, W., The Emergence of Bangladesh, American Enterprise Institute of
Public Policy Research, Washington D. C., 1973, p. 16.
22, Subramanyam, K., p. 34.
/*8. Interview, Major General Muhammad Rafi Khan.
24. Mahmood, Safdar, pp. 31, 32, 33.
, : ; tview
25. : Donnel, C. P., Bangladesh-Biography of a Muslim Nation, meee
"ess Boulder and London, 1981, p. 29.

Political Quagmire
(Beginning of the End)
On January 29, 1968 Field Marshal Ayub suffered a severe
heart attack and remained seriously ill for about 10 days which
kept him out of his office for a month and a half. According to the
constitution the speaker of the national assembly should have
been handed over power during the period of his illness. But that
was not done as Ayub never trusted him. This deliberate violation
_of the constitutional requirement angered the Bengalis. In July
the president went to England for a medical check up. He once
again departed from the democratic practice by keeping Mr. Abdul
Jabbar Khan away from the presidential chair. This encouraged
his opponents to increase the pressure on him to quit his office.
In West Pakistan, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto’s agitation against the
_ Field Marshal began to gain ground. Students, teachers, lawyers
and the men in the street joined him in his tirade against the
president. On November 7, 1968, the students of the polytechnic
School just outside Rawalpindi clashed with the police. One
student by the name of Abdul Hameed, was killed. Bhutto,
chairman of the newly formed Pakistan People’s Party, took
advantage of this and turned the funeral procession into a political .
‘'\gathering. From then on demonstrations, strikes, gheraos
(besiegement), burning, looting, lathi charges, brickbatting
became almost daily occurrences. Curfew was challenged, army
Was frequently called out. On November 11, one Hashim, an
unknown figure, fired a pistol at the president during his visit to
/pcihawar. Bhutto and Khan Abdul Wali Khan, chief of the
National Awami Party, were subsequently arrested. j
On February 17, 1969 Ayub asked Nawabzada ont oe
Khan president of the Democratic Action Committee . mit
meet him along with other politicians at a eens wae (1)
Conference (RTC), He, agreed, but placed three conditions:

116
Tragedy of Errors
emergency to be lifted; (2) section 144 to be withdrawn and (3) al
political prisoners to be released. Ayub yielded to all of them hs
RTC was held briefly on February 26, 1969 and adjourned to .
assemble on March 10. The President also agreed that he would
not contest in the next elections, that his 1962 constitution could
be scrapped and another constitution introduced, and that af
An against the Agartala conspirators would be withdrawn. Eve,
: then Bhutto and Bhashani did not agree to attend the RTC,
“Phe conference was reassembled on March 10. Nawab
Nasrullah Khan presented a two point formula to the conference
viz:- (1)The country should have a federal parliamentary system
of government with regional autonomy and (2) The assemblies
should be elected on the basis of direct adult franchise. There
were differences of opinion on the exact definition of federal
parliamentary system and the measure of regional autonomy to be
given to the provinces’. Mujib then elaborated his famous 6 Points
formula and the 11 Points of the Student Action Committee. He
was supported by Justice S.M. Murshed and Professor Muzaffar
Ahmad both from East Pakistan.
By now the 11 Point’s demand of the radical students of the /
East Pakistan had become part of the Awami League’s manifesto”
The 11 Points included among other things: (1) introduction of
postgraduate classes in the Jagannath college in Dacca; (2)
withdrawal of a book entitled Pakistan Dresho Krishti from the
syllabi; (3) improvement of science laboratories; (4) secular
education ; (5) reduction in the price of paper; (6) release of
student leaders and (7) renaming East Pakistan to Bangladesh.”
Mujib reiterated that "This (6 points) was the only formula
that would ensure the integrity of the country’. Ayub
' spontaneously asked him "which country". He was obviously not
happy with the 6 Points of Mujib which he felt would amount to
the break up of the country. "If I allow the 6 Points formula ! will v
undo what Quaid-e-Azam had done” said Ayub to Mujib with 4
tinge of anger, Khan Abdul Wali Khan leader of the National
ieee Party urged that the objective conditions both in East and
- ralistan should be taken into consideration when deciding
wie _ “ee oe Unit and regional autonomy. Maulana Mull
Mehmood of the damast Lett simply wanted that ls
president of the Pakistan Di cle san Mahmood Al A
kistan Democratic Party, supported pall

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) sal
between East and West Pakistan saying that it had been agreed
upon at the time of Liagat Ali Khan and again by Khwaja
Nazimuddin. It was also endorsed by the constituent assembly in
September, 1953 when Muhammad Ali Bogra as prime minister
put forward his formula. No headway could be made at the Round \
Table Conference which ended without achieving anything. |
The secretary general of the Al] Pakistan Awami League,
L.H.M. Qamur Zaman, was sent by Mujib to West Pakistan with a
proposed bill amending the 1962 Constitution in order to bring it
in line with the Awami League’s regional autonomy demands. It
required 100 amendments to the existing constitution. Accepting - |
it would have resulted in a confederation with Bangladesh and
made it a nominal component of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
Ayub did not agree with the proposed amendments as according
to him it would mean the break up of the country, But by now
events had moved rapidly towards the imposition of another
)s martial law‘,
Towards the beginning of 1969 the towering figure of Field
Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan began to lose its impressive
image. His health was failing so was his popularity. His ability to
manage the political crisis, which had developed after the failure
of the Round Table Conference of all major political leaders in the
country, was being questioned both in the civil and military
circles. Although his close aides including his military secretary,
Major General Muhammad Rafi, secretary information Altaf
Gohar and Syed Fida Hasan, his advisor on political affairs, tried
to give him the much needed back up support, he no longer could
withstand the pressures being built up against him both by the
+ Politicians and the top army brass at that time.
Mr. A.B. Awan, the home secretary, after visiting the
Provincial capitals in March, 1969 reported a complete defiance of
authority specially in Dacca and Karachi®, The law and order
situation had deteriorated considerably. A thousand houses had
been reduced to ashes in Parbatipur, a prominent railway. junction
In the Dinajpur district of East Pakistan. The death toll in the
incidents at Dacca had risen to 39, curfew had been imposed and
Violated at several places. The East Wing secretariat was ’geh-
ra0ed’, Hartals (strikes) were becoming a daily feature, even
Sweepers began raising their voices. In many towns electric
Supplies were cut off by disgruntled government employees.

|
118 |
Tragedy of Errors |
Adamjee jute mills and the Pakistan Tobacco Company in Dacea
had been taken over by the labourers. Ayub 'Khutha hai’ (Ayub i,
a dog) was being inscribed everywhere. Air Marshal M. Asgha,
Khan, chief of the newly created Justice Party was demanding
that the government must quit at once®. Zulfigar Ali Bhutto, wag
spitting out venom against Ayub and was shouting for his ouster.
Bhutto was, at the very early age of 32, commerce minister jp
Ayub’s cabinet, Differences between him and the President arose
after the 1965 Indo-Pakistan War. Although Bhutto, who had
accompanied the field marshal to Tashkent, to attend a meeting
with India’s Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri, had himself
drafted the Tashkent Declaration he used that document to blame
‘Ayub for a let down at Tashkent. Bhutto used to compare Ayub
with Mao and d’Gaulle but when he was removed by the
President, he became his bitterest enemy’. A Sindhi never forgets
an insult, is an old Sindhi saying, more so if he is a wadera
(landlord).
President Ayub, as a last ditch measure to save the country
from political chaos, agreed to have the next general elections in
1970 on the basis of one-man-one-vote and accepted that the
future political set up in the country could be based on the federal
parliamentary system. But it was now ‘too little to late’. The
leaders who had assembled for the second session of the Round
Table Conference in Rawalpindi on March 10, 1971 and those who
had stayed out of it wanted much more - his ouster and a
completely new political ball game.
. Ayub began having confabulations with the commanders-in-
chief of the three services about the future political set up in the
country. He realised that he no longer could continue as head of
state and as its chief executive.
After the failure of the Round Table Conference, due mainly to
[op uncompromising attitude of Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman and the
— re by Zulfigar Ali Bhutto, Ayub, though sincere in finding @ /
‘edtvlenias ° , , = olitical impasse, became frustrated with the:
demands of the engl ake of the politicians, specially with the
the break up of Pakiet eague which to him were leading towards
incnneed Bee istan. He is reported to have said “It is beiné,
\preside over the di country be divided into two parts. T cannot
e destruction of my country®. If 6 Points are to be

