Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 189
Mujib began his speech by reminding his votay;
had already shed blood in Dacca, Khulna and Chittagong = ciel,
beloved motherland. "Aj Bengali mubt; chai" (today the Bengalis
want freedom) roared the Bangabandhy (metaphorically father of
the Bengalis) into the microphone. He warned the milita
authorities that the entire Bengali nation had voted for him ant
that they would now grasp their political, economic and cultural
_ freedom by force.
He recounted the history of the so-called Bengali freedom
movement which, according to him, had been written in blood.
"Amar cheledar goli kore mara hai” (my sons have been killed by
bullets) said Mujib, referring to Ayub’s martial law. "Then came
Yahya, who after holding the elections did not keep his words",
continued the Sheikh. The voice firm, never wavering. Self
confident and self assured Mujib blamed Bhutto for not agreeing
to sit down on the negotiating table. He then turned his tirade
against the army. "Amar desher ghoreeb mancher upar ostro chali
achey". (The army which was equipped to fight the external
enemy and which was bought from our own money was turned
against our own people). Mujib then referred to General Yahya’s
address to the nation in which he had blamed Mujib for the
postponement of the assembly session. He termed the allegation
as false and rubbish. He denounced the military leadership for
favouring a minority leader and not willing to hand over power.
He raised the ante by saying that the Awami League would not
attend the national assembly till four additional demands were
met. These were: (1) martial law to be immediately lifted; (2)
power to be transferred to the majority party; (3) the army to
return to the barracks and (4) a judicial enquiry be held into the
firing by the army in which some innocent people were killed on
the night between March 1 and 2.
_ He appealed to Bengali nationalism by saying “all those whv
live on this land Hindus and Muslims are one people. We have
shed blood and we will continue to shed more blood to make our
People free",
He ended his 17 minutes speech with the words "Amader ot
ag Shadimutar songram" (our struggle is a freedom 4 a : :
na careful nat ose the word independent: No Me
tie in clear terms that he was deman re - He had been
© of Bangladesh. But,the meaning was clear.
www.balochlibrary.com

sac Tragedy of Errors
warned by Major General Khadim Hussein Raja not to announo,
a unilateral declaration of independence (UDI). or else he Would
use his full military force against him and the Awami Leggy,
Mujib was, however, under pressure to do so from the Students
and hardliners. He deliberated on this issue for a long while and
was, therefore, late in arriving at the race course ground that
evening. He correctly decided that prudence is a better Part of
valour, "UDI - not yet” was his reply to a questionnaire fro, te
foreign journalist.
It was by all standards Mujib’s day. His baritone voice Was fy]
of passion. He was in full command of the situation. The people
responded spontaneously to every inflexion in his tone. There
were several climaxes both in voice and substance. All in all it wag
a powerful speech which could have moved stones and trees, The
impact on a volatile audience was electrifying.
Reporting the meeting on March 7, the intelligence agencies in
Kast Pakistan recommended that all suitable steps by armed
forces be taken to plan for the worst contingency on assumption
that there would be complete non-cooperation from locals.
Sheikh Mujib started a non cooperation movement against the
Centre - ala Mahatma Karamchand Gandhi of India. His 10
points of ‘Ahimsa’ included: (1) Bengalis not to pay taxes to the
government; (2) all government officials to observe hartal and not
to attend offices; (3) railway and port workers not to cooperate
with the government; (4) radio, TV and press not to suppress
news about the Awami League’s directives and ‘atrocities’
committed against them by the Pakistan Army; (5) only local and
district telephone connections to be put through; (6) all schools to
remain closed; (7) banks in ‘Bangladesh’ not to remit any money
to West Pakistan; (8) black flags to be flown on all buildings, shops
and transport system; (9) general hartal throughout the country
to be withdrawn and (10) Sangram Parishad (Council of Action)
to be organised at mohalla, union and district level.
__ These instructions were later sent out as directives (thirty five
in all) from time to time by the Awami League which were
implemented by nearly all Bengalis in letter and spirit. He als?
ee ( 1) immediate cessation of a military build up in Bast
akistan; (2) Immediate stoppage of firing on civilians by the
army; (3) non interference by the military authorities in running
the government in East Pakistan and (4) maintenance of law and

191
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End)
Bangladesh had virtually come into being on March 7,1971. *
Jails were broken. Training of armed Awami League personnel
began openly. Banks refused to open fresh accounts, Desertions of
army and police personnel began taking place. All East Pakistan
radio stations changed their station identification. Instead of Radio
,. Pakistan, Dacca, the announcer identified the station as Dacca
Betar Kendra (Radio Dacca). AJ] government officers contributed
one day’s pay to the Awami League fund. Many must have done
so through fear of Awami League militants ‘but there was no
doubt about where their loyalties lay after March 7.
General Yahya too posed as a strong man and indicated by
words (but not with deeds) that as long as he is in command of the
Pakistan armed forces and head of State,he shall ensure complete
and absolute integrity of Pakistan. "Let there be no doubt or
mistake on this point" said the General!3®, But it is not military
strength that ensures internal harmony. What is needed is
national cohesion. It required a Statesmen and farsighted and
sincere political leaders to have saved Pakistan after March 1. But
alas there were none after the Quaid-e-Azam,
When General Tikka Khan arrived in Dacca at 3.30 pm on
March 7, to take over as governor of East Pakistan he was not
welcomed by the Awami League. At that very moment the
meeting at Paltan maidan was in progress, General Tikka, a
straightforward and simple soldier who was known for his
Obedience to orders even if it meant using force to carry out
instructions, was to Mujib,a symbol of the East Pakistani military
domination. The Artillery general from Mehra Mator, a village
near Rawalpindi, had earlier quelled the uprising in Balochistan
Without regard to its fall out, for which he had earned the title of
‘Butcher of Balochistan’ given to him by the Indians. With that
background it was not surprising that the Bengalis did not
appreciate him replacing the pliable, soft spoken Admiral Ahsan.
General Tikka was received by Yaqub, Khadim Raja and Shafi-ul-
Azam, the Bengali chief secretary.
With Mujib the defacto ruler, Justice Siddiqui, chief justice of
Dacea High Court, feigned illness when rot , <a ye
and hig 1 Ollice to General Tikka Khan on danger if he had
's family would have been in extreme ange
hetormed his duties as required under the law. A judge had to oa
Kn in from West Pakistan to give legality to General Tikka
"'S governorship!39,
www.balochlibrary.com

— Tragedy of Errors
General Tikka wanted to meet Mujib. His chief secretary -
that he could arrange such a meeting on March 9. Mujib On bein
contacted said that he is prepared to meet him but he will have ‘
come to his house as otherwise other Awami League leader,
would take Mujib’s visit to the government house ag ,
capitulation. The general suggested a neutral place like the
provincial assembly building but that too was not acceptable ¢,
Mujib and the meeting did not take place.
On March 9, Maulana Bhashani and Ata-ur-Rahman who had
always opposed Mujib now pledged support to him thus
completing the hold of Awami League over the Bengalis.
On March 10, 1971, Bhutto realising that matters had come ty
a head sent a telegram to Mujib in which he expressed hig
willingness to go to Dacca "The unfortunate crisis that has
developed leads me to believe that we have come to a stage where
the two wings of Pakistan must immediately reach a common
understanding if the unity is to be saved"'*°. But he had not given
up his aim of not sitting in the opposition.
With matters reaching a breaking point the leaders of the
Council Muslim League, Convention Muslim League, Jamaat-e-
Islami, Jamiat-ulema-e-Islam, Jamiat-e-Ulema-e-Pakistan and
other smaller parties met at Lahore on March 13. They backed the
Awami League’s four additional points and urged General Yahya
to go to Dacca and find a political solution to the crisis.
Nawab Akber Khan Bugti a prominent political leader of
Balochistan and head of the Bugti tribe was also in favour of
handing over power to Mujib immediately. "When Mujib can rule
_ the whole country why should he be content with half’ were his
comments. He blamed Bhutto for being only concerned with)
sharing power and for not helping in framing of the new
constitution'4', However, Bhutto stuck to his guns and at Nishta!
Park at Peshawar he demanded that "power should be transferred
to the Awami League in East Pakistan and to the PPP in We
Pakistan '? thus ensuring his piece of cake. According to him the
majority party in East Pakistan and the majority party in West
Pakistan could democratically represent th This was 0°
wholly true. a OUGHY:
One unit having been dissolved. Bhutto could not expec 0
ahi ee a provincia assemblies of the NWFP o
tA "made no mention; 6f, the, type of. gavernme?

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 193
ntre and on the centre-proy;
th oon was that because of the "seogrechie tu omship. His
majority rule does not apply"'** hence the need for fen he
the Centre as well. This statement was condemn eee at
number of politicians in West Pakistan. "I hope én ye ewe
peen incorrectly reported said General Shor Ante he has
ynfortunate” commented Air Marshal Asghar: "It is : t tb
democratic norms” recalled Nasrullah. "He ‘cannot s “sg .
NWFP" quipped Khan Abdul Wali Khan!45, speak for
On March 14, Bhutto made a public statement in which he
stated that "power should be transferred to both the majority
parties"!“°. This could be an indication of his acceptance of the
separation of, or a confederation between, the two wings.
Time had come for Yahya to take an initiative in bringing the
two political leaders together. For this to happen it was essential
for him to first meet Mujib. A message was sent to General Tikka
to inform the Awami League chief about the proposed meeting.
The reply from Tikka read “Mujib will be glad to meet the
President in Dacca". It reflected the strength of the Awami League
_ vis-a-vis the central government.
When the President of Pakistan arrived at Tejgoan airport on
the afternoon of March 15, there were no Bengali civil servants or
politicians to receive him. Although the usual cavalcade of security
jeeps, motorcycle outriders, spare staff cars were all arranged but
there was no reception line, no crowds lined the streets, no |
flowers were strewn, no clapping was heard. Instead there was a
deathly silence as the chief martial law administrator drove to the
president’s house.
_In compliance with Bangabandu’s instructions all Bengali
‘Wilian staff stayed away from the government house. The C-in-C
had to remain content with West Pakistani batmen to look after
his personal comforts. +
; as ccompanied the
oan POvernnient 5 negouialing team pail “AR. Cornelis
*sident included General Peerzada; els Abul
Brigadier Iskender-ul-Karim and Colonel Hasan, Genera Sear
Hamid, Ghulam Umar, Abu Baker Mitta SS ae the
eel, followed them soon thereafter. cm me ,
hancial and economic expert joined the team later.
Immediately after arriving in Dacca General pestis
down i ely after ar ike Awami League to come an
Claborate aoe He aske omulgating a new constitution.
eir proposals, for promu f n
www.balochlibrary.com

194
Tragedy of Errors
On being asked by the government’s team as to what
their grievances against the central leadership Dr Kama] Hae
outlined the disparity between the two wings in various gp Sseiy
His arguments were refuted by M.M. Ahmad and his assistart
Baqai. Kamal Hussein, however, had come well prepared
confronted them with ne While elaborating the 6 p and
he tried to allay the fears that the centre would become inef, ints
without the authority to levy taxes. He said that a pati
formula for the transfer of financial resources from the pro Steed
to the Centre could take care of the concerns of the ne _
government. The first informal meeting ended with a su i.
that each party should prepare a draft proposal te
Sea oaeaton be drawn up which would suit both the Cant
On March 16, Mujib, clad in a kurta (shi
, , shirt),
trousers) and a Nehru jacket came to the oresident’s hous, (loos
a Bangladesh flag. He was recei i ouse flying
g as received by the militar .
president, Major Ge ¥ Secretary to the
; ajor General Muhammad Ishaq Khan, who cond
him to the rear verandah where Yahya was sittin acces
General Peerzada was called in to join them ee See
The President opened th ‘sati
to work with you to find a ~ to br sation by saying "I have come
the province. I want your coo ra back peaceful conditions in
the national assembly inangural ie would like you to attend
suspiciously and said "should wh uel ee Se lose, aot
elsewhere” (he was afraid that ie carty out the discussion
bugged). ; at the appointed place had beet
The President lo
, oked towar
his broken Bengali "hj haley” tah Peerzada who asked Mujib in
on ne would rather talk els _ Se Nagi inte
“3 s bedroom upstairs (the bai ere. They finally moved "
and Leo Rose is incorrect). athroom story quoted by Siss0
‘ Mujib then menti |
. mention
NE epeonore in his speech ee Ming we points which he had
o e fulfilled before he eal 7. These according to him had
Sion. The Pregj attend th i bly
alr esident told hi e national assem
ready been ac im that two ~ had
toirnicks b cepted. Orders for th out of the fou!
acs had been given. An enquiry hoy es 2°, back od
eged killing of iyi); enquiry had b the
regards th 8 ot civilians by the ar een ordered on
e other two points, Genera “a on March 1 and 2. a
ahya pointed out to Shel#
|

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 195
Mujib that the lifting of the martia) law '
ret to be done by the national iments -_ handing over power,
Mujib objected to the composition of the inquiry committee -
according to him, an Awami League member should also have |
been incorporated. He also did not agree to the terms of et ave
as it pertained only to the circumstances under which the arms
was called in aid of civil power whereas he wanted the comnin
committee to pin down responsibility for the ‘unwanton’ killin a
‘innocent’ civilians by the army. He rejected the proceedings The
commission of inquiry. Mujib also remained firm by saying that
the other two points should also be carried out before the national
assembly is convened. Yahya replied saying "In Principle I am not
even entitled to agree to the lifting of the martial law and handing
‘over power but for the sake of peace we would consider these two
points before the meeting of the nationd] assembly but some
modalities have to be worked out". Mujib accepted this view.
The President then went on to Say "let us prepare the
modalities together. We have our teams. Let us ask them to meet
and work out the modalities. We will keep overseeing them",
Mujib agreed to send his team to discuss the details, but before
. leaving, he created a stir by telling the President "why not we have
/ confederation, We will still have one president, one flag". Yahya
' was taken aback. There was dead silence for a while. But he kept
his cool. "Sheikh Sahib I have come to talk about the
alrangements for a federation of Pakistan not about
Confederation. We are all prepared to give absolute maximum
autonomy to the provinces in some cases (referring to East
Pakistan) even more than the others".
The meeting which lasted one hour and forty five carr
11.45 am to 1. am) ended on the note that the two negotiating
teams Should meet, The President asked Peerzada not to mention
the word confederation to any one. The Awami League ing
'0 point out that the negotiations should not be tripe. .
sould not include Bhutto. Dr Kamal Hussein ole Yahya,
done that they would address all drafts to |
i .
Of : lieus
After Mujib left Yahya called all his aides. need Comers .
argued against the lifting of martial law before the p
hand ° - is lifted there would be a vacuum
ed over as once martial law is lifte
www.balochlibrary.com

196 Tragedy of Errors
as the President would have no legal authority. According to hin
the correct sequence would be: (1) calling of the national assem}y,
’ session; (2) the assembly asks the CMLA to lift the martial lay
and (3) transfer of power to the elected representatives,
The President wanted Cornelius to see the reality op th
ground and reminded him that Awami League would not atte, i
the session unless we can produce some acceptable answers 4,
Mujib’s other two points. Cornelius replied saying "we shall 5,
what we can do’.
On March 17, the two teams met. By now Mr M.M. Ahmaj
and Sartaj Aziz had joined the government’s team. The Awan
League team consisted of Tajuddin Ahmad, Dr Kamal Husgeiy
and Nazrul Islam. The meeting began with Cornelius giving oy
his proposal of the sequence of events for the smooth transfer of
power. Tajuddin did not agree to the suggestions and merely said
that “our leader has already spoken to the President’ ,thereby
putting a seal to their earlier demands. The main hurdle seemed
to be the lifting of martial law before the national assembly
session. Justice Corneleius insisted that there would be a
constitutional vacuum if that was done. Doctor Kamal Hussein, a
constitutional lawyer of repute and the legal advisor to the Awami
League team, did recognise the implication of such an action but
felt that a way out could be found to avoid a legal lacuna. He felt
that an independent opinion may help in cutting the Gordian
, knot. "Shall we get an opinion from Mr A.K. Brohi, the wel
known legal expert on constitutional issues"? asked Kamal
Hussein. Justice Cornelieus agreed to the suggestion. Brohi is
reported to have said "yes it can be possible by issuing an interim
arrangement order"!47,
Another attempt was made to work out an acceptable
arrangement. The government’s team produced a draft martis!
law order (MLO) according to which a council of ministers ft"
sli the elected representatives could be set up to aid th
governor in administering the province. The martial Jaw
regulation would provide for suspension of the martial law.
The process of finding a solution to the political impasse lookel
good when all but one) West Pakistani leaders reached Dace”
March 19. They included Mumtaz Daultana (CML); Sart
yraukat Hayat Khan (CML); Mufti Mahmood (JUD; Khan Ab,
an (NAP); Sahibzada Abdul Qayyoom (Muslim Leagu®"

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 197
aulana Shah Ahmad Noorani (Jamiat-i- r .
Prominent by his absence was Zulfigar Ali Feige i yey
People’s Party).
The two teams met again on March 19. T ;
team rejected the MLO. They put forward es ow aa
which included: (1) lift Law immediately (2) transfer ere
provinces to respective majority parties: (3) no change at the ‘ ..
Centre; (4) 1962 Constitution to be amended to ensure full |
autonomy for East Pakistan; (5) two separate committees be
formed to frame the constitution initially. The national assembly
to discusss the two reports and find a compromise between the
two; (6) governors to be nominated by the president and (7) list of
subjects with the Centre to remain as mentioned in the 6 points. |
‘Foreign aid and trade for West Pakistan, however may remain
with the Centre if that is their wish. Yahya was willing to accept
these proposals by the Awami League chief provided Bhutto
rasied no objections. He (Yahya) had conceded all points except
immediate transfer of power. But he was also aware that neither
his generals nor Mr Bhutto would accept these conditions.
Initially, the Awami League proposals among others included:
(1)\independent armed forces for East Pakistan; (2) separate
currencies for the two wings; (3) negotiations for foreign aid to be
carried out separately; (4) export earnings to be divided equaly; (5)
two state banks and two central board of revenues; and (6)
taxation to be a provincial subject.
Further negotiations betwen the two teams narrowed down
the differences between them on these major issues. After some
discusion it was agreed that two separate currencies and two
Separate State banks would be against the unity of the country. To
ensure that there would be no flight of capital only 5 ee
Percentage of the profits would be allowed to be repatriate ais
West Pakistan. The points about separate currencies and 7 es
/Teserve banks were, therefore, deleted and according to nd the
/ Hasan both Kamal Hussein and Rahman Subhan sign
deletion.
AS regards foreign aid, aftyer some argu aie - eo
League team j ted to have agreed to removing that c :
well am is reported vee apg due share and the funds
$0 ried Kast Pakistan 1s given ‘nt was also dropped and
_2"ocated are not lapsable. This po
Nitials obtai ned.

198
Tragedy of Errors
As regards East Pakistan having the sole authority {, ,
taxes the government's team gave in and accepted the Proposa)
the Awami League provided a fixed share of the tax collecteg of
given to the Centre and that should be incorporated jp hs
constiution. The Awami League team agreed to this conditj he
They also accepted that foreign exchange earned through s
export of goods was to be disbursed according to the requiremen,
of the two wings. The question of increasing the strength of t
armed forces in East Pakistan was acceptable to the governmeny
team provided the extra expense was borne by East Pakistan i
the forces both in East and West Pakistan remained under op,
commander-in-chief. :
The draft brought by the Awami League was suitably amendey
to incorporate all points of agreement. Things began to look up as
both felt that a serious approach had been adopted by both
parties'4*, But when the Awami League came to know that MM
Ahmad had left Dacca ed began to have doubts with regards ts
the real intentions of the administration. A feelin
sgt g grew amongst
them that the negotiations were a put-up show.
; In the meantime other political leaders were following the
evelopments between the two teams closely. They had been
—- to Mujib asking him to attend the assembly session which
uae - " the very first instance empower the president to lif
At 10 a.m on March 20, another
’ meetin
teams took place. Khondkar Mushtaq and nina Zan ih
also included in the Awami League team, led by Sh anne
Rahman. It was a full dress meeting Ashes b / h oak bagi
progress, or lack of it, from March y the president. e
Awami League draft includ dt pedi aged
martial law 1S Te Ele: the following main points: (
modifications to be the interi 1962 constitution with some
| Yahya to stay as head of nterim law of the land; (3) president!
dissolve the national ass mer (4) he should not have powers ©
‘ start functioning even "ite (5) provincial assemblies shout
constitution is reached: 6) ore an agreement on the draft
make laws in respect of W central legislature to have power® .
appointed on advice of th ago pese alone, (7) governor 1 be
Bangladesh; Centre to hav e chief ministers; (8) with respect t0
currency alone; (9) P ‘ae ei on defence, foreign affairs and ,
authenticationyof the catkins 9 be a confederation and (10)
’ lution td hé done within 7 days,
|

