462 Tragedy of Errors
supporting; (4) ensure regular patrolling in the
by ar es a hostile civil population to enable covering
troops to fall back to the fortresses without being ambushed.
Since none of these conditions existed the initial defence
concepts was doomed to failure. It was, as Lt. Gen. Aftab Ahmad
Khan, chairman of the Special De-briefing Committee had Pointed
out, "out of tune with the operational environment”. As soon as it
was clear that the Indians would launch a full scale attack (By the
end of November that was becoming quite evident) the original
plan should have been revised and a more compact defence should
have been organised, specially around Dacca which was the centre
of gravity. Indefensible terrain and non-strategic areas should not
have been strongly defended.
Dacca Denuded
The most serous mistake and a very glaring one indeed,
whatever the circumstances, was denuding the Dacca bowl. Dacca
was the centre of gravity; the political hub; the pivot of the entire
military machine in East Pakistan, the final objective of any
enemy whether within or without. How could any commander
leave the capital undefended? On this point he had been given |
clear instructions. "Dacca was to be defended at all costs" was the ©
operation instruction given by GHQ to Eastern Command. |
‘ Niazi’s contention that he had been promised eight infantry |
battalions which according to him, were to be earmarked for the ©
defence of Dacca does not hold water. "Evidence unfortunately
does not disclose that any firm commitment was made by GHQ" is
what the HCR observed after examining all the witnesses. —
| Brigadier Baqir Siddiqui, the chief of staff of Eastern Command —
_ Who came to Rawalpindi, in November, 1971 to present the final —
| Operation plan, however, maintains that eight additional units |
| hot g promisad by GHQ’. Even if they had said so, since they did
| on ntogically tm - pulled out his troops from me |
when it became certain the pineal them in and around q
at an Indian attack was imminent.
| Incorrect Assessment of Enemy’s Intentions
| Unfortunately, . neither GHQ, nor Commander Easter
| onesie flea impression that New Delhi we
'

Causes for the Military Debacle (Eastern Th eatre) 463
give maximum support to the Mukti Bahini from their own Side of
Lo re AWaml Lonny 2 Chunk of East Pakistan terion
enable the Awami League leadership to establish a prov; ry
Bangladesh government on East Pakistan sail : Ovisional
November 21, GHQ continued to believe that the India ven after
not launched an offensive but that the Mukti Bauka " had
operating in the border areas supported by the fire. owen
provided by the Indians. No deep thrust towards any tide tow
and certainly not towards Dacca was visualised at that stage.
‘The Indian intention was no doub first t
lines. The capture of Dacca was not the initial dastie Leo
always in the back of their minds.
Niazi’s visualisation that his formation in the Jessore Sector in
the West and Comilla and Sylhet Sectors in the east would fall
back on to Dacca was unrealistic. He should have been aware of
the major water obstacles in between them and Dacca, the total
air superiority enjoyed by the enemy and the risk free
environment in which the Mukti Bahini were operating in rear
areas. As it turned out only one depleted battalion came into
Dacca and that too when the ‘game was up’.
Out of the 26,250 men in uniform he had in Dacca’, just before
its fall none were from the fighting arms. They consisted of
/Signallers, maintenance personnel, drivers, supply corps troops,
doctors and office orderlies. Such a motley crowd could not even
hold the Muktis leave along the Indian army which was knocking
at the gates of Dacca on December 16.
Though GHQ is partly to blame for not fulfilling their promise
'o General Niazi he alone should bear the responsibility of a ren
“oncept of operations which left its vitals, unprotected, “ camne
to make adjustments to his original plan, when that became
necessary, to ensure that he is not caught with his pants down.
Distribution of Forces ;
Misappreciation of the Enemy’s, intention - int —
“onclusions. The Central Sector, was very ay ee cross.
though it had no major obstacle which the oy ciiiticaliea As it
The Indians also did not give this sector ac i proach which
finally turned out it was the troops along ‘Bo Thad
Were the first to reach the Mirpur bridge outside

464 Tragedy of Errors
The shortest route to Dacca was from the eastern side. The
capital being only 48 kilometres away, as the crow flies, from the
Indian city of Agartala. Indian IV Corps was the strongest of all
the offensive formations with three divisions under its command
. against two with the others. The major thrust of the enemy
should have been expected from the East. The then director of
military intelligence at GHQ claims that the Indian _army’s
operational plan against East Pakistan had been obtained. It
surely must have been passed on to Eastern . Command
Headquarters before the commencement of hostilities. Niazi
should have, therefore, placed his major defensive effort in the
Comilla sector. Unfortunately only an adhoc Division was
deployed between the strongest enemy corps and the vital area of
Dacca. Neither 14 Division in the north-east, nor 39 (Adhoc)
Division had any depth to absorb the initial attack, or to prevent
sany outflanking manoeuvre. Once the forward defences were
pierced or by-passed Chandpur, Daudkundi and Bhairab Bazar
were quickly reached without much opposition. This brought the
enemy troops to within striking distance of Dacca only a few days
after the all out war began. It does go to the credit of General
Sagat Singh for not knocking his head against the so-called
fortresses, by passing each of them while maintaining his aim of
threatening the capital as soon as possible. His use of the third
dimension and Eastern Command’s inability to do anything about
it helped him in hastening his advance towards his final objective.
Chittagong Hill tracts was an area which could have been
mgnees for a considerably long time. More troops allocated to
at sector could have ensured that the Pakistan flag continued to
fly in East Pakistan even after the fall of Dacca - a botched naval
landing by enemy forces not withstanding.
Reserves
A commander can only influence the outcome of a battle by
maintaining adequate uncommitted reserves which he can utilise
to prevent a breakthrough or to retake vital ground. Because of
the policy of defending every inch of the territory of East Pakista?
with a limited number of troops neither the corps commander nor
his divisional and brigade comman ders were able to maintain any
mln hye A result that neither the enemy’s forward
“ie enh Wi Als outflanking manoeuvres could be checked. -
ey run, In most places, after breaking through the forwa!

Causes for the Military Debacle (Eastern Theatre) 465
Gen. Niazi used up the few rege
pale was joined by raising adhoe divising P89 before the main
were no reserves at the divisional oy corps level] ust because there
Narsingdi which continued for 18 hours Gia the heli-landing at
para drop at Tangail which Sealed the fate of Ee ctallenged. The
could have been tackled Successfully if adeau astern Command
available around Dacca. In spite of the fact ny reserves were
was there to welcome and give Protection to the ee Siddiqui
Counter Insurgency
Since the central leadership had fail ™
settlement with the Awami League a" "hat to a political
indiscriminately to quell the Uprising, the insttgeney s i
Pakistan had turned into an Open revolt against this Bek
army. Although Eastern Command had been able to restore Sn
writ of the government by the middle of June and almost all
border outposts were once again in friendly hands, The eight
_ months long counter-insurgency Operations had caused a great
deal of attrition. Troops were tired of continuously being
employed on internal Security duties, They were losing their will
to fight as it became more apparent that it was a futile war, in a
distant land, cut off from the home base and against one’s own
citizens.
Subversion
Subversive activity on a large scale in rear areas by a fifth
column can cause the defeat of even the best equipped and best
tained army. The Chindits played havoc with the Japanese forces
in Burma in World War II. The Free French created a lot of
Problems for the German occupation troops in F Jie 1944,
The communists insurgents caused considerable casualties to =
British in Malaya. The Viet Cong humbled a super-power scien
60s. The Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka pushed back the 80,000 In 7
Peace Keeping Force the freedom fighters in Afghanistan bough
the Soviet th ’ their knees and the Kashmir Intifada 1s
keepin socal in Indian Held Kashmir.
§ 500,000 Indian troops at bay in —
The Pakistan army in East Pakistan, during we mais by
Var of 1971, had not ntend with subversive activities
uh 1, had not only to co body of well-trained army
and of guerrillas but by a large ‘alin of their hand as they
ytsonnel who knew the areas like the ks whole populace had
re °perating in their own country.

466 Tragedy of Errors
‘rst the army. They had infact joined the enemy. In
Te te Mukti Bahini numbering over 100,000 nearly
every one else in East Pakistan was eager to help the Indian
cvmmed forces. They found and reported gaps through minefields,
assisted them in crossing water obstacles, pulled their guns and
,heavy vehicles through marshes. They blew up ammunition
dumps, destroyed bridges, burnt country boats, ambushed
convoys, provided military information, killed pro-Pakistani
elements, threatened the fence sitters and welcomed the Indian
para troopers dropped deep behind ‘enemy’ lines. They all but led
the Indians by their hands into Dacca.
To place a proud army in such an adverse situation was to say
the least, criminal injustice by the political leadership which
unfortunately at that time was also in the hands of the military. It
is the duty of the government in power to send its troops into
battle in as favourable a circumstance as possible within a given
situation. Those at the helm of affairs in 1971 and responsible for
the higher direction of war failed in this duty. |
Conduct of Battle
Niazi was no novice in the art of conducting battles. He had
seen battles lost and won in Burma and Africa during World War
Il. He had commanded a unit in the 1948 Kashmir War and a
formation in 1965. His vision, however, remained that of an
infantry unit commander whose job is not to question why but to
do and die. How else can one explain his order of November 27,
1971 to his troops in East Pakistan, that they are not permitted to
withdraw unless it was cleared by two senior headquarters up and
till they had suffered 75% casualties!9.
Niazi was obsessed with the idea of not falling back from the |
borders, a spirit required to be shown by company and battalion
commanders defending outposts and defended localities. He could
not rise above that. Handling of large formations requires —
manoeuvering while keeping the final objective in mind. Time and
space, the effect of major water obstacles on rearward movement,
= pa a ever increasing insurgency after November’ . |
not take into ~ = wher eto decane on witht com ail it was —
aa count when insisting on no withdrawal i)!

Causes for the Milita
ry Debacle (Eastern Theatre) 467
A formation or unit ceases to b
force is lost due to enemy actig € effective if One third of j
N. It is norm all of its
break off contact to be replenisheq and reinf, Y Permitted then to
day. But Niazi had given Strict instry nlorced to fight another
commanders that they are not to witha; Ctions to his divisional
their forward position. Jessore was bash wf even a company from
107 Brigade was not allowed to fall back . Over cheaply because
have given them Permission after the ane It Was too late to
kilometres away from Jessore cantonmen Fe Position, only §
: Repeated requests by his formation comma i am been breached.
withdrawal or to allow then to fal] back to Daces, to permit limited
—_ cca Wer
14 and 87 Division in the east should h ae
withdraw intact west of the Brahamput ave been asked to
after 3 December. Since that was not tae er closer to Dacca
_ hot move towards Dacca and took the Seinnanyiy ct Rana, could
_ Sylhet instead as his route of withdrawal was cut ee Veiga te
| Role of Higher Headquarters
GHQ does not appear to hav€ retained any control over th
| ; °
Pore battle in East Pakistan. They seemed to have written it
| tor € day the war started or were depending entirely on friendly
o intervening on their behalf in the ensuing Indo-Pakistan
hae Eastern Command was indeed an independent theatre.
| Pat Operations were to be left to the local commander. East
be stan was cut off from West Pakistan. N 0 reinforcements could
i. sent. No physical support could be given but yet it was very
ne part of Pakistan. It could not just be thrown away to the
. Nien? - Directives could still have been given during the battle to
421 to pull in his reins, to concentrate his troops in and around
Dacea whil °
lle the going was good.
one? battle in East Pakistan was not being closely followed in
Ws Q. Just before launching the offensive on December 3, in the
his Niazi should have been given definite orders to concentrate
arg “ops on to designated fortresses and strong points specially
thar Dacca. After December 3, it should have become ae
die = Indians would no longer pull their punches and wou
C “k East Pakistan with full force.
0nana and Control stan
~ , lective civil
leader me democratic traditions enabled eae who were
“ip to give a political direction to its a

468 Tragedy of Errors
then left to make the necessary preparations and prepare the
operational plans without any further interference.
There was a clear cut division between the civilian
management of war and the military plans to accomplish the
national objective. Although no Joint Staff Headquarters existeg
in India the Chief of Staff Committee frequently met in the
ministry of defence to prepare for and handle the higher direction
of war. Lower down, command headquarters had tactical air
commands attached to them for appropriate coordination of the
air effort.
In Pakistan, the President sat in the Military Operations room
at GHQ to get reports of a battle raging a thousand miles away
over which he had no control. There was also intermittent breaks
between Eastern Command and CMLA HQ as occasionally the
President, his Chief of Staff and the Principal Staff Officer were
‘not available at critical moments. The chief of staff and his chief of
general staff were reportedly not on talking terms. Neither was
the CGS getting along with other PSOs at GHQ. For such a
situation to exist at the highest military headquarters when the
country’s integrity was at state, is unpardonable.
Complete control over the forces one commands is a sina qua
non for success on the battlefield. It is equally important in a
theatre of operations.
The situation in East Pakistan had deteriorated to such an
extent due to over extended frontages, actions of the insurgents
and a paralysis in the higher echelons that the control over the
battle had been lost from Day 1. With units split into companies
and platoons fighting their own individual battles not much of
| resistance could be expected from them. Wherever the brigade
| commander could concentrate his battalions together and fight as
| a brigade with the commander right up front controlling the battle
the troops stayed at their posts and fought bravely. At such places
they earned the respect even of their enemies. Several formation
| and unit commanders lost control of the battle due to very Wide
| frontages. General Niazi also failed to visit his subordinat®
headquarters between December 4 to 16.
| The President of the special De-briefing Committee Repo
| the military collapse in East Pakistan, came to the conclusio” ; as
General Niazi had not been able to rise to the occasion, and W

Causes for the Military Debacle (Eastern Theatre) 469
ly shaken and mentally paralyseq!! ;
_ did not change his lane e, "a an the fact that
when it was still possible to do so in the ve nant acca garrison
pattle justifies General Aftab’s comments, Hebi arly stages of the
reason, that the higher command in Rawal —" Fi not without
paralysed and failed to take any military or ssi a also been
avoid the impending tragedy!2, teal measure to
Lack of Coordination
Since General Yahya was the Presiq ,
aan the Chief of Army Staff al nie
is staff were burdened with iti _
fedora both political and day to day military
Instructions were issued to Eastern C .
different agencies: the President’s a, eae
Headquarters and by GHQ. Quite often all headquarters were not
kept informed of each other’s decisions, Major General Gul
Hasan, the chief of the general staff was not aware that Eastern
Command had been told by the CMLA HQ to lay down their arms
on December 1413. To top it all the message to lay down arms was
sent in clear and easily intercepted by the Indians.
I agree with the alleged observations of the Hamood-ur-
Rahman Commission that while undoubtedly the responsibility
for these failure lies with the Commander Eastern Command,
GHQ cannot escape its responsibilities as the plan had been
approved by it!4, "GHQ should have been guiding, directing and
influencing the conduct of the war in the eastern theatre. But
mc failed in this important duty"!5 observed the Commission
nightly,
Morale
The troops in East Pakistan had been under pressure since the
v, ponement of the National Assembly session by General
ahya. ‘Geharos’ (besiege), road blocks, insults, isolated incidents
. killing had confined the armed forces in the eastern he to the
a till they were let loose on March 26. After which it was a
tinuous battle between the army and the insurgents
roughout East Pakistan. Although the army did get the a
hat but not without loss of lives, destruction of mi ee
me rate and the demoralising effect of killing one's own peop
"a sustained period,of time.

470 Tragedy of Errors
By the time the real fighting started in November the troops
had been engaged in fighting an elusive enemy for over eight
months. They had by then become tired and exhausted. Their
morale was further adversely affected when they began to realise
that the local population had turned against them. Every day that
; passed brought no relief or reinforcements. A feeling of isolation
and strategic encirclement began to creep in when contact with
other units and formations began to be lost due to the activities of
the guerrillas. "General Niazi had lost the will to fight on
December 7"!6 noted Justice Hamood-ur-Rahman.
An army, hated and despised by its own people, cannot be
expected to retain its morale nor its discipline for long. That was
the situation into which the army had been placed because of the
follies of its leadership in 1971. Indian propaganda and the
international electronic and print media carried exaggerated
;stories of the success by the Mukti Bahini as part of an
orchestrated psychological campaign against the troops in East
Pakistan, which also had an impact on the fighting spirit of the
soldiers.
Lack of air support
In modern warfare air power plays almost a decisive role. The
side that can achieve even local air superiority can cause so great a
damage to ground forces, logistic installations and command
headquarters that further military operations become untenable.
The air situation in East Pakistan was even worse. Just three days
after the western front was opened the Indian air force succeeded
in making the lone PAF squadron in-effective. The only airfield
available was made non-operational and when the remaining PAF
: pilots were flown out during the war the skies over East Pakistan
were totally dominated by the IAF. It fully exploited the third
dimension of warfare, which hastened the fall of Dacca.
Naval Blockade
With the banning of overflights over Indian territory by Mrs.
Gandhi after the ‘Ganga’ incident at <a only way to re
supply East Pakistan was by a circuitous route via Sri Lanka by |
sea. As the D Day drew near the Indian navy imposed 4 naval |
blockade of East Pakistan thus cutting off the only remaining link —
with the eastern wing. |
|

‘a 471
Causes for the Military Debacle (Eastern Theatre) ’
This not only affected the Material re.
munition but it also had a devastatin a SEE of seas sie
am : . & effect on the morale of
the troops in East Pakistan as they began to realise that they were
now trapped inside East Pakistan since al] connections with th
outside world had been severed, Surrounded on all three sid =
India the only inlet of Possible assistance except for cn all
_ portion adjoining Burma, was by sea. That too rae denied by
- naval blockade. on ay «
Justice Hamood-ur-Rahman’s alleged criticism of Eastern
- Command for not having plans to withdraw the forces either by
, sea or land"? are not justified as the Indian air force and navy had
achieved complete naval and air supremacy, Extrication of troops
flung out in far fetched areas in direct contract with the enemy
was not feasible and could not have been attempted. Even if they
were able to concentrate in any one place there was no way for
them to leave East Pakistan.
Performance on the Battlefield
The special Debriefing Committee came to the conclusion that
all divisions did badly except one. That out of ten brigades, six did
poorly and out of 28 battalions directly committed to battle 15
battalions performed badly.
This criticism is not wholly justified. In the circumstances in
which the troops in East Pakistan were made to fight, their
performance at the unit and subunit level was in most cases
‘ommendable. Units which were led by courages commanders did
Well. Where command and control was lost they performed badly.
‘The fact that they did not offer as much resistance to the enemy
48 expected was due mainly to the fact that the Indians saree
ip, Passing their defensive positions, courtesy the Mukti rate
Which isolated some and denied others from withdrawing to pre
designated fortresses.
; . All
_ Except for Jessore no other major town had = aitvdeeed to
~.¢S Were still in the hands of the Pakistan army w denuded of »
Surrender by Eastern Command. Had Dacca not - vned for some
‘oops the war in East Pakistan could have continu Dakictan at
time ] v= ‘ hose countries supporting n
t Onger giving time for thos fire on less ignoble
he Untied Nations to arrange for a cease
terms,
i

