a Tragedy of Errors
Notes
L. Rizvi, Sved Haider Abbas, Brig, A History of the Punjab Regimen,
Wajidalis, Lahore, 1984, p. 302.
2. Interview, Maj. Gen. Rao Farman Ali — a
ion, istan, India
2 ik Ba ra ee at Cabact Press, Berkeley, L.A 1090, 9. ato
4. Khan, Fazl Mugeem, Pakistan’s Crisis in Leadership, National =
Foundation, 1973, p. 52. 7
. YB. Special De-briefing Committee Report on me haters Collapse in East
Pakistan (Aftab Committee Report), 1974, pp. 8,
6. Interview, Maj. Gen. Rao Farman Ali Khan.
7. White Paper, Government of Pakistan, August 5, 1971.
8. Interview, General Tikka Khan.
9. Ibid.
10. Mahmood, Safdar, Pakistan Divided, Ferozesons Ltd., Lahore, 1984, p. 134,
11. Interview, Col. Hasan, Deputy Advocate General, GHQ.
12. Interview, Brig. C. M. A. K. Zahid.
13. Sitrep 061500 April, G 1559.
14. Interview, Gen. Tikka Khan.
15. Ahmad, Maudood, Constitutional Quest for Autonomy, University Press,
Dhaka, 1976, p. 224.
16. Ibid.
17. London Times, March 25, 1971.
18. Interview, Lt. Gen. Jahanzeb Arbab.
19. Interview Prof. Taluqdar Kamar-uz-Zaman, Dhaka University.
20. oo & M., Maj. Gen. Bangladesh at War, Academic Publishers, Dhaka,
9, p. 55.
21. Ibid, p. 20.
22. Ibid. |
23, Events reconstructed based on Interview with Lt. Col. Muhammad Shafi,
CO, 23 Field Regiment and Col. Yusuf Gulji of the same regiment.
24. Riza, Shaukat, Maj. Gen. Indo-Pakistan War, 1971.
25. Interview, Brig. Iqbal Shafi. |
26. Safiullah, p. 39.
27. Interview, Lt. Gen. Jahanzeb Arbab.
28. Interview, Brig. A. R. Siddiqui.

Military Action 271
99 Bangladesh Papers, p. 287.
O'Donnel, C. P., Bangladesh-Biogr h ;
P Press, London, 1984, pp. 30, 31. SPhY Of a Muslim Nation, Westview |
Praval, K. C. Maj., Indian Army after Ind
F New Delhi, 1990, p. 321. *pendence, Lancer International,
39. White Paper, Government of Pakistan, August 5, 1971
° 93, Statesman, New Delhi, April 4, 1971.
34. Times, London, April 6, 1971.
35. Northern Echo, Durhan, April 7, 1971.
36. Interview, Brig., Abdul Hafeez, Direct ‘
- International and Strategic Studies (BITSS) Dhak emeladesh Institute of
37. Interview, Lt. Gen. Khwaja Wasiuddin.
. _38. Time Magazine, December 6, 1971, p. 12.
39. Interview, Brig., A. R. Siddiqui. |
40° Lt. Gent. Tikka Khan’s letter to commander Eastern Command, N |
“ — 1000/2/3/ML-1, dated May 20, 1971. omnes
41. Interview, Haroon Ibn-e-Ali.
42. Ibid.

a._.'9 i .
india’s Role in the Break Up of Pakistan
Historical legacy
The partition of the subcontinent was not willingly conceded to
by the Hindus of India. They opposed it tooth and nail and only
gave in when there was no other way out. The holocaust that
followed in which one million people lost there lives and around
four million had to flee their native land leaving all their property
behind, left deep ,scars on both, communities. It was natural,
therefore, for a spirit to develop among the top leadership in India,
and to an extent amongst the people of that country to undo the
perceived ‘wrong’ that had been inflicted on them.
Mother India had been vivisected. Bharat had been forcefully
divided. A ‘handful of converts’ had succeeded in creating the two-
nation theory. They could not be allowed to get away with it.
’ Mahatma Gandhi, the revered leader of the Hindus of India,
and internationally, acclaimed as the ‘apostle of nonviolence’, told
the Congress party in East Bengal in July, 1947 that the Congress
Committee there (East Bengal) must never look upon Bengal as
" divided', Jawahar Lal Nehru, architect of India’s independence
from British rule) and the first prime minister of the new
‘ominion, confided to Joseph Corbel that “one day (Pakistan)
ne be inevitably integrated with India’. S. Radhakrishnan, a
oTmer president of India, felt that the division of the ord wes
euevous wrong which India was made to suffer. He felt at me
— acquiesced to the Partition against their sees apie
- the advice of Mahatma Gandhi*. He is reported a Fal was
vs te-union of the two successor states of British Inala
“ssary and inevitable”. an; tod
. ndi
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the president of the “=
Ogre ; . the president of India
tom 8S Committee (AICC) and later the Pit Acharya
Marked "T es hort lived Partition”. “¢ ary
Ktinale,: at Sure it will be a sho! as more vocal in
“nl, another president of the AICC, Ww

274 Tragedy of Errors
ivision of India. He said th
expressing his bitterness Se eon he given up a claim of
"neither the Congress nor the freedom that India had achieve
united India. Accordingly ~ he unity of India®. India’s interioy
would not be complete without the ur Sardar Valebbhai P
‘lator and a well respected politician, Sardar at atel,
ne f the view that "sooner or later we shall again be united ip
: bane diesen to a country’, Sardar Patel was So angry with
the Quaid-e-Azam that he burst out saying ‘The poison has been
removed from the body of India" referring to . Mr Jinnah’s
departure for Karachi on 7 August, 1947. Mrs Sarojni Naidu (the
nightingale of the Deccan), governor of Uttar Pradesh, Was
confident that "sooner or later India will be one again"? Mps
Vijaya Lakshimi Pandit (sister of Jawahar Lal Nehru) never
accepted the break up of India. She like others, did so merely
because according to her "failure to do so would have perpetuated
foreign rule"!®. B.G. Kher, chief minister of Bombay was certain in
his mind that "even if there is a partition of India.it would only be
temporary and would even be a prelude to a closer union"!
Subramanyam Swamy, member of parliament, acknowledges that
the main stream of India wants to undo Pakistan!2.
Keith Callard, author of the book Pakistan - A Political Study
opines that "many Indians feel that the creation of Pakistan was a
beacon eat can be corrected, at least as far as Fast
cerned"!3.
‘Even the Quaid noticed the adverse propaganda being carried
al Renal oe to arouse the feelings of the Bengalis against
98 Maret, i ee his Speech, broadcast by Radio Dacca on
Jinnah asked his Beng i list ii om suet ns ‘
phenomenon’ that the ve tener whether it iit peaiaha i
Indian press’ who “e <——— See een Rad oman of Ye
‘suddenly found with a t aoa the creation of Pakistan.have
just claims of the Musli Sof ee science for what they call the
ms of East Bengal!4,
werenae son aay Panera as emationl a
Wf & 'on when the wounds of the surge!)
were fresh. But what Should be mak f f the
internationally known Indian sch ee f
. ot Cholar, K. Subramanyam, head 0
the Institute of Defence and Strategic Analysis (IDSA), whos
within Tnda and anand Peg, 8%4_ government opinian
"What Indi ates € stated as late as 31 March, Jot
at’andia must realise is the fact that the break up of Pakist2"

India’s Role in the break Up of Pakistan 275
isin our interestyan opportunity the like of which will never come
‘n!9, (The martial law regime and the Politicians j : F
again”. (26 tunity) “ans in both wings ¥
gave India this opportunity). :
India’s intention of gathering the pieces left behind after the
British, left can be seen from the fact that soon after the Great
Divide Indian Leaders began consolidating the dominion. First the
princely states in the Union lost their ‘nominal sovereignty’ and
were totally absorbed within India. Those Princes who resisted
had to face a ‘police action’ (military take over). Hyderabad and
Junagadh were amalgamated along with 40 other princely states
The disputed territory of Kashmir was declared part of India. ° |
Sikhim lost its individual status. Goa, a Portuguese enclave, which
even the British respected, was forced to join the Union. Nepal |
was made to realise its dependence on India and Bhutan was
placed under its thumb. Pakistan was too big a prize to swallow in |
one go. It was to be cut to size first whenever an opportunity |
arose. Sir Claude Auchinlek, commander-in-chief of the Pakistan
army, was aware of the machinations of the Indian Leadership
when he remarked "I have no hesitation in affirming that the
present Indian cabinet are implacably determined to do all their |
power to prevent the establishment of the dominion of Pakistan :
.on a firm basis"!
The softening up of East Pakistan began soon after the |
independence of India. Unlike West Pakistan there was no mass
massacre of either of the two communities in Bengal which |
‘ncouraged the Hindu population in East Bengal to stay behind. |
Although a million Bengali Muslims moved from west to east not
many Hindus moved in the opposite direction. They formed 20~
‘Percent of the population in East Bengal but comparatively only a
small number crossed into West Bengal. A sizeable figure
"emained behind to create a pressure group of their own in East
vikistan They sent their families to Calcutta while remaining in
oo and made the newly created international border between
© two dominions more porous by frequently moving —.
. Will. Large scale smuggling of jute, rice and gold pinacpger /
— 'N order to weaken Pakistan’s economy. oe hs nye .
ahr R’ had to be launched by Major General Umrao —
teak on this illegal transaction. Gi
of rs Mitter a Hindu Bengali from East rovuges ene
000 Volunteers to ‘invade’ East Bengal in 1 ;

276 Tragedy of Errors
-. celf.styled East Bengal government In exile. Many of
on ats ee the border and pele — tal in spreading
propaganda against West Pakistan’’. The m lan deputy high
commissioner in Dacca took more than a nor mal interest in the
polities of Bast Bengal, by giving directions to the members ofthe
Rast Bengal Congress to withdraw support to & portaiilan party if
its policies were not in tune with Indian designs’’.
Agartala Conspiracy ey Citas
India’s attempt at subverting! the Bengali elements in the
Pakistan armed forces against the central arena alte back to
1963. Capitalising on the economic disparity betwéen East and
West Pakistan.they managed to recruit some naval personnel and
encouraged them to form an organization to work for the
separation of their province from the rest of Pakistan. The theme
of West Pakistan exploiting East Bengal was played up. The
disgruntled Bengali servicemen were encouraged to contact senior
Bengali politicians and to seek their co-operation for starting a
revolutionary movement. The most important to be contacted was
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman.
The Sheikh too was thinking on similar lines. He visited India
in 1965 and met Indian officials'?. Subramanyam also accepted
| that Mrs Gandhi was meeting Mujib very frequently”°, but had
not decided to convert the political battle to street power. He had
hoped that President Ayub would not be elected in the Januaty,
1965 elections, and that a democratically elected civilian
government would be more amenable to,removing the grievances
of East Pakistan. But when Ayub won the 1965 Elections Mujib
became more and more frustrated as any possibility of a changeit
the central leadership faded away. He than made up his mind that
he would resort to non-constitutional means to work towards #
complete break of East Bengal from his perceived grip of West
Pakistan. He also realised that he will need the moral, financ
and military support of India. It was in August, 1965 when the
dissidents met Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman at. his Dhonmantl
House in Dacca, that Mujib encouraged them to conimle
expanding their activities: and assured them that when the t°
i selina support will also be forthcoming.
Zulfigar Ali Bhutto, Pakistan’s foreign minister in 1966
charged India for encouraging secessionist tendencies i? Bast
Pakistan. While speaking to the national assembly of Pakis!@” "

India’s Role in the break up of Pakistan 277
, 1966, he stated "India felt j —_—
3 dotted Pakistan and that East pete coM4 liquidate the
trunca > 3 : akistan was particular]
vulnerable where forces of disruption and subversion w ‘
loose"?!. He was not too far wrong. In July, 1966, a Bengali citi nF
of East Pakistan contacted Lieutenant Colone] Mohantnad rain |
Khan, head of the counter intelligence section of the inter conte
intelligence directorate of Pakistan, and informed him that ‘a
organisation had been created in East Bengal to work for the
separation of their ‘homeland’ from Pakistan. He revealed that
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman and Lieutenant Commander Muazzam, ,
Hussein (Pakistan Navy) were the key figures in the newly | :
created set up. Others ptm be named, who according to him
supported the idea, was the Bengali speaker of the national
assembly Fazalul Haq Choudhry and Major Rauf, of the ISI
detachment in Dacca. (The statement of the informer could not,
however, be independently substantiated).
So when Amir Khan reported this fact to Major General
Muhammad Akber Khan, the DG ISI replied "All this is humbug",
The ISI chief then spoke to Naseer Husain Rizvi, the director
intelligence bureau (IB) y and it was decided to send a
representative of the civilian intelligence agency to investigate the
matter further. Mr Sayood, deputy director intelligence bureau,
was consequently sent to Dacca for three months. The gist of his
report was that the informers were unreliable people and the facts
stated by them were not true. However, Commander Moazzam
and other government officials allegedly involved, though not
charged, were.posted to West Pakistan instead to keep them out of
hartés way. :
Colonel Amir, in the meantime, continued to make more trips
to Kast Pakistan and succeeded in taping conversations between
the alleged secessionists which showed that there were plans to
Support a move towards separation. Frequent meetings with the
"Indian high commission officials and their crossing over to the
Indian town of Agartala, just, across the eastern Se Te
wii and East Pakistan, was also noted” ”. Sheikh bes thet he
ne admitted, after the creation of Banglades ean
“Wib) and other Bengali leaders had contacts WIth)
diplomatic and intelligence circles*’. N ;
an
‘ The Indians showed their willingness to only ed items
"Munition to the subversive elements when a

278 Tragedy of Errors
was given to Mr. P. N--Ojha, the first secretary of the Indian hig}
commission, at Chittagong. Ojah continued to meet the
disgruntled elements in the armed forces,and in September, 1 9¢¢
confirmed that the Indian government would be prepared 4,
supply them the weapons which they needed. However, the actual
delivery was pended. Ojah gave the excuse of the coming general
elections in India. It was only after Indira Gandhi was elected ag
the prime minister of India in January, 1967 that the question of
arms supply by India was taken up again.
Ojha asked the dissident elements to send a delegation to meet
the Indian intelligence agencies at Agartala. Ojha was again
contacted and the date, time and place and code words for crossing
over to Agartala ve fixed. On 12 July, 1967 the conspirators met
the Indians at Agartala. The Indians, however were disappointed
at the level of the delegation which consisted of Junior non-
commissioned officers some of whom had deserted and had been
dismissed from service. The deal temporarily fell through”4,
The Indian involvement in the Agartala Conspiracy case is
\substantiated also by a letter believed to have been written by the
wife of Lieutenant Commander Moazzam Hussain. It was
published in the issue of the daily Purbodesh, Dacca dated 26
March, 1971. The letter read “Dearest, You are no longer with me.
I remember your effort towards Bangladesh ...... I remember you
came to Dacca from Karachi on leave under a pseudonym, met
P.N. Ojha, first secretary Indian embassy, at the border at
Agartala along with other Indians and Bangladesh officers. You
hear with Indian authorities for arms and other kinds of
nc As a result of further investigation president Ayub, ordered the
- arrest of all those directly involved. Consequently 46 Bast
Pakistani per i Air ai Te er]
personnel were arrested for preaching and working for
the secession of East Pakistan. They informed the Pakista?!
ee agencies that India had told them that on D day the
Pig. Paliter anda rer block the air and sea routes —
est Pakistan®, The charge against t
alleged conspirators was planning to separate East Pakistan fro”
Pataatan by violent means with arms and dmmunition provided
by India’, Eleven of them were later released and thirty five W"
formally charged. The accused included Sheikh Mujib™
Rahman; Shams-ur-Rahman, CSP, director Rural Academy: Ms

India’s Role in the break up of Pakistan 279
jul Qader, CSP, vice president administrati
ra Fazlur-Rahman CSP; Lieutenant Cotgaied Meee Mr
Hussain of the Pakistan Navy; and Sergeant Zahur-ul-H om
aq of the
PAF.
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman was already in jai
‘an Jail. whe
persons were ie cones In doubt the involvement of tenn
in the Agartala conspiracy. Even General Akber is re d
id Mujib was not involved. Hie =. . “ported to
have said Muj Nvolved. His name was included
Monem Khan", but still } ed by
Governor , S © was accused of the
ledgeable circles, h ‘came uae
charge. Knowledg: ~ ,. “itcles, however, were convinced that
Mujib, while remaining in the background, was directing the
separatist movement. After the creation of Bangladesh, Mujib
acknowledged that his dream had come true29.
According to reliable sources he had been receiving Weapons
and ammunition from India Over a period of time which he used to
keep hidden®®, He himself denied any connection with the
separatist, and maintained that he had been and would remain
loyal to Pakistan. G.W. Choudhry quotes Mujib as saying "How
could I think of destroying Pakistan being a disciple of Hussein
Shaheed Suharwardy"3!? (The fact that he had the photograph of
his mentor and not that of the Quaid-e-Azam in his house shows
the relative importance of the two in Mujib’s mind).
Although Indian writers accept that a conspiracy was hatched
at Agartala in 1967 according to which a part of East Bengal was
'o he ‘liberated’ with Indian army’s clandestine mopport aus ou
independent government of Bangladesh was to be set up**, the
“ase Was not handled properly by authorities in Pakistan.
The Agartala Conspiracy case was badly processed. ‘Though
there is no doubt that certain individuals, including some army
Personnel had been meeting Indian officials and were a
plans to seize some territory with their assistance, the case s tne
have been quietly disposed off and the ppt
wulshment. By holding an open trial and invo ving en
Mujib-ur-Rahman, who, by then had become a popular “e him
East P ki ot ing him the government ma —
akistan{ and then, releasing bn : to further/
ahero, The East Pakistan press used this as an issue her,
ali Pakistan. The Agartala
lenate the Bengalis from West made him a
COhspiracy and Mujib’s eventual release

280
Tragedy of Errors
Bangabondhu, said Farman**. "Ayub made a martyr of )y,:;
insinuating the Agartala conspiracy", opined | Abdul oe
Kardar, a prominent member of the PPP*4. alee
The death of Sergeant Zahur-ul-Haq, a co-accuseg ;
~ Agartala Conspiracy case, while in the custody of the aed IN the
' matters worse as all hell was let loose in East Pakistan 8 Made
* news was released. €n this
Refugee ‘Bonanza’
After the military action a very large number of refugees }
to flee to West Bengal. The Indian parliament passed a reaeane
on 27 March, 1971 in which they assured the rebels that as
struggle and sacrifices would receive the whole hearted sy "
and sympathy of the people of India*®. Pport
Five days after the military crackdown there w
held on the lawns of Sapru House in New Delhi to disense i”
question of India’s intervention in the East Pakistan crisis It 9
here that Subramanyam first said "Pakistan army has broken =
7 i 9 presi It is in our national interest to seize this opportunity
| Bangladesh" and support the struggle for the freedom of
| »i Subramanyam was called by the defence secretary who told
_ fim “you are causing embarrassment to us" but both h
‘parliament adopted a defiant resoluti a, Houses 0
| the military action in East Pakistan "s teers ve roen naa
} is " .
: Bengal amounting to genocide". n 8 macabre tragedy in Her
Even if the figur i
refugee problem aan fs 10 million refugees is accepted. The
| unjustifiably used fo build ne oot Of Proportion and wes
| Subram uild up propaganda against Pakistan.
anyam was not far wr ym Ml
soon become a flood. 13 ‘li ong when he said "the trickle W!
| since that i » +2. mullon refugees would come over to India
| at is the Hindu population ; |
percent of those Bengali < ation in East Bengal”. "Eighty five —
would have gone awa as ake left East Pakistan were Hindus who
any case"5’, writes Kuldi Nes Bengal after Partition in 1947 r
author. The refugee pr si ayar a noted Indian columnist a0° |
| invadin - ,e-© Problem was made to be an excuse for
g a neighbouring count ny
examples of untry. Although there are ™@
| pies of refugees streemino ; ; caccog 40
! avoid bei . ning into a neighbour’s territoly
ng caught up In an inter ] : . history
“has the infl taeetternal conflict, but never in 1
‘ © intlux of refugees thean th : ilitaly
intervention. | € cause of a direct ™
| fey

