Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 351
Scene on the other side of the Border
jeutenant Colonel S. F. H. J. ;
a Mohammad Yahya Khan’s ion wanekshaw was Major
Agha . mmediate superior at Arm
rters India, in 1947, Tw y
Headqua 1a, enty four years later he. as chief
of staff of the Indian army, was directed to dismember a count
the head of which was his old colleague. Manekshaw wae &
cautious general who did not believe in rushing into battle
without complete preparations. He is Teported to have told Mrs
Gandhi, when she asked him in April, 1971, to be ready to attack
East Pakistan, "If you want me to gO In now I can guarantee you
100 percent defeat, but if you give me some time I can guarantee
you 100 percent success".
He was given the time, equipment and resources to accomplish
the task "I got everything I wanted. I got the money and I went to
the Soviet Union and got the tanks and aircraft".
He, of course, had already set about making preparations for
an invasion of East Pakistan which was planned for November,
without letting down his guard along the Indo-West Pakistan
border. Leave was cancelled; mountain divisions were converted |
to infantry formations; information about the enemy strength and
dispositions obtained; India’s Eastern Command was reinforced
by another two divisions; Mukti Bahini was organised, equipped
and trained to support the Indian army formations; softening up
of the enemy defences by engaging them all along the border
commenced, infrastructure for launching of large formations in a
riverine environment was constructed; psychological warfare to
paint the Pakistan army as a brutal force and to lower the morale
of the Pakistani soldiers was systematically carried out; launching
pads had to be secured and a number of air fields had to be
Constructed around East Pakistan.
Although some Indian army commanders do not admit tat
the political object; ‘running the whole of East Pakist
jective was overrunning the hat the mission
many military analysts have clearly mentioned tl —
sven to the Indian army by Mrs Indira Gandhi from prime
sutset was to occupy all of East Pakistan with Dacca a
Objective
Build up of Indian Forces against East Pakistan nd
The peace ti deployment of Indian armed forces aed
Rast Pak; eee isting of three infantry divisions
akistan was one corps consisting

352 Tragedy of Errors
under HQ Eastern Command at Calcutta. When the -tieig to
seize the opportunity being provided by the inept ancling of the
political situation across the border was taken in April, 1971 it
became necessary to build up the existing strength in the Eastern
theatre. Possible turmoil due to the impending elections was useq
to cover the move of additional troops into West Bengal,
Magahlaya, Assam and Tripura. Manekshaw decided to raise a
new corps headquarters and to pull out the forces from the
Chinese border. Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Aurora, Army
Commander, India’s Eastern Command, withdrew his forces
which were to deal with the insurgency in the north east®,
4 Infantry Division from Allahabad was sent to West Bengal in
August, 1971. By September the entire division had concentrated
at Panagarh. On 12 October the ‘Lal Chirya’ Division, as this
division was generally called, moved closer to its future theatre of
operations. Major General Mohinder Singh Barar received his
final orders for the attack as early as September®. 9 Mountain
Division, from Meerut, was converted into an infantry division at
Ranchi and sent to the eastern border alongwith 57 Division
which had been newly raised at Masipur. 6 Infantry Division from
Barielly and 23 Mountain Division from Ranchi joined the three
divisions already in the East bringing the total to seven divisions
and a communication zone equivalent of a division which
surrounded East Pakistan by the end of October.
Airlift capability of lifting two companies at a time based on
helicopters was developed. A regiment of Hovercraft was acquired
. Live across rivers. Each of its three Squadron could lift a
attalion.
_ Lieutenant General Katphalia, in his book ‘Mission with a
Difference’, also admits that preliminary moves for the
deployment of forces for eventual confrontation commenced in
September by the Indian army’, Major General D.K. Palit
mete itis when he Writes "By November forces for the
giadesh operation were build up to three corps®,
Contrary to what most Western writers believe the build up
was not for maintaining law and order during the forthcoming
elections but as part of a deliberate plan to invade East Pakistat
in the coming campaign season.

Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 353
Orbat of Indian Forces employed against East Pakistan
Headquarters, 4 Calcutta Lt Gen Jagjit Singh
gastern Comman Aurora (Army
Commander)
Southwest Sector
Headquarter Krishannagar Lt General T.S. Raina
[I Corps (tuby)
4 Infantry Maj Gen Mohinder
Division Singh Baar
7 Infantry Brig Zail S;
4} Infantry Brig A.H.E. Michi
Brigade, Behrampore chigen
62 Infantry Brig Rajender Nath
Brigade, Behrampore
9 Infantry Division Maj Gen Dalbir Singh
32 Infantry Brig Tewari
Brigade, Gobardanga
42 Infantry Brig J.S. Goraya
Brigade, Krishannagar
45 Infantry
Brigade, Panagarh
350 Infantry Brig H. Sindhu
Brigade, Bangaon
45 Para
Brigade, Calcutta
Border Security Force (BF)
Extra elements
One medium regiment, artillery (130 mm).
One light tank regiment (PT 76).
One medium tank regiment (T 55).
H Northeast Sector
raytatters, Silliguri Lt Gen M.L. Thapan
Corps
20 Moun Maj Gen Lachman
' tai a)
Division seein Singh Lehl

354 Tragedy of Errors
66 Mountain Brig G.S. Sharma
Brigade, Islampur
165 Mountain Brig R.S. Pannu
Brigade, Balurghat
202 Mountain Brig F.P. Bhatty
Brigade, Raygan)
340 Mountain Brig Jaginder
Brigade Singh Bakshi
63 Cavalry ,
Regiment, J alpaiguri
BSF Five battalions
6 Mountain Division Maj Gen P.C. Reddy
9 Mountain Brigade Brig Tirath Verma
71 Mountain Brigade Brig Kathphalia
69 Cavalry
BSF Four battalions
Each division was allotted:
One light armoured regiment (PT 76s)
One medium regiment artillery (5.5 inch)
One Engineer brigade
Central Sector
101 Communication Gauhati Maj Gen Gurbaksh
Zone Singh Gill/Maj Gen
G.C. Nagra
63 Mountain Brigade
95 Mountain Brigade Brig H.S. Kler
ae Mountain Brigade ig Trani
J Two battalions
Eastern Sector
Headquarte
| IV Corps HQ. , Agartala Lt Gen Sagat Singh
8 Mountain Division Maj Gen Krishna Rao
| 59 Mountain Brig C.A. Quinn
Brigade, Dhirmanagar
81 Mountain Bri
. rig R.C.V. Apte
Brigade, Shahan Kaila
Indep armoured squadron

Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre ia
57 Mountain Division Maj Gen B.F. Gonzales
37 Infantry Brigade
| 311 Infantry Brigade
93 Division Maj Gen R.D. Hira
61 Mountain Bri
Brigade eat Henig
83 Mountain Brig B
Biren rig B.S. Sandhu
181 Mountain Brig Y.C. Bakshi
Brigade
301 Mountain Brig Harinder
Brigade Singh Sodhi
BSF, Seventeen Battalions |
CRP, one battalion
Two adhoc squadrons of
light armour (PT 76s)
One medium regiment,
artillery (5.5 inch)
Total Strength
Total strength of Indian troops around East Pakistan was about
400,000
IAF (deployed against East Pakistan)
1] Air defence and fighter ground attack squadrons consisting of:-
4 Hunter Squadrons
1 Sukhoi SU 7 Squadron
3 Gnat Squadrons
3 MiG 21 Squadrons .
‘elicopter lift capability of lifting two infantry eens © er
"as available. The IAF could operate from five Indian alr
‘found East Pakistan
ddian Navy
iG ters
Units of the Indian navy which were deployed in the northern the
os Bay of Bengal had their headquarters at Visakapatnam
"mand of Vice Admiral N. Krishnan.
The fleet consisted of:-

li Tragedy of Errors
Aircraft carrier, Vikrant (47 aircraft) consising of:-
One squadron Alize; Three squadrons Sea Hawks; One helicopter
squadron
8 x destroyers/frigates
2 x submarines
3 x Landing ship tanks (LST)
Relative Strength (Eastern Theatre)
Ind. Army Pak Army Ratio
Corps Headquarters 3 1 3:1
Infantry Divisions 8 * 3 ** 2.5: 1
Infantry Brigades 28 9 3:1
Para Brigade 1 - 1:0
Infantry Battalions 72 34 2.5:1
Armour Regiments 6 1 6:1
Independent Armed Sqns 3 1 | 3:1
Artillery Regiments 46 6 8:1***
A A Regiments 4 1 4:1
Para-military forces 32 13 3:1
(Battalions)
Mukti Bahini 100,000 .
Air Force Squadrons 11 1 11:1***
Navy, aircraft carrier 1
Destroyers/frigates 8 -
Landing ship Tanks 3 ‘
* Including one communication Zone with strength equal to 4
division
** In addition two adhoc divisional headquarters were raised
in November, 1971. Other formations were ‘milked’
provide some fighting units to them. Overall strength ue
the equivalent of three infantry divisions that too withou

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre al
its full complements of armou
signal equipment support. T, artillery, engineer and
*** The reader may note that
. t : ‘
overwhelming superiority in fi he Indians enjoyed an
re power. F
outbreak of the war there was not a si our days after the
challenge the IAF. Single PAF aircraft to
Indian Eastern Command
Lieutenant General Jagjit Si
had seen 35 years service at a a full bearded Sikh,
assignment of his career. Born in a am the most important
fisrict of Jhelum (West Pakistan) in (circa) Kala, in the
commissioned from the Indian Milita circa) 1918, he was
Regiment in 1938. (The only Punjab ty Academy in 2 Punjab
India after Partition). He was joe Regiment that remained in
Dehra Dun Aeadguey — _ class mate of General Yahya in the
World War II and cone com rem service in Burma” during
tal Kashmir IHK) in 1948. He was director of military training
; . as director of mili ini
during the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war. shinies
A ;
took over ae. highly decorated, tall, slim and handsome officer
éfewothat ‘ai commander Eastern Command in June, 1969.
He had thus been sisal ding Ob army corps in the same sector.
Rast Pakista een preparing contingency plans for an attack on
hiosinp n since then. After Yahya’s military crackdown it
ils ee that the Indian army would have to launch a full
Cimitiand beer across its eastern border. So when Eastern
May, 1971 ecame overall incharge of the security of the border in
. , contingency plans had to be brought upto date’.
AHO Neo aurora received the Operational Instructions from
(1) de ‘tee elhi, on 16 August, 1971. The task given to him was:
theatre y the bulk of the Pakistan armed force in the eastern
Mestioned ¢ (2) occupy major portion of East Bengal. When
Made th ed by the author Aurora maintained that no mention was
¢ at Dacca was to be captured!®.
lnoeieh a quiet but confident officer with a mild and pleasant
Dlang far was not one who would decide on bold audacious
Headgu at all he erred he did so on the side of cautiousness. Army
Called aoe had to goad him several times, during Palit’s so-
ghtening campaign’ "to get.on with it"!!. The fact that he

358
Tragedy of Errors
MAP 2 |
ae s DEPLOYMENT OF FORCES |
NEPAL Hs AN._AROUND (NL EAST PAKISTAN
ve | ]_ 7 Sctonerue .
ee 4 fa! | / “ :
. . [Bale sicieunt \x N D | ;
ck i.
kd fe 4
| , a
\ fis ™ 101 COMM ZONE
Ve RANGPUR GAUHATI
N xX “~y | x
fq)z° a /
oN. F ° "Bear a a
MAK 5 16 - A 202 (A) .
mx ‘ E.. a “a, en “wer if A :
| Ss. NATORE | | “_ < - Lasers fe
e = y has oe mae
a \ea PS ee 9)
(es (nono - a SE Ci eas x | :
ae 9 (re jae)
Xn orig pessondl oT As i : a
COMMAND . opurt] / pa \
NC utna. sista) FENI \F oi D
\ ‘ i
CALCUTTA (X 7 » 5 ;
Sagas UY)
se a CHITTAGONG," )
| INOIAN ARMY \ yee Ss , ital , :
Tl PAKISTAN ARMY ‘ial nd ~
| Bd BRIGADE BAY OF BENGAL ;
Bd opivision bee .
Bd cores Me 7
A__aduoc
|

| all
; 359
Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre
was superseded and not made the army chief, after having
delivered the "golden throne" to Indira Gandhi, shows that his
superiors were not very happy with his cautious approach in 1971.
| His initial aim was limited to reaching the river lines (Ganges
from the western side and Meghna from the east). Subsequent
objectives and direction of attack were to be given later. Aurora
admitted that Dacca was indeed very much in their mind but it
was not spelt out!2,
| The army commander chose to put the maximum weight from
the east as it was the shortest route to Dacca; there was only one
river to cross and it would prevent the Pakistan army from
putting in a spoiling attack against Agartala. An attack across
Feni, just across the border, would cut the road, rail
communications to Chittagong and isolate a large area of East
Pakistan without much effort.
The navy could also play a complementary role in the eastern
1 sector by blockading the port of Chittagong, and by assisting in a
| landing on the coast if it became necessary.
| Aurora was however, concerned about a thrust by the Pakistan
'| army to the north which could drive a wedge between West
| Bengal and Assam. He, therefore, decided to put in an attack from
that direction as well. The north-west thrust had Bogra as its
objective as that was the nodal point in that sector.
A western thrust would involve crossing of two major river
systems, the Madhumati and the Ganges but it would help in
| Cutting off the northern half of the province from the rest, it
| Would remove the possibility of enemy’s offensive towards
') Calcutta and would enable the corps to occupy the port of Chalna.
| Luckily for Aurora the configuration of East Pakistan,
“urrounded as it was on three sides by Indian territory, provided
VP the facility of a multi-directional approach all leading to the centre
of gravity - Dacca. The numerical superiority; the existing
infrastructure; the peace time locations of formations and units;
the ability of the air force to support thrusts from all directions
| Made it easier for the army commander to adopt a three-pronged
Pincer Movement aimed at isolating the different sectors.
J Aurora confided that he had all the time at his dispose oe 2
% "eit had become quite obvious that they would aoe tge li
Peed would be impbrtant,to. end - the invasion

360 |
Tragedy of Errors
international community prevented the Indians from achieving
substantial success", said Aurora. He gave himself three weeks oy
even less to finish the operation”.
Concept of Operation
General Aurora decided to carry out multi-directional thrusts
while keeping Dacca as the main objective. His operational policy
was:
a. Avoiding frontal attacks
b. By-passing strong points
c. Para drops to speed up operations
d. Infiltration by Mukti Bahini and rebels to cause dislocation
in rear areas
e. Preventing Pakistani troops from falling back into the
Dacca bowl and
f. Reaching Dacca in 12 to 15 days to prevent the United
Nations or any other country forcing a cease fire. !
Plan of Attack (See Map 3)
Major Effort from the East. IV Corps with three divisions plus |
a Mukti Bahini brigade to capture Chandpur, Daud Kundi,
Bhairab Bazaar with a view to capturing Dacca in the shortest
possible time.
Two Secondary Efforts one from the West and one from North
using two divisions each in the Jessore and Bogra sectors
respectively. .
One diversionary attack One brigade from the direction of
Mymensingh southwards.
General Aurora accepted that he initiated the attack against
East Pakistan soon after the monsoon period was over and much
before 3 December. According to him, he had to do so "to maintal”
the morale of the people on the border; to give some battle
inoculation to his own troops and to obtain a few launching pads
for the main offensive". Although the probing attacks were ne
mentioned in the operational instructions it was verbally passe?
on to the corps commanders said Aurora. It was, therefore, part "4
his operational, policy to provoke firing from across the border 2?

