Naval and Air Operations le
Notes
1, Interview, Admiral Muhammad Sharif.
9. Ibid.
3, Siang Air Marsha] Inam-ul-Haq, Commander No. 14 §
me . quadron in East
5. Ibid.
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid.

: the UN
sictn in East Pakistan after ‘the military cnisance of the
ont ry action and the so-
called atrocities purported | to have been committed by the
Pakistan army in that province. India Successfully exploited the |
issue in the international fora terming the suppression of the
insurgency as genocide. The presence of a very large number of
East Bengali refugees on Indian soil supported their contentions.
The issue of the so-called genocide was first raised at the
ECOSOC meeting at Geneva in May, 1971. Mr. Agha Shahi,
Pakistan’s permanent representative at the United Nations and
Lady Viqar-un-Nisa-Noon, found it difficult to defend the military
carackdown though they did succeed in exposing India’s designs of
harming Pakistan by baseless stories of oppression.
Although India was openly organising, training, equipping and
launching guerrillas inside East Pakistan from April onwards
Pakistan never raised the issue at the United Nations. Pakistan
continued to deny that a very large number of refugees had
crossed the border. Instructions to Mr. Agha Shahi were to keep
the refugee’s issue out. Infact Pakistan kept denying the exodus
tll they could not afford to hide the fact anymore.
Agha Shahi maintains that he was able to convince the United
Nation’s secretary general not to provide humanitration
assistance to India till the UN body verifies India’s claims. Ismet
s Khetani, Iraq’s permanent representative to the World Body,
Went to East Pakistan to verify the situation on the ground...He
Submitted a report on East Pakistan’s relief needs and
yaommended the dispatch of 450,000 tonnes of food, _ coast
. sels, 25 river boats and 1,000 trucks - Se ae 2 to seek
te of $ 28 million. By then india had annem, Gponetaie
Gent oe aneiataee hie Seas ea to what would be
his pore rant enquired from Agha One ee to India purely
on eTnment’s response to providing assis the proposal
humanitarian _ needs. jIslamabad, agreed to P
i

444 Tragedy of Errors
provided it was only for humanitarian purposes’, Shahi was,
however, directed that all efforts were to be directed to prevent
the United Nations from taking cognisance of India’s propaganda
about a genocide in East Pakistan?.
At another ECOSOC meeting in Geneva on 3 July the —
situation in East Pakistan was again brought up. Agha Shahi
admitted at this meeting that the refugees are undoubtedly q
burden on India and recommended that the UN should assess the
intensity of the problem. Mr John Kelly left for Dacca on 19 July
as the representative of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). He, was however, not permitted to go and
see the refugees on the Indian side of the border. Hussein Ali a
defectee from the Pakistan foreign service and by then the head of
the Bangladesh mission in Calcutta viewed the UN efforts to
ameliorate the conditions of the refugees with utmost contempt
and said the safety of UN officials could not be guaranteed?. India
also rejected the UN proposals for stationing of UN observers to
which Pakistan had agreed.
When the news of Indian troops having crossed the border in
East Pakistan on 22 November was received at the United
Nations. Some friendly countries including Turkey advised Agha
Shahi to ask the government of Pakistan to take up the issue of
Indian aggression at the United Nations. A cable was sent by Agha
Shahi to the ministry of foreign affairs telling them about the
sympathy wave that Pakistan was now receiving because of the
blatant attack by India. The reply from Islamabad was "you will
not go to the Security Council unless specifically directed". Even
the vice premier-designate Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto was of the same
view. He is reported to have said "Let us not be in a hurry to go to
the Security Council"4,
The-government was perhaps wanting to avoid a discussion in
a world body on the situation in East Pakistan as India would
exploit the So- called genocide issue and play up the burden of
refugees which would draw greater sympathy for the secessionists
rather than for Pakistan. What was Bhutto to gain from not
wanting Pakistan to take the matter of India’s naked aggression t0
the Security Council is not very clear. Did he want the break up of
the country so that he could become the prime minister of what
would be left of it? Did he want to humiliate the army so that they
did not remain a force which could challenge his overlordship?

At the UN 445
saan a oe ve the attention of the Memb
Nations to the Serious implications of the «°'> Of the United
giendship between India and Soviet Uni Signing of g treaty of
at the First Committee of the genera] ears Agha Shahi’s speech
act that the Indo-Soviet Treaty woulq be ey » Pointing out the
rather than restraining the conflict, wae ir inducement to war,
"Nations missions. culated to all United
| Ironically it was the aggressor
‘lodged a formal complaint, that Pakistan ie on December 3,
the UN secretary general. New Delhi ho ac’ attacked India, with |
matter to the Security Council. It waa his did not take the \
Burundi, Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Somali Argentina, Belgium, |
and the United States to call for en emergere ont Kingdom |
Security Council on 4 December. “"Bency session of the |
When the Security C ;
from the ensuing hietaae eee ‘- ce ae
representatives proposed th empacer tg et and. Polish
ae Proposed that the representative of Ban ladesh b
invited to address the Council. China’s Huang Hua obj od 3
on @ Suggestion saying the participation of this rebellious
imate ae ae tantamount to interfering in Pakistan’s
launching —— s. ee Agha Shahi while blaming India for :
this. called rete against Pakistan also threatened that if
the Security C angladesh representative was invited to address }
etait ouncil Pakistan would have to ponder seriously its |
matter yp with the Security Council and United Nations. The
as dropped, |
ee a Sen, India’s spokesmen at the Security Council,
retaliator at the entry of Indian units into Pakistan was a
" Deople no Step. According to him India was trying to help the
ethan ee engladesh against oppression and if India is to be
have fs tom doing so, India would deliberately and resolutely
Say No.
at . i Bush, permanent representative of the US a
197) Wert Nations submitted a draft resolution on vequired for
an im calling on India and Pakistan to take all ne . aaane diate
Withdran wate cessation of hostilities; (2) te f the
Wal of nt on the territory ©
Other + t armed personnel present Pakistan. borders; (3)
aUthoric their own sides of the India- request of the
| Ising the Secretary General at the red
b

446 Tragedy of Errors
government of India and Pakistan to place observers along the
border to report on the implementation of the ceasefire and troops
withdrawals drawing as necessary on UNMOGIP personnel; (4)
calling upon India and Pakistan and others concerned to exert
their best efforts towards the creation of a climate conducive to
the voluntary return of refugees to East Pakistan (5) calling upon
all States to refrain from any action that would endanger the
peace in the area and (6) inviting them to respond affirmatively to
the Security General’s offer of his good offices to secure ang
maintain peace in the subcontinent®.
Soviet Union’s Yakob Malik termed the resolution as one sided
as it, according to him, evaded the root cause of the fighting which
he reiterated was the military suppression of East Bengal. USSR,
in their draft resolution, however, called upon the Pakistan
government to take measure to cease all acts of violence by
Pakistani forces in East Pakistan which had led to a deterioration
of the situation. Malik also requested the president of the Security
Council to circulate a TASS statement demanding a speedy end to
the bloodshed in East Pakistan’. Argentina, Burundi, Nicaragua,
Seira Leone and Somalia and subsequently Belgium Italy and
Japan submitted their draft resolutions similar to the US draft of
4 December. Mr. Huang Hua demanded an immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of all Indian armed forces from
Pakistan and called upon India and Pakistan to cease hostilities
and called upon all states to support the Pakistani people in their
Just struggle to resist Indian agression.
Three more draft resolution were Placed before the Security
Council. The Soviet resolution S/10418 dated 4 December called
for a Political settlement which would inevitably result in @
cessation of hostilities and called upon the Government of
Pakistan to cease all acts of violence by the Pakistan armed forces
in East Pakistan which, according to them, led to the deterioration
of the situation. No mention was made of the withdrawal of the
Indian army to its own borders.
g/10421) ont Decora & draft resolution (UN Does
ecember. It noted in particular that India ha
launched large scale attacks on Pakistan and called upon India to
withdraw it’s armed forces from Pakistan territory immediately
and unconditionally. It called upon India and Pakistan to cease @l!
hostilities. They also asked the members of the United Nations

| At the UN 447
Pakistani people j iri
support the people in their just struggle to resist Indian
aggression. ;
ird draft resoluti
The thir ea - on S/ 10423 dated 5 December, 1971,
was sponsored by Argentina, Belgium, Italy, Japan. Nj
d Somalia. It cal 2 vapan, Nicaragua,
Sierra Leone an es led for an immediate ceasefi
withdrawal of forces, intensification of efforts to bring ait
conditions for the voluntary return of the refugees to their
country.
The Soviets on 6 December, accepted a draft r
, esoluti |
Document S/ 10425) dated 5 December, sponsored by Helm |
Italy, Japan, Sierre Leone and Tunisia. Calling upon the |
governments concerned forthwith, as a first step, for an |
immediate ceasefire. It however, asked for an amendment in the |
resolution to the effect that the government of Pakistan should |
simultaneously take effective action towards a political settlement |
in East Pakistan giving immediate recognition to the will of the
people of East Pakistan as expressed in the election of December,
1970.
A French resolution on 6 December, which called for an
‘immediate ceasefire, reciprocal disengagement; speedy creation of
conditions for the voluntary return of refugees, was withdrawn
because China, USA, and Soviet Union all raised objections to it. |
Since all the resolutions, except the US sponsored Resolution |
of 6 December, were, merely drafts on which some discussions
took place, they were not even put to vote. The US resolution was
voted upon but was vetoed by the Soviet Union. As it was not
unanimously adopted the members of the Security Council agreed
that the problem should be sent to the General oe
Consequently a resolution was moved in the ee sey
Which stated that UN Security Council Resolution 303 ( th
December, 1971 considered the letter dated 4 Pesan = —
United States of America and nine other countries ine : = ne
addressed to the president of the Security ramiccrarens h
'efer . :; t S/Agenda/1606 to the
tefer the question contained in documen rionierss
Genera] i ixth session. The resolutlo
Assembly at its twenty s ‘os out of fifteen
Put to vote on 6 December. Eleven el of the US
Members of the Security Council voted in favot a
re . , Belgium Burandi, Italy, Japan,
Solution. They were Argentina, be gl " "Unite d States. Britain,
Nicaragua, Sierra-Leone, Somalia and the
tance, Poland and USSR abstained.
7"

448 Tragedy of Errors
On December 7, fifteen nations, including Argentina, Burundi,
Cameroons, Ghana, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Nicaragua,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Spain, Sudan, and Tunsia presented a
resolution to the General Assembly of the United Nations.
Resolution 2793 (XXVI) called on the governments of India and
Pakistan to take measures forthwith for an immediate ceasefire
and withdrawal of the forces to their own side of the border. It
urged both countries to intensify efforts for the voluntary return
of the East Pakistan refugees and for rendering assistance to
them’.
Mr. Yakob Malik, speaking during the debate at the General
Assembly on the recently introduced resolution, repeated the
earlier stand of his government and insisted that a ceasefire must
be accompanied immediately by recognising the will of the East
Pakistani population. Huang Hua condemned India’s aggression
and the shameless support given to it by the Soviet imperialists.
Mr. Bush, while accepting that the crisis began as a result of the
use of force by Pakistan in March, emphasised that India has the
major responsibility for broadening the crisis.
Mr. Crowe representing the United Kingdom was non-
committal. He felt that bilateral consultations inside and outside
the Security Council could halt the conflict and help in finding a
peaceful solution to the desperately complicated situation which
gave rise to the outbreak of the war. Mr. Morizet of France
believed that the only realistic measure was to obtain a cessation
of hostilities without prejudice to what may be decided
subsequently.
- _ Mr. Samer Sen speaking on behalf of India harped on the
theme of genocide and that India was forced to act in self defence.
He could now say, with some confidence, that the existence of
es was a reality which could not be ignored. Mr. Agha
- . an mt that the resolution before the General assembly
er had grave weaknesses but it was preferable to the
see one. He went on to say that the political problem of East
n was not that of self determination but of autonomy.
' The resolution was adopted by 104 votes to 11 with 10
i abstentions. Resolutions passed by the General Assembly are only
recommendations. They are not binding like those passed by the
Security Council. Even there only resolutions imposing sanctions
on a member state are binding. Others are not.

At the UN iad
hen the news about the fall of J €ssore r
she United Nations they began to ion ee opi
| round and the emphasis shifted from demanding the withdrawal
- of Indian forces from East Pakistan to implementing a ceasefire so
gs to stop the fighting on the western front as well.
On 8 December Bhutto, who had been appointed as the foreign
minister, spoke to Agha Shahi from Bonn and informed him that
he would from now on lead the Pakistani delegation at the United
Nations. Relations between Bhutto and Shahi were far from
_ cordial as the former felt that Agha Shahi had been supporting
Field Marshal Ayub. So when Shahi tried to explain the current
developments he was curtly told by the foreign minister "The
responsibility is now on my shoulders. I will handle the
situation". "Most welcome" replied Shahi.
On 9 December Agha Shahi informed the UN Secretary
General that Pakistan accepts the General Assembly’s call for a
cessation of hostilities and hoped that the UN would secure the
withdrawal of all armed personnel and post observers on both |
_+sides of the border!°, "Under instructions from my government, I
_ have the honour to state, that even though resolution 2793 (xxvi)
_ adopted by the General Assembly on 7 December, 1971 fails to
| rlake note of Indian aggression against Pakistan (which has been
admitted by India) the government of Pakistan has decided to
accept the call for an immediate ceasefire and withdrawal of
| troops contained in that resolution"!! was Agha Shahi’s statement
to the General Assembly.
Early morning on 10 December, Agha Shahi was woken up by
4 UN official. He read out a message which had been sent by Paul
Mark Henry, the UN representative in Dacca to the UN aoe
General, The message, was signed by Major General “ial power
Ali Khan, military adviser to the governor of East a a f the
©as also told that U Thant is going to inform the mem ip: Red
sceurity Council about the collapse of the ee sine
akistan and their request for an immediate ceaselire. N
Shahi asked the UN official to convey his a the an
seetetary General not to circulate this ee ai Agha Shahi,
he “ontents from Islamabad. "General E Tie request for a delay
cha nN authority to ask for a ceasefire”. d get an official response
8 hours within which he would try and ge

450 Tragedy of Errors |
h in that hour of cris;
-< government. Strangely enoug Sis
ra was nO direct line to Islamabad from New York. Agha Shahi
had to get in touch with his government by pencils the message
through Sweden. A sorry state of affairs indeed!
Bhutto arrived in New York on 10 December. While driving
from the airport to the hotel suite he was told about the latest
message from Farman. Bhutto was visibly moved I have been
betrayed" were his comments. Bhutto’s first action at the United
Nations was to delay the meeting of the Security Council till the
contents of the message had been verified.
The ministry of foreign affairs responded on 11 December.
President Yahya had countermanded the proposal sent by the
government of East Pakistan. Agha Shahi was to disown the
message as Eastern Command, according to General Yahya, had
exceeded the parameters within which it had been given
permission to work for a ceasefire. Agha Shahi felt as if he was
hanging in mid-air not knowing exactly what to do.
A breakfast meeting was hurriedly arranged with Mr. George
Bush and Henry Kissinger on 12 December, Kissinger told Bhutto
and Agha Shahi that he had reliable information that India would
transfer their forces from the eastern to the western front and try
and destroy West Pakistan also. He also said that any resolution
put forward now at the Security Council would again be vetoed by
the Soviet Union, as they would not want India to be stopped from
achieving its objective. He hinted that the United States would do
ee ea Gea continuing the war in the West.
; ° weer A.M. Raza, Pakistan’s ambassador in
i z Bt eee that the Pentagon had ordered USS Enterprise to
autre. e Bay of Bengal to put pressure on India to agree to a
The same day (12 December) the US _ permanent
om “ the UN sent a letter to the President of the
security Council (UN Document $/10444) in which it was stated,
inter-alia, that while Pakistan had accepted the UN General
poner ee asking India and Pakistan to institute
other _ . withdraw troops from each others territories, a
re rted ct ae had not yet done so. The US govern
Security Co . ean of the Council to convene a meeting oft
uncil immediately,

At the UN 451
India too sent a letter to the Preg; ;
on 12 December (UN Document Sioa the Security Council
Pakistan for creating the crisis ang for tiie It blamed
mentioned at length the S0-called atrocities ng the war and
Pakistan army in Fast Pakistan, It went ae by the
government of India is Prepared to Consider the call for a
provided that the basic causes of the Conflict wey Or @ Ceasefire
peace restored, © removed and
The Security Council} met, once agai, : .
December, Mr. Bush in his opening. statemenn®  vening ie
| India must immediately comply with the resolution Sahel ns :
General Assembly demanding @ Ceasefire ang withdrawal of
forces. he also called upon India to give a clear and unequivocal
assurance that it does not intend to annex Pakistani territory and
change the status quo in Kashmir, He then moved a draft
‘resolution on 13 December (UN Document S/1 0446/REVI) on the
same lines as that put forward earliey and passed by the UNGA.
Mr. Swaran Singh, India’s foreign minister, blamed Pakistan
once again for creating conditions leading to the conflict. He went
further by putting Pakistan on the dock for mounting a full scale
attack on India. He said that it was not India but President Yahya
Khan who had declared war on India and emphasised that India
had no territorial ambitions in Bangladesh and that India was
Prepared to discuss any ceasefire or withdrawal which would
ensure the fulfillment of the wishes of the people of Bangladesh.
iMrs, Gandhi, in a letter to U Thant on the same day said "There
can be a withdrawal of India’s forces to its own territory if the
rulers of West Pakistan would withdraw their own forces from
_ Bangladesh and arrange a peaceful settlement with those ue
Were recently their fellow citizens but now owe allegiance to the
0vernment of Bangladesh",
Mr. Bhutto, in his classical fiery style, spoke “ ape
hours, He told the members of the Security Se eee
with the Support of the Soviet Union was seeking eee ks be
Pakistan, "Should the UN allow a member ; ill fight for
dismembered by force of arms"? queried cnn q chee coe to
4 thousand years" thundered the feudal landlor Leilene ener
2n impassive audience. "A sovereign state Se i will be someone
limb ° eye istan tomorrow It i
by limb, Today it is Pak ened. There will be
Else, The Pandora’s Box has been opened.
i

