260 Tragedy of Errors
. made difficult because bridges over loca}
The operation ie troyed by the Mukti Bahini maj,
streams had been h or rea east of the river Meghna the enclaves
movement slow. Int oe ‘des by Indian territory and in :
nded on three sides y Many
were surroun ran parallel to and very close to th
places the rail-road networ ‘ang could support the Mus
‘an border from where the Indians co PP © Mukti
Dati with artillery and mortar fire with impunity. The road anq
saber track passing through Feni bre Tie CASTER SERHOT Won
a stone’s throw away from the Indian border.
In an attempt to seal the borders the formations were being
split up into penny packets. Frequent patrolling exhausted the
troops. To enable supplies to be transported inland from the port
of Chittagong secure road, rail and inland water transportation
was necessary. Boats were not available without local help which
was being denied. Mines, ambushes, lack of cooperation from the
local and Indian armed intervention all added to the difficulties,
Rebels from EBR, EPR, and police entrenched themselves in thick
jungles and across formidable rivers. All such pockets of resistance
had to be individually eliminated. Dispersion of troops to carry out
counter insurgency operations in a very hostile environment
became a necessity. It however, had a very adverse affect on the
morale of the troops as they were often isolated and cut off from
their units and formations for long periods. Large scale killings of
unarmed civilians also by the troops demoralised the soldiers. A
soldier returning from duty while being greeted by his wife is
reported to have been shocked at seeing the countenance of het
se: Sama Aankhon main Khun utar aya hai" blurted out
L _Casualties
The ‘civil war’ that erupted after March 25, claimed #
cae, me of casualties on both sides as it was 4 be
the support of on to suppress an armed uprising which
Port of not only the local lation but also tH
encouragement and agsi popu mon Oe
i assistance of an outside power.
; '
military pened an: 3 million were killed during
General Tikka Kan od reduced the figure to i The
missionaries in East Pakis mitted 34,000 casualties’ pout
30,000. Western write stan estimated a loss of life of om ?
were killed by the Paki eed that more than a thousand te#°

Military Action 261
Casualties suffered by the Pak:
insurgency operations between Manan Ne in the counter
937 officers, 186 JCOs and 3559 m vember, 1971 were
wounded’. . * ranks killed and ,
The Pakistan army, EBR and Ep
responsibility of the mass killings, Wheeels have all to share the
Pakistan army went berserk and took their a € elements of the
bullets at random, setting whole villages én at by spraying
unwanton acts of murder. The mutin seit and rm committing |
yolunteers were no angels either. Unmentionable bree ; League
committed by them also, not only after March 25 ae were
that date. » Dut even before
In one area of Santahar, in Bogra dist;
civilians were paraded naked in the seeds eon wits 16,000)
made to drink the blood of their own children. In Chitta oe » the
Mukti Bahini killed 10,000 persons. In Sirajgunj, close vi ate e
350 women and children were locked in a hall which was set on
fire by the ‘freedom fighters’. In Mymensingh an entire colony of
2,000 families was exterminated. Women were raped and killed by
the insurgents*2,
The White Paper issued by the GOP in August was taken to be
an after-thought but most of the cases mentioned there-in were
correct which had been reported by the foreign press as well. "It is
feared that the Bengalis have turned on the millions of: non-
Bengali in the eastern wing" reported the Indian Statesman*®.
‘Thousands of helpless Muslim refugees who settled in Bengal at
the time of Partition are reported to have been massacred by
angty Bengalis", wrote The Times of London*4, Lenon Lunsden,
an American engineer on a US-Aid project, said that for two
Weeks Chittagong’s predominantly Bengali population had been
butchering West Pakistanis in the port, The Far Eastern
pe Review, The New York Times, the Ceylon dees
nif ashington Post and Washington Evening coi " pu 7 re
Th = reports of rape, loot and mass slaughtef of mona)
'an migrants to East Pakistan) by the Bengalis.
sean than a 100,000 of the casualty hgures sen ne
Worke sae, the result of the aie ne ba ; and their non-
Bengal, and the Mukti Bahini on West Pakistan! aes heat
'Well wishers. Intellectuals in Bangladesh, however,

262 Tragedy of Errors
: the ‘devotees’ of Sheikh My:
play the atrocities ee genocide. Some amongst ther
and still call the es Se of Pakistan to apologise publically for
would like the a by the army during their attempt ty
the atrocities committed by
crush the insurgency.
Reaction in West Pakistan
. istan were torn between loyal
Bengali —_— ne oul of Bengali nationalism, By a
Se they nana at their posts though their hearts were wit},
| their kith and kin in East Pakistan. f th
so ul Hafeez, director general of the Bangladesh
Peas Ae al and Strategic Studies (BIISS), Dhaka,
recalled how he (then only a major) and five to six other Bengal
officers in Sialkot gathered together to hear the electrifying’
speech of Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman on March 7. Lieutenant
Ahmad-ul-Hagq, a signal’s officer, had heard the speech on some
foreign radio and had taped it, as it had been suppressed by the
government controlled electronic media. Hafeez described Sheikh
Mujib’s outbursts as ‘classic’ and "spell binding". He felt a spark
kindle in his heart.
But then came the March 25, military action. Hafeez got the
news from the next day’s newspapers and was "shocked". He rang
up his Bengali friends and switched on the radio to get more
information. When he heard the President’s announcement about
| the arrest of Bangabandhu the banning of the Awami League and
_ Stricter application of martial law, he said that he was dazed for a
few minutes. When he recovered he went out of the house and
| walked for hours alone contemplating as to what should he do.
, . The Bengali officers gathered at his house next day. They
~~ planned to defect. They decided to take 3 East Bengal Regiment
which was stationed in Sialkot, a few miles from the Indian
border, to Marala headworks right on the frontier betwee?
Pakistan and Indian Held Kashmir (IHK). The unit could then
tea $ Bea bees However, Yefore their pla
Pakistani jy ast Bengal was moved out to Kharian. Probably
/. telligence agencies had come to know of the!
ae ce Cn Tahir was doing a senior tactical course at .
; 'y Senoo’ at Quetta when he heard about the military ©"
own. He too like Brigadier Hafeez was stunned and walked #0"

Military Action 268
tside his room. He a : .
_ for hours ou .” “cording to Lawrence Lifshultz,
who interviewed him later advised all Bengali officers in Quetta to
escape from West Pakistan and Join the liberation war.
Major Zia-ud-Din and Abu Zahir from GH hee”
Sialkot and discuss plans for defection, Major “Alas hese
major of 14 Para Brigade, stationed in Sialkot, however, was the
first Bengali officer to defect. He crossed the border along with his
| family and batman 'n August taking with him the complete
| operation plan of his brigade, which came in handy to the Indians
when they attacked the Shakargarh Salient in that very sector. He
left behind his car. After seven days another Bengali officer
' crossed into India from the same place. This time leaving his BSA
* motorcycle in Pakistan.
While Brigadier Hafeez called the freedom struggle the ‘finest
. hour of our history and that Bangladesh Was at its best’ he did not
feel very happy about the Indian’s Supplying arms and giving
training to the Mukti Bahini. He wanted his own freedom fighters
. todo it alone*®,
' Lieutenant General Wasiuddin, who had earlier termed the
postponement of the national assembly session as a ‘slap in our
face’ was commanding a corps in Multan. When he was posted out
. from the important oe resigned in protest and joined
_ the rest of the Bengali officers i internment?’,
_ After Effects of the Military Action
_ By3i May the insurrection by the East Bengal Regiments, the
East Pakistan Rifles, the police and other paramilitary forces was
Suppressed and the writ of the government had been restored.
West Pakistani troops had occupied almost all of the border
Outposts (BOPs) and the area in between,had in most cases been
cleared. However a large number of Benfali troops both from the
regular army, the para military forces and the potow nae =
over to India taking with them their weapons W - tes
- Munition they could carry. They formed the core of Eine
Bahinj One h ; li diplomats serving abroad
undred and thirty Bengali dip
‘defectaq3s
Not handing over power to the majority party, after ne
\/fetions, had already drawn adverse — i bs
*Mocracies The military action, dubbed as genocide, a

264
Tragedy of Errors
the antipathy against Pakistan in several world capitals
bitterness against West Pakistan leadership in general ana The
Punjabi dominated Pakistan army in particular, had am the
manifold. Saseq
Although it is generally believed that the military actio
successful and all that was needed was to restart D Was
negotiations the reality of the situation in East Pakistan ‘Politica
nothing now could undo the error. Even those who were sits, that
the fence, or those who were favourably inclined to Ng On
noe within emcee disillusioned and ra ia a
est Pakistan. gai
League, La ae that haan me the fae
March 26. After which he was in favou eres 8 Pakistani
Hussein, son of Manik Mian, of the NN te secession. Munir-y}.
impression of the military action ermal mg Dacca, giving his
on that day”. Profess Taluqdar of the Daced Uni astan was finished
er Lan, Pro-Pakistan before March 2 niversity maintained
Professor Shameal Haq (ater foret c 25, but not thereafter.
called the ‘military action quite ill le minister of Bangladesh)
sobre and mature Bengali bur ogical’. Enam Choudhry, a very
crackdown should have been ae felt that the military
_- against the diehards. ore selective and targeted only
Before the milita ,
foreign journalists wine pa hey place all of the thirty five
The Indians escorted them to A hey moved over to Calcutta,
rt from where they cover i: border and even into East
i ecseie out unceremoniously fom = events. Angry at being
ocities’ committed by th acca they exaggerated the
operation ‘clean up’. Gener e Pakistani troops during ‘the
forcing the foreign . enera) Tikka accepted the mistake in
eal A. R. Bitdienl, eltonot ae to leave East Pakistan
en SC ennck ; » ealtor of .
Headquarters public relations a Defence Journal, Karachi,
keep th rs, however, defend er it Mastin Command
p the foreigners away 1; nded his advice to G
seen much way. His ar eneral Tikka 0
en much more tha gument was that th ¢
point in India? hi n what they actuall at they would hav
report the inting that just y saw from their vantag®
' actual casualties. as well they were not there to
itreps fro
report the true pn; akistan to
when they dia « Picture. They wee Headquarters failed |
' 7" Was greatly a etails of casualties 4” i
| ised. Sitreps dated 30 al

Military Action as
31 March, 1971 mentioned that the situation in Dacca and other
cities was fast returning to normal. No indepth study of the mood
of the people of East Pakistan after the military action, was made
by the intelligence agencies. No investigative réporting was
carried out.
Military action was launched to restore the authority of the
government and save the country from total disintegration. This
action was mostly directed at the elimination of the rebellious
elements of the East Bengal Regiment and the East Pakistan
Rifles and other 2nd-Line Forces including the civil police, It was
directed against the Awami League supporters and other militant
groups who tried to Tesist ‘the military forces in their attempt to
restore normal SS an ae it ended by the indiscriminate use
| of force against an ethnic majority which proved to be
counterproductive.
Pacification
The military administration in East Pakistan did begin to work
out ways and means of pacifying the Bengalis after their military
action. They tried to repair the material and psychological
damages resulting from the unavoidable action taken by the
armed forces against the anti-state elements. Efforts to win the
loyalties, confidence and willing cooperation of the people were
made. They tried to convince the people that the armed forces
were there to protect the life, property and honour of the people.
Planning began for the restoration of the morale of the civil
administration and for building up confidence among the people.
General Tikka Khan, as governor and martial law
administrator Zone B issued a directive to Lt. Gen. Amir Abdullah
Khan Niazi, the newly arrived commander of Eastern Command,
on the course of action to be followed after the first phase of the
, llitary action was over. The directive dated June 7, 1971 was as
followsy"It is of the utmost importance that no punitive action, is
"esorted to. If it is considered unavoidable it will be sanctioned in
writing by an officer not below the rank of a brigadier". These .
Were General Tikka Khan’s instructions after the initial phase of
the Military action was over. Martial Law authorities and civil
administration were to sit together and work out further steps &
testore normal conditions. Emphasis now was on soft Ae
General amnesty to all displaced persons who had been misled by

|
266 Tragedy of Errors
the Indian propaganda was declared. Indian propaganda of a) ee
‘genocide and the flight of Hindu population from East Pakistan,
had tarnished Pakistan’s image abroad. Incentives had to be Riven
|to encourage them to return.
General Tikka ended his directive to Eastern Commang by
saying that "minority communities were to be assured that they
would continue to be guaranteed their right of equal citizenship
like any other Pakistani. That they would be given full freedom in
their religious affairs and their places of worship would be fully
protected’. He wanted maximum publicity to be given to this, 7)
ensure border security, however, a 5 mile belt along the Sylhet/
India border was to be evacuated. ‘It is quite possible that
saboteurs, infiltrators and enemy agents will attempt to cross into
East Pakistan. Selective screening of returning personnel will be
necessary" continued Tikka. Armed forces were required to take
initiatives to establish contact with people to ascertain their
_ problems.
"Our behavior should remain fair, firm and friendly’
emphasised the General at the end of his directive. But Alas! that
was not to be ‘ethnic cleansing’ became the order of the day.
Immediately after restoring the writ of the government
General Tikka Khan set about the task of revamping al’
commercial activity in East Pakistan which had come to a
standstill during the Awami League’s confrontation with the
ee authorities, Since much of the traffic moved on Inland
ber ie ansport (IWT). Tikka laid stress on getting that
Commander Haroon-Ibn-e-Ali had jJust been posted to East
Pakistan. Being a naval officer he was dir ted P
moving both withi : ected to get the goods
within the province and to the ports for exporting
Bengal’s golden fibre Har : .
IWT Che, - “aroon conducted daily meetings with the
Chairman, Mr. Abdur Rash d ,
road - nasheed and secretary railway and
| oad transport board, Mr Qazi Jalal
Kecon eee al, (both Bengali gentlemen).
cording to Har cna
them and shape aealen maximum cooperation from
Coasters carried food — began to move along all routes.
launches loaded with ine, ms from Chittagong ports inland;
IWT was able to export igi ee a m the interior to Chittagong.
corr ; nin greater quantities than the
sponding period of the year before!l, Pes HAP

Military Action 267
Tikka kept a watchful eye
Haroon. “Bhola island has only e day ge roeress being made by
said the East Pakistan governor, "Hay rations do something"
fertilizer to Bogra’? queried the MLA‘ pu ‘ispatched the
Balochistan had his human side as wel) Ar. So-called butcher of ,”,
he concentrated on the economic aspect and . = military action
between April and October. Pe nothing broke down
By the middle of May the gover |
over almost all of East Fubidtan Shope he restored normalcy |
started running, schools and colleges began ri er factories |
showed normal attendance, TV and radio stations wo offices |
control of the administration. Even Brigadier Ja er under the
Indian army acknowledges that the hold by ae mee of the |
i i . Stanis
was improving by the day. The claim made by the Mukti B hini |
and the Indians, he believed, were highly exaggerated “When re |
Indians invaded East Pakistan in November they rer a :
Pakistanis right on the border" confided Jagdev Singh. But an
under-current of hatred against the army persisted.
Critical Analysis
1 Out of the 8 immediate objectives of Operation SEARCH
LIGHT, only a few could be achieved and that too partially. Some,
but not all, of the six East Bengal Regiments were indeed
disarmed. Those that went across to India almost intact with their
weapons formed the core of the Mukti Bahini.
Only two of the die-hard Awami League leaders were arrested.
Although they were clever enough to be frequently on the move »
the intelligence agencies should have kept a tag on them,specially
when it was becoming obvious that an action against them would
probably be necessary. If the majority of the Awami League
stalwarts would have been taken into a the secessionists
Would have needed more time to reorganise themselves.
Although all major towns were secured the —
still under the control of the dissidents and the mobility 0
army remained restricted and it’s security jeopardised. 1 of
Radio and TV stations came once again under seraing. fron |
the government, but clandestine radio stations Op rfare against,“
Indian territory continued to wage psychological me : :
: ry continued to wag ‘de in East Pakistan,
Pakistan. News about the so-called Gee tapmatiotiol media.
therefore, was still being picked up by the in
i

268 Tragedy of Errors
Martial law was-not strictly imposed as intended. Infact in
~ civil war environment a iw ree or aa
r resumin the adminis! € lon
etait dies were also not achieved - heaton could not eS
sealed, conditions for selecting a civilian Se : p was only partially
obtained and a new political aa E ee oe are soueting the
non-radical elements of the elected represen ee iia to be
only a show piece.
The decision to use force to quell the spontaneous uprising
against the so called Punjabi army was widely commented upon
by both western and vernacular writers alike. Those in the CMLA
headquarters in Rawalpindi defended the military action. To them
| it was absolutely necessary to restore the writ of the government.
There is no denying the fact that by March 25, politica)
negotiations had come to an impasse , and that a _paralle]
government, infact the only defacto government, that of Mujib
and his supporters was in place. A situation which could not have
been allowed to cofitinue. There was only one way out.
However, before taking such a drastic step which would
certainly have had far reaching repercussions, both within the
country and without, a careful assessment and appreciation of the
situation was necessary. The pros and cons of using force should
have been thoroughly discussed and clear cut instructions about
the quantum of force to be usedyshould have been spelt out. No
evaluation was carried out of the consequences of the military \v
action on the reaction of all Bengali elements in the armed forces
and in the civil departments. Neither was any thought gi
the attitude of those sitti ah Berer ©
oe ng on the fence who were most likely to
turn against the armed forces and the central ;
Islamabad. The deserti government In
a esertion of the Bengalis lock, stock and barrel |
and their going across to India was, incorrectl} <a
not considered as an , y, not visualised or |
‘ a major draw back. The res by friendl
countries was also not properly analysed ponse by friendly
to India and how easily they would ca wie ¢ panera
the Bengalis, was not taken into aici es en Ales mentee
I do nof a ee Wi ‘i <
that after the military = including Mr. Bhutto, who maintain
government based on elected Tihs aMminesry arid-formation of a
have kept Pakistan united. M As still in East Paki§tan,would ¢
Yahya to bite. She was not rs. Indira Gandhi, had got General
going to let him off the hook. Mrs. -

Military Action 269
hi now had the evidence to |
Se ned with 10 million Sli til world that India was
committed by the Pakistan army. She Sali, he atrocities being |
ground for the world community to a now prepare the
dismemberment of Pakistan. No moira mots her planned |
The fault lay in not being far'sigh |
can be termed preventive Alia taro to engage in, what
situation which leads to a disaster fein gale prevent a
diplomacy is what was eventually followed.and it ended th, —— |
way up. That is what happened in East Pakistan when te |
military action was carried out. ©
It would not be totally correct however to label all those who |
carried out orders as butchers or Chengiz Khan’s hordes. They
__ were soldiers who were caught in the cross fire of political )
violence. Their fault lay in not being able to dampen the bitterness |
that had been aroused because of decades of political bungling.
Greater control over emotions was needed. Though it is realised |
that those who have not been under stress and strain, of a
prolonged insurgency, can sit back and make pious sermons, it still
cannot be denied that it was both necessary and imperative to
restrain the men under command. |
A bloody civil war which ranges for a long period of time,
removes the veneer of gentlemanly behaviour. It requires super ~
human effort to act normally in such abnormal situation. What.
was needed was a quick surgical operation in which only the
militant Awami League were put out of action. Indiscriminate
killings which pushed a very large number of refugees in to the —
open arms of the empties have been strictly forbidden.
On the political plane, banning of the Awami League and
trying Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman for sedition did not help in
arriving at a solution which could keep Pakistan united. The cont
for negotiations should not have been totally closed. Some room
for manoeuvre on both sides should have been left open. te at
after the limited military action talks could have been ee
Throwing out the foreign journalists from rere mney the
mistake which isolated Pakistan from the areilé the desired
Publication of the white paper in August did no
‘pact as it was taken toybe an after thought.

