504
may be liquidated due overwhelming strength of enemy (.) charlie (.) enemy
possess mastery of air and freedom to destroy all vehicles at will and with ful)
conc of effort (.) delta (.) local population and rebels not only hostile but a}j :
out to destroy own troops in entire area (.) echo (.) all communication
road/river cut (.) orders to own troops issued to hold on last man last round
which may not be too long due very prolonged operation and fighting cmm |
troops totally tired (.) any way will be difficult to hold on When
weapons/ammunition exhaust in the next few days (.) supplies/ammunition |
also continue to be destroyed by enemy/rebels actions besides intense rate |
battle expenditure (.) submitted for information and advice”.
10 Dec :
President to Governor East Pakistan G 0002 of 10 Dec
Your flash message A 7107 of 10 December.
The proposed draft of your message has gone much beyond what you had
suggested and I had approved (.) it gives the impression that you are taking
decisions on behalf of Pakistan when you have mentioned the subject of the
transfer of power, political solution and repatriation or transfer from East
West Pakistan etc (.) This virtually means the acceptance of an indep East
Pakistan (.) the existing situation in your area requires a limited action by
you to end hostilities in East Pakistan therefore suggest a draft which you are
authorised to issue (.) In view of complete blockade of East Pakistan bv air
and sea by overwhelming Indian armed forces and the resultant
indiscriminate and senseless bloodshed of civilian population has introduced
new dimension, to the sit in East Pakistan (.) The President of Pakistan has
authorised me to take what ever measures I may decide (.) I have therefore
Sheet Pain aytnough Pakistan armed force have fought heroically against hy
S$ and can still continue to do s ti i t
loss of human lives I am ahi ieae toe vii prec Par
immediate cease fire in East Pakistan to end hestitles ( ) on ( ‘ cameaiion
- sein ps settled in East Pakistan since 1947 (.) three ( ) oieelloes of no
r “I J 2 . ‘
ti . hae ae pe ae in East Pakistan (.) I want to make it clear that
Proposal of ending all hostilities and the question of
surrender of armed forces would not b i i
dats k € considered and does not arise (.)
within this framework you may k iti
desire (.) The question of tran ue rjand aes pea gk om
whichis being dnaet ransfer of power will be done at national level
11 Dec ;
resident to Governor East Pakistan signal 11 0430 Dec
"Do not repeat not j
diploniattc’ aaa ms me wr action on my last message to you (.) important
essential that we hold fivisnnte 36 Ste ty oom Sends £2) _s
message to General Niazi and Geteal Fea sail cenmeunaael meal
13 Dec
Command
and Eastern Command to PAKARMY G 131500
"Dacca fort: i
ress def well organised and determined to fight it out”.
For Command Eastern Command to PAKARMY G 1286 132300
"Moving to built up area for final battle".

505
14 Dee
PAKARMY TO Governor Eastern Command 14 13392 E
For Governor and General Niazi from Presid
to me refers (.) you have fought a heroic battle ee ood (}
The nation is proud of vou and the world full of admiration () t hse ao il
that is humanly possible to find an acceptable solution to the bl ; Os :
have now reached a stage where further resistance is no tong ‘3 isis
possible nor will it serve any useful purpose (.) it will only 1 d to fu ther ls A
of life and destruction (.) you should now take all sietientiy en re - on :
the fighting and preserve the lives of all armed forces ernst all ts -
from West Pakistan and loyal elements (.) meanwhile T have anova UN to
urge India to stop hostilities in Bast Pakistan forthwith and site the
safety of the armed forces and all other people who be ing dared
vaineweariia. may be likely target of
Sd/ XX
Brig
14 Dec
14 Dee
Lieutenant General A.A.K. Niazi
Dacca, East Pakistan
. December 144, 1971
Mr. Herbert D. Spirach,
Counsel General of the USA,
American Consulate General,
Dacca, East Pakistan.
Dear, ;
In order to save further loss of innocent human lives which would inevitably
result from further hostilities in big cities like Dacca, I request you to arrange for .
an immediate cease fire under the following conditions :-
a) Regrouping of Pakistani Armed Forces in designated area to be mutually
agreed upon between commanders of the opposing forces.
b) To guarantee the safety of all military and paramilitary forces.
c) Safety of all those who had settled in East Pakistan since 1947
d) No reprisal against those who helped the administration since March, 1971
2. In those conditions, the Pakistani Armed Forces and paramilitary forces
Would immediately cease all military operations.
3. I would further abide by any resolution which the Security a rd the
United Nations may pass for the permanent settlement of the present dispute.
1. I make this proposal with full authority vested in me by great ag oe
as Martial Law Administrator of Zone ‘B’ (East on nies and para-military
Pakistan, exercising final authority over all Pakistani mill
forces in the area.
15 Dee %
F dia. -
For Lt. Gen. Niazi from S.A.M. Maneckshaw, Chief of the Army Staff In
Dec, 1971,

506FIRSTLY - I have received your communication regarding a cease fire in
Bangladesh at 1430 hours today through the American Embassy at New Delhi (.)
SECONDLY. | had previously informed General Farman Ali in two messages
that J would guarantee (A) The safety of all your military and para-military forces
who surrender to me in Bangladesh. (B) Complete protection to foreign national
ethnic minorities and personne! of West Pakistan origin no matter who they may
be (.) Since you have indicated your desire to stop fighting I expect you to issue
orders to all forces under your command in Bangladesh to cease fire immediately
and surrender to my advancing forces wherever they are located (.) THIRDLY. |
give you my solemn assurance that personnel who surrender shall be treated with
the dignity ~ os ~ soldiers oe a to os shall abide by the
provisions of the Geneva onvention (.) Further as you have many w ,
shall ensure that they are well cared for and the dead given proper bavi «1 Bo
one need have any fear for their safety no matter where they come from (.) Nor
shall there be any reprisal hy forces operating under my command (.)
Naa re Immediately I receive a positive response from you I shall direct
ones Aurora the Commander of the Indian & Bangladesh Forces in the
ape Theatre to refrain from all air and ground action against your forces (.)
2 a token of my good faith I have ordered that no air action shall take place over
Dacca from 1700 hours today (.) FIFTHLY. I assure you I have no desire to inflict
se essary casualties on your troops as I abhor loss of human lives (.) Should
a ite you ha comply with what I have stated you will leave me with no other
natives but to resume my offensive with the utmost vigour at 0900 hours
Indian Standard Time on 16 December (.) SIXT. ‘to di
16 De er (.) 'HLY. In order to be able to discuss
and finalise all matters quickly I hav io li i i
Pon ae Tae \ e arranged for a radio link on listening watch
.S.T. today 15 December (.) The frequency will be 6605 (6605)
KHZ by day and 3216 (3216) KHZ by nigh Callsi ill be
FAG tae onid quail tumearven ig t (.) allsign will be CAL (Calcutta) and
Ce ee Ronee the iy you instruct your signaller to restore microwave
(Above messa i issi
Dacor ge received for transmission to General Niazi 2300 hrs 15
4

Persons Interviewed
{n Pakistan Appointment in 1971
Lieutenant General Principal Staff Officer to General
s,G.MM. Peerzada Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan
Lieutenant General Commander Eastern C
Sahibzada Yaqub Khan of East Pakistan. ommand/Governor
General Tikka Khan -sctiasels Martial Law Administrator of East
Major General General Officer Commanding 1.
Khadim Hussein Raja Division in East Pakistan. mg 1 Infantry
Major General Brigadier Martial Law Maj. G.
M. Rahim Khan Law (Adhoc) in East re —
Officer Com manding 39 Infantry Division
in East Pakistan.
Lieutenant General Brigadier Civil Affairs,
Ejaz Azeem Martial Law Headquarters, Rwp.
Major General General Officer Commanding 16 Infantry
Nazar Hussain Shah Division in East Pakistan. °
Major General General Officer Commanding 14 Infantry
Qazi Abdul Majeed Division, East Pakistan.
Admiral Muhammad Sharif Flag Officer Commanding East Pakistan.
Air Marshal Inam ul Haq Commander PAF Base, Dacca.
Major General Deputy Martial Law Administrator in
Rao Farman Ali Khan East Pakistan.
Lieutenant General Brigadier Martial Law in Dacca; Director General
Ghulam Jilani Khan Inter Services Directorate, Islamabad.
Brigadier Bashir Chief of Staff, Eastern Command.
Brigadier Baqir Siddiqui Chief of Staff, Eastern Command.
Lieutenant General Commander 57 Brigade in Dacca.
Jahanzeb Arbab
Major General Commander, 205 Brigade, Bogra Sector.
Tajammul Hussein Malik
Brigadier Muhammad Hayat Commander, 107 Brigade, Jessore Sector.
Brigadier M. Iqbal Shafi Commander 53 Brigade, Comilla Sector.
Brigadier Brig. Civil Affairs/Commander
Ata Muhammad Malik 97 Brigade, Chittagong Sector.
Brigadier Saleemullah Commander 202 Brigade, Sylhet Sector.
Brigadier N. A. Ashraf Commander 93 (Adhoc) Brigade, Nator subsector.
Brigadier Director Inter Services ze
A. R. Siddiqui Public Relations Directorate G a
Brigadier M. Fayyaz Khan _ Col. Staff 9 Division in East Pakistan.
. ‘ jati ight
Brigadier S. Liagat Flight Commander Army Aviation Fligh
Asrar Bukhari in East P akistan.

508
Brigadier Commanding Officer 31 Field Regiment in
C. M. A. K. Zahid East Pakistan.
Lieutenant Colonel Commanding Officer 23 Field Regiment in
M. Shafi Saidpur, East Pakistan.
Colonel Afsar Gulji Battery Officer 23 Field Regiment Artillery
in Saidpur.
Lieutenant Colonel Commanding Officer 53 Field Regiment in
Yaqub Malik Comilla.
Lieutenant Colonel AQ (Staff Officer) 9 Division in
Ismail Kamal East Pakistan.
Lieutenant General Commanding Officer 21 Punjab (R & S)
Imtiaz Warraich Battalion at Jessore.
Major General Chairman, National Security Council.
Ghulam Umar
Major General Private Secretary to Field Marshal
M. Rafi Khan Muhammad Ayub Khan.
Brigadier Iftikhar Military Attache in the Peoples Republic of China.
Colonel Hasan Deputy Judge Advocate General, GHQ. Legal
adviser to the negotiating team.
Major General Commanding Officer in East Pakistan.
Fahim Haider Rizvi
Major General Commanding Officer 23 Field Regiment Artillery
Muhammad Aslam Hayat _—_Saidpur in East Pakistan.
Brigadier S. A. Kermani Officer Commanding Supply and Transport Unit in
East Pakistan (1950).
Lieutenant Commander Commandant Inland Water Transport in
Haroon Ibn-e-Ali East Pakistan.
Major General A Bengali retired officer currently MD Fauji
A. K. H. Khalil ur Rahman Fertiliser. .
Rear Admiral Rashid Ahmad Chief of Staff, Pakistan Naw.
General Mirza General Staff Officer Grade 1 (GSO-1) at 9
Aslam Baig Divisional Headquarters, Comilla/Jessore
East Pakistan.
Brigadier Amir Khan Inter Services Intelligence Directorate.
Brigadier Sher Ali Baz Inter Services Intelligence Directorate.
Brigadier Muhammad Taj _ Inter Services Intelligence Directorate.
General M. Iqbal Khan Director of Military Intelligence, GHQ.
Colonel Riaz Intelligence Bureau in East Pakistan.
Lieutenant General Governor in East Pakistan (1960).
Azam Khan
Brigadier Sahibdad Director General East Pakistan Rifles (1958-1962).

509
Civil
Professor Dr. Professor of History at Dacca University,
A. H. Dhani Curator of the Dacea Museum.
Dr. Matiur Rahman Lecturer in Rajshahi University.
Mr. Roedad Khan Secretary Ministry of Information.
semen Home Secretary, Government of Pakistan.
yee ae ated of Information in General Yahya’s
Mr. Ali Yahya Son of General A. M. Yahya,
Mr. Agha Shahi Pakistan’s ambassador at United Nations.
Mr. Riaz Piracha Pakistan's ambassador in Burma.
Mr. Etizad Ali Siddiqui Isphani Colony in East Pakistan.
Mr. Ahmad Alauddin Student in East Pakistan.
Mr. Ahmad Salahuddin Student in East Pakistan.
Professor Abdul Qayyoom A Bengali retired officer currently President IRS,
Islamabad.
Mr. Ghanie Erabie Director General Public Relations Government of
Pakistan.
Dr. N. A. Bhatty Director General, Foreign Officer Government of
Pakistan.
Shah Usman Businessman, Isphani Colony, East Pakistan.
Mr. Altaf Gohar Secretary Information.
Khwaja Khairuddin President East Bengal Muslim League.
Mr. Mahmood Ali Political leader in East Pakistan,
In Bangladesh
Barrister Amir-ul-Islam Member of the Awami League.
Colonel Farooq Freedom fighter who allegedly organised the
assassination of Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman.
Lieutenant General Master General of Ordnance. General
Khwaja Wasiuddin Headquarters, Rawalpindi.
Ambassador Murshid Presently Chairman Bangladesh Institute — of
International and Strategic Studies Dhaka.
Mr. Shamsud Doha Former foreign minister of Bangladesh. Presently
editor "Dialogue" Dhaka.
Mr, Mucinul Hussain Presently editor, ‘Tttefaq’.
Professor Tuluqdor Political figure with attachment to no
Munir-uz-Zaman political party.
Mr. M. Ayenuddin Bangladesh Muslim League.
Mr. Hasan Arif Businessman Dhaka.

~ 510
Professor Shamsul Haq Former foreign minister of Bangladesh.
Professor Rahman Subhan Part of the Awami League negotiating team:
Presently Chairman Bangladesh Institute of
Development Economics, Dhaka.
Mr. Nur-ul-Qader Khan DC Pabna.
Major General Brigadier Civil Affairs Chief Martial Law
Iskander ul Karim Administrator Headquarters.
Mr. Enam Choudhry Presently Secretary Planning Economic Resources
Division, Government of Bangladesh.
Brigadier Abdul Hafeez Battery Commander Field regiment artillery
(presently Director General BIISS, Dhaka).
Dr. Kamal Hussein Part of the Awami League negotiation team.
(Barrister)
Mr. Khondkar Mushtaq Prominent Awami Leaguer later to become
Ahmad President of Bangladesh.
Professor Emajuddin Dhaka University.
Lieutenant General Battery officer in an artillery regiment later to
M. Atiqur Rahman become Chief of Army Staff, Bangladesh army.
His Excellency Presently Ambassador of Pakistan in Dhaka.
Mr. Anwar Kamal
Major General Brigadier Civil Affairs Eastern Command
Majid ul Haq Headquarter later Minister of Agriculture
in Begum Khalida Zia’s cabinet.
Lieutenant Colonel Rashid Battery officer in an artillery regiment.
Major Qazi Noor uz Zaman = Freedom Fighter. (2nd IMA Course)
In India
Maharaj Krishan Rasgotra Deputy Chief of Mission of India in Washington.
Ambassador S. K. Singh Spokesman of the External Affairs Ministry.
Mr. Venkatesvaran Joint Secretary Minister of External Affairs Sovict
Union/East European Desk.
Lieutenant General GOC-in-C, Eastern Command, Indian Army.
Jagjit Singh Aurora
Major General General Officer Commanding
Lachman Singh Lehl 20 Mountain Division.
K. Subramanyam Director Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis
(IDSA),
Air Commodore Sirsa air hase (presen tly Director IDSA)
Jasjit Singh (retd)
Khushwant Singh Chief Editor, Illustrated Weekly of India.
XKuldip Nayver Prominent Journalist.
I. K. Gujral Former Foreign Minister (1990).
Ramjethmalani Presidential Candidate (1992.)

511
Publications/Documents
1. Hamood ur Rahman Commission Report (photo copy of an alleged original).
2, Special De-briefing Committee Report on Military Collapse in East Pakistan
(Aftab Committee Report).
3. Awan Committee Report on the war in West Pakistan.
4, Obeid ur Rahman Committee Report on the actions of some officers in West
Pakistan prejudicial to military discipline immediately after the fall of Dacca.
5. Seaton reports f rom Director General Inter Services Intelligence
eee to Joint Chief of Staff (JCS) Ministry of Defence and CMLA, HQ
resident's House Rawalpindi (June 1971 to December 1971).
6. Census of Pakistan, Vol. 2, East Pakistan Population, Home Affairs,
Government of Pakistan, 1961.
7. Civil List from Establishment Division C] 1 Offrs.
8. Government of Pakistan, White Paper of 1971 - on the massacre of Biharis
and WPs in East Pakistan between March 25 - April, 1971.
9. India, 1985, Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
Government of India.
10. Lok Sabha Debates, March 1971 to December 1971,
11. National Finance Commission Report (1964-G).
12. Pakistan Year Book, National Publishing House, 1970.
13. Pakistan Economic Survey 1969-1970 - Ministry of Finance, Economic
Advisor’s Wing, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad.
14. Pakistan Planning Commission - Mid-Plan Review of the Third FYP (1965-
70).
15. Press Information Department, Government of Pakistan Handouts.
16. Radio Pakistan Monitoring Reports.
17. Tahir. M. N., (ed) Information Handbook Part I, Vol. II, Pakistan Television
Corporation, Rawalpindi, 1970. ;
18. Twenty vears of Pakistan in statistics (1917-1967) - Ministry of Economic
Affairs, Central Statistic Office.
19. Public Services Commission Reports.
20. Annual Confidential Reports of Senior officers concerned.
21. Signals exchanged between HQ CMLA, GHQ and HQ Eastern Command.
22. UN Resolutions pertaining to situation in India and Pakistan November -
December, 1971.
23. Pakistan National Assembly Debates March, 1969.
24. Situation reports despatched by Eastern Command to Inter Services
Intelligence Directorate.
25. United Nations public documents, held by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
"
Z

512
96. Army List, held by GHQ.
97. Government of Pakistan White Paper - August, 1971.
98. Personal files held by the Military Secretary’s Branch at GHQ.
929. Data of actual military strength in East Pakistan and casualties occurred
provided by Adjutant General’s Branch, GHQ.
30. Statement by persons interviewed by the Hamood ur Rahman Commission.
31. Vision of India, Indian Council for Cultural Relations, New Delhi.
32. General A. M. Yahya Khen’s personal files courtesy Ali Yahya Khan.
33. War account of 53 Field Regiment Artillery.
34. War account of 39 (Adhoc) Division.
35. so aaa manuscript of Lieutenat General A. A. K. Niazi’s proposed
ook.
*

| 1
Bibliography
|. Ahmad, Emajuddin, Bureaucratic Elites in Segmented Economic Growth
| Bangladesh and Pakistan, University Press, Dhaka, 1980,
-g. Ahmad, Kamruddin, A Social History of East Pakistan.
d, Maudood, Banglad sh - .. . ,
. tid. Dhaka 1983. anaes ~ Era of Muj b-ur-Rahman, University Press
|
d, Maudood, Constityt; ——
| * ’ aa 1976. onsiutonal Quest for Autonomy, University Press,
5. Ali, Kifait, Pakistan vs Bangladesh, Kamla Raja Estate Lahore, 197]
6. Ali, Mahmood, Role of Muslim Bengal in the Creat; i
Services, Lahore, 1975. ” “earOs of Pakistan, Students
7. Ahmad, Vigar; Amjad Rashid, The Management eae
1947-82, Oxford University Press, Karachi, 1934! aéStan’s: Economy,
8. Ali, T., Pakistan: Military Rule or Peoples Power, London, 1970.
9. te Can Pakistan Survive, Penguin Books, Chaucer Press Suffolk, UK,
10. Allana. G., Pakistan Movement Historical Documents,
ll. Ambedkar, B. R. (ed) Thoughts on Pakistan, Thatcher Co., Bombay, 1941.
+12. Ambedkar, B. R. (Dr.) Pakistan or the Partition of India, Book Traders,
Lahore, 1945 (reproduced). :
13, Anderson, Jack, The Anderson Papers, Random House, New York, 1973.
l4. Anis-ur-Rahman: East and West Pakistan.
15. Appodorai, A. Selected Documents on India’s Foreign Policy and Relations,
1947-1972 Volume 1, Oxford University Press, New York.
16. Atwel, D, L., East Pakistan: A study in Political Geography, unpublished
Ph.D. Thesis.
17. Ayub, M; Subramanyam. K, The Liberation War, S Chand and Co., (Pvt) Ltd.,
New Delhi, 1972.
18. Fo M, Bangladesh: A struggle for Nationhood, Vikas Publications, Delhi,
71,
"Azad, A. K,, India Win’s Freedom, An autobiographical Narrative, Bombay,
1959,
20, Aziz, Qutubuddin, Mission to Washington.
“21. Aziz, Qutubuddin, Blood and Tears, Din Muhammad Press, Karachi, 1974.
22, Badruddin, G. G. M., Election Handbook - 1970, Kangthi, 1970.
23. Baiyyan,’M. A. W., Emergence of Bangladesh and Role of the Awami League,
Vikas, New Delhi, 1982.
24, Bangladesh Papers, Vanguard Books, Lahore.
8 Banglabandhu Speaks: a collection of Speeches < Documents, Dacca:
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Government of Bangladesh.

