Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) a
conceded what is the heed of the Centre" saiq Ayub®. Ayub began
to consider the alternatives available to him. His h aaiths
deteriorating further and he was losing control Z Pees
gs of the political
situation in the country. The choices open to him were: (1) j
partial martial law and try to maintain law and citer in th »dttes
(2) impose martial law throughout the country and io the
role of the chief martial law administrator (CMLA); ay hand, .
_ to mee 2 abbar. Khan, speaker of the national ns on
accordance with the constitution ;
power to the army. °F @ resign and hand ial
. Imposing martial law in the cities only would not have helped
in solving the political crisis. The problem was not a local one as it
was in Lahore in 1953 when martial law was clamped down on
that city alone. National issues were at stake which required a
new set of leaders at the Centre.
The second alternative was also not feasible as Ayub was no
longer a member of the armed forces and could not declare
himself CMLA. A title usually reserved for soldiers in uniform
f [(Though ‘Bhutto, did make himself CMLA in 1971 against all
norms). He would, therefore, in such a case, be a president only in
name with all powers rested in the C-in-C army who sooner or
later would ask the President to step aside as he himself had done
in the case of President Sikander Mirza in 1958,
The third choice, of handing over to the speaker of the national
assembly, would have been constitutionally correct and accepted
by the people, more so in East Pakistan as Jabbar was a Bengali.
However, precisely because of this he would not have had any
cooperation from the West Pakistani politicians, particularly from
Bhutto and his Pakistan People’s Party (PPP). Ayub was afraid
that the country would not be secure in the hands of Jabbar.
General Yahya is believed to have told Ayub "why don’t you
hand over to Jabbar" Ayub according to Ali Yahy . nmi is
reported to have replied "I do not trust the bastard". aie ae
quite conscious of Bhutto’s uncontrolled ambitions ae 3 a “9
to generate street power which he could raise to om -_ y
insecure Bengali head of state. Bhutto had no love los —
; ; atient for not
He was very envious of him and was a on of Ayub’s
Setting an opportunity to rise to the top be
continued rule.

q
120
Tragedy of Errors
The Baton is Passed on
The President finally decided on the fourth alternatiy,
although the 1962 Constitution did not give him the authority 4,
transfer power to the army. He sent a letter to the C-in-C Of the
army General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, handing ovey hig
responsibilities to the army on March 24, 1969. The letter draftes
by Altaf Gohar, was delivered to General Yahya, at the C-in.c,
House, by him at 5 p.m. the same day!®. Ayub handed over Powe;
because of the pressure from the army’s top brass and because o
his conviction that the army would be able to save the country
from disaster. His own security also lay in the future head of stat,
being the army C-in-C.
President Ayub addressed the nation for the last time on
March 25. His speech was recorded at the President’s house in the
presence of General Yahya at 7 p.m. a few hours before it was
broadcast.
President Ayub ‘did receive a fairly good treatment from the
new incumbent. He stayed on in the President’s House, was given
personal assistants and Rupees two hundred thousand in foreign
exchange. This would not have been the case if Bhutto had
replaced him in the presidency as he would have certainly taken
his revenge. He could have been placed under house arrest or
_7 even put on trial.
There are different versions of the change of command
between Field Marshal Ayub and General Yahya. Lieutenant
General S.G.M.M. Peerzada, who was adjutant general at GHQ,
maintains that Ayub handed over power without any coercion
from Yahya. According to him General Yahya, invited the two
service chiefs and Syed Ghiasuddin, the defence secretary to his
house and showed the letter received from Field Marshal Ayub!!.
None of those present at Yahya’s house that evening evel
mentioned about. a conspiracy hatched by Yahya to usurp powel:
a acknowledged that Admiral S.M. Ahsan, C-in-C
_—— e and Air Marshal Nur Khan, C-in-C Pakistan Ait
; oC sed to meet Yahya frequently at General Headquarte!’:
Ul he got no indication of Yahya’s desire to take over power from
Ayub. Of course the army C-in-C in Pakistan seld if evel;
/consults the other two chiefs o; ; ; iain a his
own ouster if his pl on an Issue which may result in
plans are too widely known. General Zia-ul-Ha4_
|

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) M21
taged a coup d’ etat in July, 1977 and t :
without taking any service chief o; the chain Ali B hutto A
staff committee into confidence. joint chiefs of
Major General Nawabzada Sher Ali
minister of information in General Yala eae wee on
agrees that Ayub was not forced to leave, by the army. It Tons den
been ascertained that there was no movement of troops wear the
house of President Ayub just before he handed over power és
General Yahya, indicating that Ayub was not being asked to hand
over at the point of a gun. Peerzada maintains that there was no
conspiracy against Ayub by the army 8enerals. Since he was the
adjutant general in those days he would have certainly come to
know of any such thoughts within the higher military circles,
Nur Khan, though he was later removed by Yahya, made no
mention of a conspiracy theory in his interview to Brigadier AR.
Siddiqui of the Defence Journal which was taken much after :
Yahya’s death!2,
~Gohar Ayub, the eldest son of the Field Marshal, in his reply to
the author’s query about whether his father had voluntarily
handed over power to Yahya or was forced to do so, however,
indirectly hinted that the latter was the case. He pointed out in
his letter that Field Marshal Ayub was directed to appear before
the Hamood-ur-Rahman Commission and the report of the
Commission in this connection is correct!3, (Justice Hamood ur
Rahman opined that General Yahya had usurped power).
Admiral A.R. Khan, the defence minister, and General Abdul
Hamid, Chief of Staff, are reported to have suggested,to Yahya
"accept but do not grab" but there is reason to believe that some
) other army generals, close to the C-in-C, were encouraging him to
- force Ayub to hand over power to the army.
On March 20, a PSOs conference was held in GHQ where the
Political situation was discussed. All agreed that Ayub had to go as
the agitation could only be controlled when Ayub was removed
and it was ensured that he did not offer himself as a candidate in
the next elections. There were differences, however, on how to
effect the change in the top leadership. Major General ee,
Wasiuddin who was then the master general of ‘sone ar he
Suggested that Ayub should hand over power to the speaker
: ~ 2 d_Akber, director
national assembly. Major General Muhamma (ISI), was
8eneral of the Inter Services Intelligence Directorate ’

122
Tragedy of Errors
against it as, according to him, a civilian government would not he
able to handle the situation. The ISI chief felt that a military take
over was necessary. General "Yahya interposed and said “how
about imposing martial law in East Pakistan?’ General Wasiuddin
was against imposing of martial law in East Pakistan as it Would
_mean that the army was discriminating against East Pakistan,
Finally Yahya made up his mind "The army will have to take
over" said Yahya to his PSOs. "How will you tackle Ayub" querieg
Wasiuddin "using troops if necessary replied the General",
The final decision to assume power was taken on the night
between 22/23 March, 1969".
The letter from President Ayub to General Yahya asking him
to assume power could not have come as a surprise to Yahya as a
few days earlier he had come to know about the coming events,
He was, therefore, mentally prepared. He gave a ’warning’ to his
adjutant general, and is reported to have said "Peeroo. You will
come with me in case I am called upon for some extra curricular
activities. So you start thinking about it". General Peerzada says
that he was taken aback. When Major General Gul Hasan Khan,
who was the chief of the general staff, came to know about this he
reportedly was angry for being passed over, as according to
Peerzada, he thought it was his right to have been picked up as
the principal staff officer when Yahya became president. Since
- then the two (Peerzada and Gul Hasan) remained at logger heads.
Major General Rao Farman Ali Khan, major general political
affairs with the East Pakistan government said that when Major
General Gul Hasan, visited Dacca on April 10, 1969 he told him
that “Yahya was not taking over I.(Gul Hasan) forced him to do
/8o". Farman recalled that Gul Hasan went on to quote the full
conversation between Ayub and Yahya. Ayub is reported to have
told Yahya that the imposition of martial law was the only
solution left to get over the political crisis Yahya agreed but said
ccard moo ee oat law but the army will control it" Ayub
Sita ouse od Lee and powerless as he had become he
p Is fate. "I understand Yahya what you meal
prepare my speech and the papers for my handing over" is what
Ayub told Yahya, confided Gul Hasan to Farman!6 ns
man!®,

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 123
‘On March 25, 1969 in a broadcast to the nat;
Muhammad Ayub Khan (62) tendered his resignation anne
last time I am addressing you as president" announced the ee
Marshal in Urdu. After summarising the deterioratin a and
torder situation, the crippling economy and the toleonie of s be
| politicians to divide the country into two parts he said with a v “en
| charged with emotion ‘It is impossible for me to preside over the
‘destruction of our country’. He continued to tell his peopléthat all
government institutions had become victims of coercion fear and
_jintimidation. Then camegghe piece some generals were waitin to
hear "The whole nation demands that General Yahya Khan ahs
commander-in-chief of the Pakistan army should fulfil his
constitutional responsibilities" Ayub ended his broadcast by saying
"in view of this I have decided to relinquish today the office of the
President"!’. _
From the different versions given by those who were close to
the events it appears that by March, 1969 Ayub had reached a
decision to quit his office. The question as to how and to whom
power should be transferred must have been discussed between
the head of state and his service chiefs. Since the military
hierarchy had no confidence in the politicians and no faith in the
ability of a civilian set up to restore normalcy in the country ,they
must have come to an agreement that the army must stay in
payer but under a new leadership.
It is here where some pressure on the President by those
wanting to replace him became necessary. Ayub who perhaps
wanted to remain president though only as a nominal head of
state was told, in no uncertain terms that he too had to go, Before
matters could become worse for Ayub he adopted the only course
left to him.
Although the Hamood-ur-Rahman Commission Report blames
Peerzada and other principal staff officers at GHQ for forcing
Yahya to assume power Peerzada argues, with some justification,
that if at all any one was to blame for forcing Ayub to quit It,
should have been the service chiefs and not their staff officers.
Comments
_ The political situation in the country had indeed reached an
impasse. The people in both wings had turned against Ayub er
his controlled democracy (basic democracy). But the answer di

sai Tragedy of Errors
not lie in a continuation of military rule. It is the task of an ele
government to run the country and it is the politicians who sho!
have been given the responsibility to do so and accept the blame
» they failed. The army should not have stepped. In again, Yah.
could have said No, even if Ayub had voluntarily asked the Ay “
to step in. Ayub should have been advised to hold elections Unde
the existing constitution within three months supervised by the
army and power transferred to an elected national assembly Why
could have sought amendments to the 1962 Constitution in
accordance with the rules. The army should have stayed away.
and confined themselves to their role of the defence of the |
country. But a precedent had been set in 1958. The temptation 1,
assume power once again was too great for the generals.
The important and vital difference between the elections hely
under Yahya in 1970 and those that could have been held unde
Ayub in 1969 would have been that in the latter case the
summoning of the national assembly, whatever the results, would
not have created such a problem. The 6-Points formula of the
Awami League, which may have still gained a majority, would
have been discussed inside the assembly as in other democratic
countries. Even if their demands led to a confederation or
eventual parting of ways,the military would not have been blamed
y for the break up of the country.
J Old Wine in New Bottles ¥
_5,Géneral Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan was a Persian
~ speaking Pathan whose ancestors had migrated to Peshawar from
’ Iran. Yahya’s grandfather was a subedar major in the famous
Guides Cavalry and an ADC to the viceroy of India. General Yahya
was commissioned in the third battalion of the famous Baloch
Regiment in 1938. During World War II he was serving in Italy
where he, along with others, was taken a prisoner by the
Germans.
Piers a was a smart, intelligent and hardworking young officer
elore the partition of India he was a general staff office?
grade II (GSO Il) in the military operations dir t GH@
India. A vrestic; irectorate a
( .. 4 prestigious appointment for a major. Lieutenant Coloné
S.H.F.J Manekshaw,.. th : cher ‘ ip
. Shaw,,the officer who was instrumental
humbling Yahya in 4971, was his i ‘or in 194?
Manekshaw found Major Yah to eran epee king
officer who had a logical mi ya to be "an excellent, hardwor
3 nd and could think clearly".

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) sais
Yahya is reported to have slept in the staff coll ‘
the Indian instructors were leaving for India to earl an
taking away some of the books of historical importance to their
country.
Brigadier. Lauder, commandant of the Staff Coll |
Major Yahya “as an outstanding officer" in 1948 Canara De. |
Gracey, C-in-C of the Pakistan Army, thought Lieutenant Colonel |
Yahya_to be "an outstanding all-round Officer", Major Generals |
)Akber, Hayuddin, Sher Ali, and later Ayub and Habibullah Khan |
all gave excellent remarks in Yahya’s annual confidential reports
(ACR). To them he was an “asset to the army, a very valuable
officer; an officer who possessed a sharp brain", should be
earmarked and trained for higher command", Right up to 1963 he
_ was judged by General Musa as "an officer with/clean habits| and a
first class chief of the general staff". :
"Well above average as Brigadier, outstanding as a general". He
was living a simple and dignified life till 1965 according to
Lieutenant General Bakhtiar Rana who was his corps
commander. Yahya proved his professional ability in the Indo-
, Pakistan War of 1965 by capturing Chamb and Jaurian in Indian
P held Kashmir. On the face of it, if a general was to assume power
again General Yahya seemed to be the person, but Yahya’s life, ‘>
* had changed as he became senior. Power corrupts and
abgolute power corrupts absolutely. Even before becoming the
head of state his personal conduct was becoming questionable.
, After becoming president and the chief martial law administrator
he fell into bad company. His over-addiction to wine and women
‘earned him a bad name.
___In spite of his nocturnal activities, he retained his qualities of
ntelligence and quick in the uptake. Colonel Ejaz Azim (later to
become a Lieutenant General and Pakistan’s ambassador to
United States of America) who was then at CMLA Headquarters
us that General Yahya was. quick to dispose of files and gave
Clear cut decisions. He maintained that General Yahya did een
the Ome, in spite of his preoccupation with non promede
Activities, to read through all the minuting and absorb t ra
before acceptin 2) f - them. Brigadier Iskander-ul-Karim
(later major G hel 1) and Col ‘l KM. Arif (later General) who
Were in the CMLA’% ) anc olone firmed this fact to the author.
Lieutenant Cer al pay ver owledges that General Yahya
Was profess eneral Gul Hasan ac oe Vatva’s military secretary
found hi Ssionally competent. Gener y
m sober during office hours, :

ws |
Tragedy of Errors
On March 26, the self appointed President and Chief May "
law Administrator (CMLA) General Agha Muhammad Yahy,
Khan (52) addressed the nation "Fellow Pakistanis” said the na,
President "Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan has called Upon
me to carry out my prime duty of protecting the country frop,
utter destruction" - (ironically it was he who had to preside ove,
the dismemberment of the country). "I have imposed martial lay
throughout the country. My sole aim in imposing martial law is ty
protect life, liberty and property and to put the administration
back on the rails". His tone was confident, his sentences short, his
words were crisp, but they lacked wisdom. As it turned out he |
could not achieve his stated objectives. While he may have been
sincere when he said “I wish to make it absolutely clear, that].
have no ambition other than the creation of conditions conducive
to the establishment of a constitutional government”. by
abrogating the 1962 Constitution and dissolving the national and
provincial assemblies, he set the scene for political forces to run
riot in the country"®.
In the meantime the farce that was being played out in East
Pakistan can best be judged from the fact that Mirza Nur-ul-Huda
was sworn in as governor olla Pakistan replacing governor
Monem Khan on March 24, 1991 and was removed from his office
two days afterwards when martial law was declared on March 26.
The Administration *
The CMLA_ Headquarters was controlled by Lieutenant
General Syed Ghulam Muhammad Mohiuddin Peerzada (51),
who was the principal staff officer (PSO) to the President. He had
worked under General Yahya as the director of military operations
when Yahya was chief of the general staff and later as adjutant
general at General Headquarters when Yahya wa
C-in-C.
General Peerzada had also been the military secretary to Field
not quite like she Felt We erhaps this was the reason why he o
ag Apub incre reer . arshal. (The dislike seemed to be mutué
ashis P&C) s a 0 have advised Yahya not to appoint Peerzade
os his PSO). He was assisted by a Brigadier civil affairs (Brigatt
er Jang) and Brigadier Martial Law (Brigadi him
Khan). aw (Brigadier M. Ra?!

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) nat
4
<
{8 9 > poses ¥ te de a eGR FIELD MARSHAL
; it kee §=MUHAMMAD AYUB KHAN
‘We ww AoE PRESIDENT OF PAKISTAN
2 nee 1958-1969
=, | ‘S-
ae '
GENERAL AGHA a |
MUHAMMAD YAHYA KHAN og
PRESIDENT OF PAKISTAN
1969-1971

128 Tragedy of Errors
ey FS
= = x e:
bs se é : : Se
tiie * =
en
, a. my) ie GENERAL
bo ao a ee ABDUL HAMID KHAN
« ena OG: Se eee
<4 Sea | CHIEF OF STAFF PAKISTA)
—_ ; ARMY 1969-1971
:% :
y - a
(3 Cn
fee
i r) 4 -
a ESS uf oii, —-
Pd: \ le “
i € Be ;
1 i F |
: 7 ‘O- if
| a A et a ; } | j :
LT GENS. G.M.M.PEERZADA ee s awe)
PRINCIPALSTAFF OFFICER [Mie .- Geman" |
~ OF THE PRESIDENT 1969-1971 ve fae”

