Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre =
The Dacca triangle or the Dacca bowl as it is often
was about 160 kilometres wide and around hundred Kilometres
deep. Four lines of defences were planned. The outer line of
gefence between 60 to 80 kilometres away from Dacca joi
: ca joined
Mymensingh - Bharab Bazaar - Daudkundi - Chandpur - Faridpur
-Pabna and Tangail. The inner line of defence was at a distance of
30 to 50 kilometres connecting Joydehpur .... Manikganj. The
third line of defence was just outside the city and the fourth line
were fortresses and strong points in the built up area itself. This
plan, of course, could only be implemented if adequate troops
were earmarked and emplaced before the start of hostilities.
Unfortunately that was not possible because of the policy and
decisions not to allow the Mukti Bahini to declare Bangladesh on
East Pakistan soil.
The directive given to Commander Eastern Command was to
defend Dacca at all costs. General Niazi had initially kept 53
Infantry Brigade in the provincial capital as his theatre reserve.
However, when a threat developed in the east and a breakthrough
at Feni was becoming real, Niazi released the only brigade he had
in Dacca for the defence of that border town which if captured
would cut off Chittagong and its hill tracts from the rest of East
Pakistan.
The eight battalions, which General Niazi claims were
promised to him for the defence of Dacca, were not sent. In the
final count there were no fighting elements in Dacca at all when
the Indian’s invaded East Pakistan on 21 November nor where
there any when the all out war started on 3 December. Efforts
Were made to move some units to Dacca. But it was too late. 16
Division could not send their battalions to the capital because of
the enemy’s blocking positions. 14 Division also was peg
despatch a brigade to the provincial metropolis as, when ed
Were asked to do so, it was too late. 39 (Adhoc) Division was le
With only one battalion when it was allowed to fall back to mite
Remnants of 93 Brigade also could not reach the ee en Mukti
Para drop at Tangail and the subversive activities © fltrateinto
Bahini, Only one battalion less two companies —*
‘he town.
n General
. Dacca, therefore, lay completely en to
hy reached the outskirts of the cap’ n in uniform in Dacca
'a2i saying the game is up. The 26,250 me
"

422 Tragedy of Errors
at that time were signalers, service corps and maintenance
personnel, nursing orderlies, rear parties, mujahids, razakars, ang
members of West Pakistan police. Very few of them were from the
fighting or supporting arms.
Evacuation
On 15 December Niazi had sent a signal to Manekshaw
accepting a conditional cease fire in East Pakistan. Major Liagat
Asrar Bukhari, commanding 4 Army Aviation Squadron in Rag
Pakistan told the General on that day that he was prepared to fly
out his team in the hours of darkness to Burma if permitted to do
so. Air Commodore Inamul Haq felt that in view of total air
superiority enjoyed by the IAF that would not be possible. Rear
Admiral Sharif opined that Liaqat should be allowed to give it 4
try as several helicopters would be prevented from falling into
enemy hands. General Niazi agreed and ordered Liagqat to take
Major General Rahim with him as he was wounded and that he
had to send some important documents through him to
Islamabad. He also informed Liagat that some nurses would also
be sent with him.
Liagat worked out his time and space and decided to fly out
from Dacca at 3 am on 16 December so that he could be across the
border and in Burmese territory before dawn. There were in all
eight helicopters. Four Mi8s (medium size helicopters) and four
Aluettes (four seaters). Liagat waited for the nurses till 3 a.m. but
was forced to leave without them as taking off after three O'clock
would have meant flying in the day-time over Bangladesh
territory which he had to avoid. Liagat flew very low to avoid
being detected. Throughout the flight no lights were switched and
no communications with any one was carried out.
Three and half hours later as the day was breaking Liagat and
| his flight landed safely at Akhyab (Burma). From there, after
| some preliminary question and answers by the Burmese
| authorities and with the assistance of the Pakistan embassy !"
Rangoon, the helicopters flew to Bangkok from where they weré
| shipped to Karachi®3, An evacuation accomplished because of the
| daring of an army aviation team leader. Approximately 139 an
| mI te alongwith the army aviation squadron crew ip
ght back safely to Pakistan and out of reach of Indian han0s-
|

Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 423
| surrender
Lieutenant General Amir Abdul] .
Mention in Despatches, signed the ea Niazi, H. J, S.J, MC,
431 p.m. on 16 December, 1971 ana banded a. of surrender at
Pakistan’s eastern province to its bitterest ¢ over the control of
ending the conflict, however, had begun Witigh nt The process of
er.
The military situation in East Pak;
rapidly after the Indians launched thee ean to deteriorate
‘Bangladesh’. Although no major city. exee ‘sn invasion of
the Indians had succeeded in making nen on peere, had fallen
sectors. The Mukti Bahini operating idee the Gn oS ene
umbrella, were increasing their subversive acti ep army’s
isolated the units and formations. Losses of ten nd wach nad
were rising with no replacements possible. n and equipment
The governor of East Pakistan, Dr A.M. Malik held a meeting
at the government house on 7 December and discussed the
oe ae with commander Eastern Command and his
rinci ior . ;
vostearlhg thie toe ge ilar an a Ali Khan. After
to place before the President the sail “ Tikewiege
erlousness of the situation and
recommend to him the immediate need to negotiate a peaceful
transfer of power so that unnecessary loss of life is avoided.
A telex to the chief martial law administrator was
consequently drafted and sent from the government house to the
President in Islamabad on 7 December. The signal painted a grim
picture of the situation. Even more serious than it actually was.
But since Dacca was defenceless Dr Malik could see the writing on
the wall (Signal A 6905, DTG 07 Dec).
General Yahya in his reply assured Dr Malik that he was
tying for a ceasefire through the assistance of certain world
Powers. He also informed him that General Niazi was being
Instructed regarding the military strategy to be adopted to prevent
further loss of territory. He was advised to adopt stringent
measures to ration food supplies. The signal ended with a prayer
lor the safety of the governor and all those in Kast Pakistan. This
Was followed by another signal on 8 December from the President
'o the governor assuring him that all possible efforts were being
*xerted at the political level.

424 Tragedy of Errors
By 9 December the Indian army had ae me banks of the
rivers protecting Dacca from either side. North of the capital there
was no major water obstacle. The brigade covering a very wide
frontage was fighting it out but falling back under pressure,
Two signals from corps headquarters to GHQ copies of which
were also sent to the governor indicated the possibility of an early
collapse. Dr Malik realised that the Pakistan army could not stand
up very much longer against a determined push towards Dacca by
the Indians. He, therefore, sent another telegram to the president
on 9 December pointing out to him that the military situation was
desperate and that the enemy was likely to be on the outskirts of
Dacca any time. He also informed General Yahya that he was
inclined to accept the proposal of the United Nations
representative that Dacca be declared an open city. He did
mention in this signal that General Niazi was against this
proposal as his orders were to fight to the last man and the last
round. Dr Malik once again urged the president to consider
ordering an immediate ceasefire and accept a political settlement -
which at this stage meant handing over to the Awami League,.
(Signal A 4660, DTG 09 2300).
| General Yahya, by now, had also begun to realise that the
battle for East Pakistan would soon be over and that steps must
be taken to salvage whatever is possible in the circumstances. He
replied the same day authorising Dr Malik to take whatever
decision about East Pakistan he felt necessary and left the matter
ori ie iad § good sense and judgment. He also informed
governor’s decision and Miz had been instructed to accept the
| 092300), arrange things accordingly. (G 0001 DTG
| svemdegaiooe beet ood ban Secretary the same night and 4
Pp e delivered to Mr Paul Mark Henry, the
| UN secretary general’s representative in Dacca. The governor's
| Proposal included an acceptance of an immediate ceasefire
arrangements for a transfer of the armed for onnel and
| loyal Pakistanis to West Pakistan tha ti aa Kast
| Pakistan to the elected repr = . transfer of Pemes m
Presentative viz the Awami League.
| General Farman was as . of
the messge to General Nis and get ie eoncoa ava
| Farman went to Eastern Command headquarters and showed the

| {ndo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 425
to Commander Eastern Command. G . .
i General Farman as to in which capac; sheen seni SDAIN
from Pacity was he (Niazi) bein
approve the message to Mr H 8
asked to ap enry. He was told that he i
uired to do so as Commander of Easter x - =
requir : sre Gl heted astern Command. Niazi,
then in the pres ) miral Sharif and General Jamshed
eed that the telex to the UN assistant sec oe
agt . retary general should
be sent.
Paul Mark Henry was then called to the government house
and the message was handed over to him by the governor
General Farman was then told to transmit the text to the
president as well which he did. The army signal was signed by
General Farman. (A 7107, DTG 10 )
The President was not happy at the message as, although he
had allowed the governor to act as he’ thought/fit to end the
fighting in East Pakistan, he was still not willing to accept the six-
points formula of the Awami League, which he had earlier
rejected. He, therefore, sent an immediate reply on 10 December
to the governor admonishing him for going beyond the authority
that had been vested in him. "The proposed draft goes much
beyond what you had suggested and I had approved" cabled the
president to Dr Malik. He emphasised the point that the subject of
the transfer of power and the nature of a political solution for East
Pakistan lay in the domain of the central government. The
governor could only take a limited action to end the hostilities.
General Yahya then spelt out the proposals which governor
Malik was to hand over to the United Nations representative.
Those were (1) immediate ceasefire (2) guarantee of no reprisals
against any person in East Pakistan (3) question of surrender 7
not arise. He also informed the governor that the —_— ’
transfer of power would be at the national level which according
to him was being done. (G 0002, DTG 10 DEC).
The President seemed to have been assured of aur messaue
assistance from some foreign power as he sent anot er be any
on December 11 to governor Malik asking him not to
: . 8 , talked about important
action on his message of 10 December. He king place and added
tiplomatic and military moves which 36 aes at all costs.
Hit it was essential that we hold for ee i General Niazi and
He asked the governor to pass this message
General Farman also.

426 Tragedy of Errors
When Niazi was told by the Chief of the General Staff Major
General Gul Hasan on 12 December that the Yellows are coming
from the north and the Whites from the south, he got emboldeneg
and announced his famous last words "tanks over my chest", [p
actual fact it was the Browns (Indians ) which were coming from
all directions. General Gul Hasan had passed this fake message in
Pushto to the operator in Dacca as, according to him, he was told
of this by the Chief of Staff, General Abdul Hamid.
Niazi put up a brave face based on false bravado when he sent
a signal to GHQ on 13 December. He tried to assure them that the
Dacca fortress was well organised and that he was determined to
fight it out (G 1282 dated 131500). He followed that with another
signal eight hours later (G1286 dated 132300) informing them
that he was moving to the built up area for the final battle.
Both GHQ and Eastern Command were playing a game of
bluff at that stage. Neither of them were willing to tell the other
that they had gambled and lost.
On 13 December government house Dacca was strafed by the
Indian air force. Several other targets in Dacca were being
bombed. The Indians had stepped up their psychological warfare
by spreading false rumours using Pakistan army wireless
channels. Dr Malik had come to the conclusion that East Pakistan
would soon become Bangladesh and his own life and that of his
family would not be safe if he stayed in the government house and
so on the very next day he decided to resign and move to the inter
continental hotel which by then had become a neutral zone.
General Yahya finally accepted the defeat of his army in East
| Pakistan and directed the governor and commander Eastern
| Command, in his unclassified signal of 14 December that they
should now take all necessary measures to stop the fighting and
preserve the lives of all armed forces personnel and loyal elements
in Kast Pakistan. He also informed them that his government had
moved the United Nations to urge India to stop hostilities in East
Pakistan forthwith. (G 0013, DTG 141332 EF).
The signal from the President was received at Eastern
Command headquarters at 2 P. m. on 14 December. Air
Commodore Inamul Hag, Rear Admiral Muhammad Sharif and
Major General Farman, who were also present at the
Headquarters at that time, gave their respective interpretations to

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre a |
the words of the signal authorising them to take all necessary
easures to stop the fighting. It was the first time that surrender
m :
was being talked about at the highest leve] in Dacca. Admiral
Sharif remarked that the latest Signal from the president was only |
a permission not an order. Implying that Niazi had the Option of
continuing the resistance till they had the Strength to do go.
General Farman claims that his advice to General Niazi was that f
Eastern Command should not surrender en’ masse but leave it to
individual commanders. )
General Niazi told the other service commanders that he
would seek a clarification from the president as to whether
surrender had been authorised. Consequently General Niazi
spoke to the chief of the general staff and wanted to know from
him what exactly the president had in mind. General Gul Hasan
is reported to have replied in frustration "what signal, what
surrender are you talking about. Since president has issued the
signal talk to him",
Niazi tried to contact the president but he could not trace him.
Eighteen hours after receiving the signal from General Yahya
Niazi went to Mr Herbert D. Spirach, the American consul
general in Dacca, accompanied by Farman. Niazi requested him to
convey a message to the Indian chief of army staff anid (1) for ‘
cease fire in East Pakistan (2) ensure the safety of all onl th _u“
paramilitary units (3) safety of all non-Bengalis a
reprisals against non-Bengalis. ,
Spirach agreed to convey the message Bromus i se nye
A tr er are they had advised Pakistan
Provided by the US administration, as they J solve the matter
not to enlarge the conflict and try an
Politically54_
y° ral Manekshaw. Eastern
Farman drafted the telex to Gene word surrender in their
Command was careful not to use t ” eh the Pakistan armed
fe nake to Manckshaw while ta immediately cease all
forces and paramilitary forces wou
Military operations. de it clear in a message sent
peneral ania, Deeegtce Se c the Indian high command
'o Niazi at 9. a. m. 15 December nerely a ceasefire™. elie
demands a surrender and not ee the word ceasefire". Gene
“cording to Aurora "Niazi, still use

_
| 428 Tragedy of Errors
munication regarding the ceasefire
Manekshaw, a be ban et 2.30 pmon 1 5 December from
(not surrender) hen at New Delhi. By 11.30 pm Manekshaw
the American em rar der to his advanci
ked Niazi to surrender to his advancing
“aa 8 Ee eer ‘ion a located. He assured Niazi that al]
a who surrender shall be treated with dignity and respect
that soldiers are entitled to and that he would abide by the
provisions of the Geneva Convention.
He also warned Niazi that if he (Niazi) did not comply with
what he (Manekshaw) had stated he would leave him with no
other alternative but to resume his offensive with the utmost
vigour at 9 a. m. Indian Standard Time, 16 December.
Manekshaw’s signal addressed directly to General Niazi was
received at 11.30 p.m on 15 December. Niazi sent a copy of the
signal to GHQ. Previous to this signal Manekshaw had been
broadcasting messages to General Niazi to surrender. He had also
addressed some of them to General Farman on 8 and 9 December
assuming him to be the commander Eastern Command as he had
sent the signal to the UN. He was guaranteeing the safety and
security of all those who would surrender. It was the usual age-old
psychological warfare technique by the aggressor.
While Niazi was contemplating as to what should be his next
step the Indian para battalion which had been dropped at Tangail
moved rapidly towards Dacca using an approach which was not
being held. As the sun rose over Dacca on 16 December the Indian
soldiers were at the gates of the capital. General Officer
- Commanding 101 Communication zone Major General Gandarv
Nagra was with them. At 8 a. m a brief and curt message
addressed to General Niazi recei .
was received from General Nagra. The
ton Bt was delivered by General Nagra’s ADC who came on a
ee ;
hatistion tr ait tee accompanied by some soldiers of the para
y cear Abdullah, I am at Mirpur bridge. The
game < up. you have done well to bring an end to the fighting. !
sugge
8gest you give yourself up. Send somebody to receive me”.
Admiral Sharif, Farman J
? ’ am iddiaui
present when the message for omen vas so oa
read it. There was a hush all around pete b
askine Nav; . und. Farman broke the silence by
g Niazi what is
response. Farman a Jour resistance potential? There was 0¢
gain asked him how long can you fight? agal”.

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre #29
no reply: Then admire) Sbarit spoke in Punjabi "Kutch Pallay Hai"
(Have you any strength left). Niazi looked at Jamshed who was
the commander Dacca garrison (commanding only assorted units
of ynessential slaiientst. Jamshed shook his head indicating a
negative response”’.
Niazi then told a Jamshed to go to General Nagra and
see him. A few hours later at 1 p. m Major General Jacob, General
aurora’s chief of staff, accompanied by a small negotiating team
arrived by helicopter with the instrument of Surrender. (The draft
ofthe surrender document had been prepared by Aurora and sent
to Manekshaw who, after discussing it with the political
leadership, had approved it). At 1.30 p.m. General Aurora sent a |
wireless message to General Niazi asking him whether General
Jacob had arrived with the surrender document. Niazi flashed
back an unwarranted friendly reply "He is having lunch with us
many salaams". Fearful of being killed or maltreated by the Mukti
Bahini General Niazi and others with him at Eastern Command
headquarters objected to the words "Pak army to surrender to the.
_ joint command of the Indian army and Mukti Bahini" General
Jacob, however, made it clear to them that he was not allowed to
change even one word in the instrument of surrender "This is how
it has come from Delhi. We cannot amend it" said the Jewish
general of the Indian army with a pipe in his mouth. At 3 p. m
General Nagra moved his troops into Dacca. By the afternoon of
| 16 December the second capital of Pakistan was under the control
of its harshest foe.
Aurora then flew to Agartala with his air and naval chief, some
_ other civilian dignatories and the press media. Lieutenant General
Sagat Singh, was the only corps commander to have been mane
in the group accompanying him. From Agartala the party lew
into Dacca by helicopters where they landed at 4 p. m.
General Niazi and a staff officer were present at the — .
“ceive the victors. They shook hands, photographs wel oe *
General Aurora, Mrs Aurora and General Niazi then sat in = ;
Staff cay wi ‘ara? in the front seat. As they proceede
to with Aurora’s ADC in the -e banging on the
Vindoetd the car was besieged. The Bengalis Worn ne ee they
ndows, shouting "beast! beast". Aurora first thous d that Niazi
Were direct; os him but he soon realised tha
€cting their insults at him d and asked
_ Was the tar ; He had the car stopped an
his rget of their abuses. a's flag from the car and
Fr oe to remove Eastern Command's
Place it by the Indianiflag.
" é

430 Tragedy of Errors
The party drove straight to the Ramna race course ground
(where Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman had delivered his speech of
defiance on 7 March). A small contingent of 20 to 25 para troopers
of the Indian army presented a salute as Aurora and Niazi Walked
to the make shift arrangement for the surrender. With Admira]
Krishnan, Air Chief Marshal Davan and Lieutenant Genera
Sagat Singh standing at the back Lieutenant General Ami;
Abdullah Khan Niazi, HJ, SJ, MC signed the instrument of
surrender’. The time was exactly 4.31 p.m. East Pakistan Time
on the sixteenth day of December in the year nineteen hundred
and seventy one. Soon thereafter the sun set for the last time
behind the horizon of East Pakistan to rise next morning in
Bangladesh.
Niazi handed over his revolver and his badges of rank to
Aurora to mark the formal surrender of the Pakistani troops in
Kast Pakistan to the Indian army. He lowered the national pride
further by asking for a copy of the photograph taken of his own
surrender, which he later autographed for General Aurora.
The autographed copy of the photograph alongwith the
surrender document enshrined in a glass case hangs proudly in
the study and in the dining room of General Aurora’s residence at
| 10 Feroze Shah road in New Delhi.
| Aurora had brought with him his wife to witness the
surrender ceremony. The presence of a lady at such an occasion
| was not in keeping with military tradition but who can blame
Aurora for sharing this moment of glory with his life-long
companion. But neither General M.A.G. Osmany, the
commander-in-chief of the ‘Bangladesh’ Army nor Group Captain
Khondkar, chief of staff of the ‘Bangladesh’ High Command was
present around the table, where a new country for which their
people had struggled, was being christened.
Casualties
The total strength of the military and para-military personnel
in East Pakistan immediately prior to the outbreak of the war was
1,833 officers, 50,232 junior commissioned officers (JCOs) and
other ranks. Out of these 354 officers, 192 JCOs and 5,320 other
ranks lost their lives. (The Japanese left behind a model which
few nations can copy. Out of 23,000 Japanese defending Ijma, "
World War II, only 260 were found alive after allied forces carried

