. ' 219
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the Ena)
ae . y, .: : vA Lee i Ve
' ‘ aS w H
te ~ =~
= an, | df q
— He - J ‘tet ~
=ixS iv MWD, Pal DOO |
= wi pe) heim
> 4 x. N J BR Bae iT; <2
* —— a : 4 4, / pce AR a>
- : Cg . / <a FF me oO +
a & ‘ Zo
ae bys - " fe a4 ea
; 8 4 he fx] A,
” Oe Saat Bie >
YS 2 Se ; D ic
ji.) aoe :— Oz
{Sa Boe I Rye 'g ~ ©
| ~ iti. pas)
g 4 i; . ae cA) 4 Z,
ok De ee 4 ee
= SA OR BeAr Sn
t <q! a a oe i i 1G taken, i aos ioe) ‘:
~~ ir ~ @ y it : MEAs ye coer ; = > fa <
cape ae Su mechan Crm ARCs 2 Z
r cy * 7 G38 Mie icone pte ‘e) -
Pe aes | Wye oe PSY Cade). z Of
Ay “TE 05> Fan 4 Va 3 a if : , te 92)
a hl > ‘" <t “art = _
aR Bs A Oe a: —
Rereriratsens q a: ; ‘ TAN, = —
f pid ite an ae : Sa ~~. ]
os - sie, eke x Ze Az
my 7g * pif Sa yibF, ; (eat 2
ca aad ~ Z J : pote 4 . Pats jee) ica] |
th i f- ; om hie A, fe
Fee Pcest ahi od j, (2 aS
“ ~*< & 8 . eri ys (> f j Pho if a >
\c ed it pe q i aaa a
; ed * i Fi, alee a
: J i" ae Je. seer Pye)
. : + = etre bf 4 , a 2 fx
- a ae 0) Me Jf iF , x
=q / es) ~<a >
— ~ ae \ wus haa > are Oy ral
Ne : . al ne : RL | : gf F << be
_ j BC oS a -@& aa = E>
con a faint y . vf =|
a 3 a ny 4 a =
m : oS ,. x | O<d
ba Woes cig
& . Sas a oe on f| 2 <
let a - - 2 wo
1 ‘p. ' ~ ane af yo 0,3
— - ~ 5 a fi a és n <
: \Qunt ce eo We 8B
cc Bat’? SL: ‘ > a
a 4 ¢ Po x a
a +. ee 4 : . % ee =
a ; Ae wh)
Se Vs 2 aaertl
i ~<e ’ | wer Sea

Mukti Bahini_
It is difficult for the armed forces of any nation, however
disciplined and a-political they might be in normal times, not to be
affected by tumultuous events in their country, more sis if ethnic
issues are involved. So it was with the Bengali elements in the
military establishment, particularly those serving in Kast Pakistan
during the days when the election campaign was in full swing.
Although the Awami League was not demanding separation from
West Pakistan initially, Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman and his
lieutenants were leaving no stone unturned to widen the existing
gulf between the two wings. He was, without any restraint,
playing to the tune of Bengali nationalism. His fiery speech on
March 7, at the race course grounds, Dacca, left no doubt that he
had finally given the call for an independent Bangladesh although
he did not declare it openly.
The sounds of joy Bangla and shala Punjabees had reached the
‘barracks and the officers messes in the units and formations,
stirring the minds of both the ethnic groups alike. Many Bengali
soldiers were attending the political meetings. Others, who had
kept away, were following the speeches on the radio. Slowly and
gradually they were getting emotionally involved. It was natural
for the Bengalis to have rejoiced at the land slide victory of ue
Awami League. They began looking forward to their kith and | in
to be at the helm of affairs. Many of their perceived injustices
Would surely be undone. They would atlast get a better deal in the
hew democratic dispensation.
So, when the power was not transferred to the ae a:
majority party in March, as announced by the aoe t Pakistani
Was a sudden wave of disappointment amongst the Eas oo ds
Soldiers as well which gradually turned to bitpernass bbe a ita
military hierarchy and Bhutto in particular -i declared that
Pakistanis in general, After, March 7} when Muji

222 Tragedy of Errors
0 unchallenged, and th
og postponement ons La a behind him, the feeling entire
Bengali population seemed ay, axouaed & of the
Bengali troops were also, quite natur y 7
To avoid a rebellion by a large body of native soldiers tp,
British had devised a system of mbt © different religious an,
ethnic groups in any one miilaly unit, specially those of the
fighting arms. Though known by their ethnic names the Punjap
Baloch, Rajput and Frontier sc a ae did not consist of
any one community alone. PMs (Punjabee Mussalmans), Jats
Dogras and Sikh companies of the same battalion lived, workeq
and fought side by side. This not only encouraged a healthy rivalry
between them but also reduced the chances of a mass uprising
against their superiors.
This practice was followed by the Indian and Pakistan army
even after independence. However, in the case of the Bengal
‘regiments there was a deviation from the established rules of
recruitment.
East Bengal Regiments (EBR)
The first and second battalions of the East Bengal Regiment
were raised in Kurmitola (Dacca) in 1948 when General Ayub
Khan was the GOC in East Bengal. Their class composition was
100 percent Bengali. General Ayub did not raise any objection to
this change in the composition of the East Bengal Regiment units.
perhaps due to the fact that initially it was presumed that they
would only serve in the eastern wing. The question of a whole unit
revolting could never have crossed his mind a year after the
creation of Pakistan. A five percent quota for recruitment of
Bengali personnel had, however, been placed which later was
removed and so by 1965/66 five battalions of the East Bengal
Regiment were on the ground.
As more and more EBR units were raised and some began
serving in West Pakistan also, problems arising out of linguistic
and cultural differences began to raise their head. Lieutenant
General Khwaja Wasiuddin, the senior most Bengali officer at the
time of the partition of India, recalls h h th colonel
ow he, as the
ae of the newly raised East Bengal Regiment, had "
attouhisfesitemertia a
” e Bengali troops were facing.
Roman viv tap case Roman Urdu (Urdu writtel = wi
S replaced by Urdu in all the army units 2°

Mukti Bahinj 223
institutions. This immediately Put the Benoali ¢.
disadvantage as, though they could Speak and troops at a |
they could not read and write it in the Persian seri ohn he |
question papers for promotion examinations in Bengali their |
Families of Bengali soldiers whose units Were j |
ein
faced the problems of the education of their child West Pakistan
i d Enplish or (1, “dren as the local
schools only used English or Urdu as the medium of instructi
The duration of the East Bengal Regiments in West Pakistan, |
therefore, had to be reduced SO as not to deprive the Ben ali '
children of their required education. (West Pakistan units in Rast |
Pakistan faced similar problems).
General Wasiuddin also recalled a cultural show in the Kast "
Bengal Regimental Centre in Chittagong, where troops were
almost 100 percent Bengalis, but every item in that concert was in
Urdu. This unthoughtful act did not help in creating a feeling of
brotherhood between the Bengali and West Pakistani troops.
What was required was a mixture of programmes in the major
regional languages to accommodate the sentiments of all present
there! .
A total of ten East Bengal regiments had been raised by March
of 1971. At the time of the military action they were in the
following locations:
Units Raised Location Commanding Officer - 1971
1 East 1948 Jessore Lt. Col. Raza-ul-Jalil (EP)
Bengal |
2 East 1948 Joydebpur Lt. Col. Masoud-ul-Hussain (EP)
Bengal Major Safiullah, 21C (EP) |
3 East 1956 Saidpur Lt. Col. Manzoor Ahmad (WP)
Bengal
4 Bast 96; ille Lt. Col. Khizar Hayat (WP)
Bengal 1963 Comilla Maj. Khalid Musharraf, 21C (EP)
5 East 1965 Sialkot Lt. Col. M. A. Rauf
Bengal brought to
Lahore in
December, 1971. Salahuddin
6 Rast +n Lt. Col. Firoze Salahuac
Bengal 1965 Lt. Col. Mashoor-ul-Haq
‘tye hammad
’ Bast 1969- — Malir Lt. Col. Ershad Mu
Benga) Khan (EP)

4
224 Tragedy of Errors
: Lt. Col. M. Rashid Janjua (Wp
8 East 1970 Chittagong Maj. Zia-ur-Rahman, 21C (Ep).
Bengal *(later to become president
of Bangladesh)
9 East 1970
meade : Lt. Col. Mueeduddin (EP)
10 East 1970 Dacca
Bengal Training
8 battalion
East Bengal ‘Chittagong Brig. Muzamdar (EP)
Regimental Centre Noutanpura
(EBRC) (2.500 recruits) Cantt.
In addition to the six East Bengal regiments in Kast Pakistan
at that time which had 100% Bengali troops, there were about 4 to
5 % Bengali elements in all infantry units and formation
headquarters stationed in East Pakistan. The proportion in the
technical arms and in the air force and navy was even higher. The
East Bengal regiments, however, like other units in East Pakistan
were, during the long election campaign, split up into companies
and platoons and spread along the international frontier
accupying border security posts (BOP’s) sometimes even in
section strength.
East Pakistan Rifles (EPR)
The East Pakistan Rifles was formed to guard the border
between India and East Bengal in peace time and to reinforce the
Pakistan army in defending its territorial integrity and national
independence in war. The border was divided into the following
six sectors: Dhaka, Chittagong, Sylhet, Dinajpur, Rajshahi, and
Jessore. Each sector was composed of six wings of 450 men each.
Most of the men were Bengalis while their officers came both
: from East and West Pakistan. Mymensing had an independent
wing.
Me total strength of the East Pakistan Rifles at the time of the
os ari action by the Pakistan army was 16,000. There were at
at ume only 4 Bengali officers in the EPR.
S : :
sth of Bengali Elements in East Pakistan
e total
and para ‘ilinc bs the Bengali elements in the armed forces
about o1 ce ¥ forces in East Pakistan in March, 1971 was

Mukti Bahinj 225
Fach brigade of 14 Infantry Division
ment, The supporting arme sf ihe dr had an East Bengal
regime! vision had an ¢]
Rengalis amongst them. About 50% of the troops j e ement of
on March 1, were Bengalis. In addition there ‘eas East Pakistan
Police. The break down being: © Razakars nd
; ions of Kast Bengal Reo;
Six battalions of se *eiment 5,000. regular soldiers |
Bast Pakistan Rifles 16,000 |
Razakars 50,000 |
Police 45,000
SS —H
1,16,000_ '
SS .
The Link Snaps
After March 3, 1971 a defacto Bangladesh had come into |
existence and the loyalty of the Bengali officers and men had been
put to great strain. Ex-army personnel had already formed a para- _-
military force in Support of the Awami League. It is remarkable
that Bengali personnel in uniform did not desert and go over to |
the other side during those critical three weeks in March. They
must surely have been emotionally very disturbed, not knowing |
what the future was going to be. But they still were committed to
the oath they had taken at the Kakul Academy and in the |
regimental centres. All that was needed was a spark to ignite a
chain reaction which would force them to cast aside the loyally to
°ne’s country which, according to Lord Chetwood of the Britis
army, came ‘first always and everytime’. a
The Spark came in the form of a military action a rote
areal Regiments and the Bengali elements in the as sa, Went
te Were required to hand over their Neonpons 6 "een Taaee
“kistanis, Quite expectedly they refused to do h . cele
Ss @ military confrontation they rebelled and 1oug
nto the lap of the enemy, turned protector”. taken to keep
en
so Even before the military crack-down ae vil eutilive posts.
Sai of the more vocal Bengali officers ees! wore animosity and
. this mistrust and suspicion only create prey to the
ade the » i soldiers an easy Pt id
br Test of the Bengali ; ders. Major Khal
‘Paganda being unleashed by the political leaders. in Dacea,
Mushars ng unleashe ay » bf 57-Brigade i
. "Taff, who wag the brigade majon |

226 Tragedy of Errors
was sent away to a non-descript station far away from the Maj
scene of the planned military action. But he returned, againgt .
orders of his seniors, and clandestinely began to form q rebel
group of Bengali elements of his unit. Later, he escaped to Indi
via Brahamanbaria and set up 4 headquarters near Sylhet Where
he put up a stiff resistance against the Pakistan army. He
organised several raids and carried out sabotage Activities
Musharraf was later joined by Major Safiullah With hig
headquarters at Mymensingh. (Ironically Khalid Musharraf ii
killed by his own people in Bangladesh in the post-Mujib era).
Many Bengalis who were serving in East Pakistan in the mixed
units, where Bengalis were present along with West Pakistani
troops, did not revolt. Brigadier C.M.A.K. Zahid, who was then
commanding 31 Field Regiment, Artillery in Dacca, maintains
that Bengali soldiers in his unit did remain with the regiment til
the very last and even surrendered to the Indians along with the
unit. ,
All Bengali officers of 23 Field Regiment, Artillery, at Saidpur,
remained steadfast in their loyalty towards their unit till the end
of the war. So was the case with a Bengali officer of 53 Field
Regiment, Artillery at Comilla who even came over to West
Pakistan after the creation of Bangladesh.
Although previously too some Bengali armed forces personnel
had, at the behest of India, participated in anti-state activities but
after March 25, open rebellion by whole units in support of
political leaders, who had raised the stakes to the creation of an
independent Bangladesh state, began to take place. “It was only
when the Pakistan army killed Bengali intellectuals ané
servicemen that they revolted to a man" said a freedom fighter:
Mukti Bahini was manufactured by the Pakistan alm)
~ overnight” he repeated.
Formation of the Mukti Bahini
; is colourful account of the creation of Bangladesh and the
cnc oes tn
sioner 0
west of East Pakistan. oe Balms, & Seni teas tn. he»
Recording to him when the Pakistan army re-established
control, over Pabna which had been ‘liberated’ by the freedol

227
Mukti Bahini
fighters’ after March 25, he went to the border village of
chuadanga. He was later joined by Major Usman of the East
Pakistan ne who brought with him a company of the EPR with
their wea ;
On April 8, Qader claims that he was met by Lt. Col Banerjee
of the Indian army who asked him as to what assistance does he
need from the Indians. An Anglo-Indian DG, from the Indian town
of Krishannagar, helped Qader to get in touch with Mr. Tajuddin
Ahmad who had escaped to Calcutta. Later the woutriatdent of
the Indian Border Security Force, Lieutenant Colonel Rustamijee
and the local Indian Sector commander Golak Maier
contacted Qader and asked him what exactly he wanted. Gailor
told them to request Tajuddin and other Bengali leaders including
Colonel Osmani to come to Chuadanga and declare the
establishment of the independent republic of Bangladesh and the’
formation of the Mukti Bahini. Qader claims that Major Usman
and other Bengali army officers were insisting on the declaration
of Bangladesh so that if they are captured by the Pakistan army ,
they could be treated as prisoners of war and not shot for being
deserters.
On April 10, Syed Nazr-ul-Islam, so-called acting president of
Bangladesh, had broadcast the proclamation of the independence
of Bangladesh from Mujibnagar, which was located at 8 Theater
Road in Calcutta, formerly the offices of the deputy high
~ commission for Pakistan.
The visit of Tajuddin to Chuadanga was arranged by the
Indians and at 10.30 am on April 17, 1971 Tajuddin is reported to
have come to Budhonathtola, just 4 kilometres, from the border
hear the western village of Mehrpur. (A place where Lord Clive
had taken over Bengal from the local Muslim chieftain). Colonel
Osmani was also present. A small contigent of the self Styled
ti Bahini presented a guard of honour. A ‘war council’ was
yvormed. Chairman of the war council was Colonel M.A.G.
many. Other members of the Council were Major aie
len eahman, Khalid Musharraff, Nur-ul-Aslam and sara
ee Colonel Muhammad Ata-ul-Ghani Osmany AEA Beh =
on 1p mmander-in-Chief of the ‘Liberation Army ema chan
Bane April, 1971 at Mujibnagar, the provisional ne vafte ditle
tip government in India®. (It retained that hono
ora day ). /

228 Tragedy of Errors |
; rn at Sunarganj, Assa
Se seabar Sah. Tis Wether Khan Bahadur Mafiz-urRahime
on an honorary recruiting officer during von er II. Osmany
was a bright student having obtained a first SNMOOB! thy (ii,
matriculation examination from the ime University, He,
however, started falling back in his studies while at the Aligarh
Muslim University from where he obtained his Bachelors degres
in 1938. But he left Aligarh in 1939 | =— ns Masters
i hy. While at the University he becal ember of the
Indian Territorial Force. He joined the British Indian Army jn
1940 and served in the Indian Army Service Corps during Woy\q
War II. Later he was transferred to the Infantry. After some years
with the ninth and fifth battalions of the 14th Punjab Regiment
he took over command of 1 East Bengal Regiment in 1952. Latey.
he was posted as commandant of the East Bengal Regimenta]
Centre at Chittagong.
He was a bright and ambitious officer who rose to the rank of a
- full Colonel in the Pakistan army and was appointed to the
important and sensitive post of the deputy director of military
operations at General Headquarters from where he retired in
1966. He was being looked upto by the Bengali officers who saw in
him a supporter of their rights. Since birds of a feather flock
together his bachelor’s apartment at the Rawalpindi Club was
often filled with Bengali officers with whom he freely mixed. He
had become their father figure.
It was, therefore, a genuine feeling of disappointment mixed
with frustration when he was not promoted to the rank of a
brigadier and was moved over to a less sensitive post. He became
disgruntled and bitter against those whom he believed had not
given him a fair deal. Osmany was the right man to organise a
rebellion against the Pakistan army which he thought had been
unjust to him. He was a die-hard Bengali but according to many
not pro-India. That is why perhaps Lieutenant General Jagiit
Singh Aurora, army commander Indian Eastern Command,
thought him to be a “difficult person to get along with". He found
Osmany to be ‘arrogant and proud"? and was not impressed by his
overgrown moustaches which had earned him the title of ‘muchoo
Osmany’ amongst his colleagues in West Pakistan. Eve!
Manekshaw had a certain dislike for Osmany. "They could not
stand each other" confided Aurora.

Mukti Bahinj 229
ny, as a senior retired arm .
oy action, organised the Poa oo had, even before the |
military | al ; eague volunt
military force along with othe; eX-arm eers into a |
Pr 971 it was he who had led the Awam}. personnel, On March |
‘ assed by Mujib’s house. According to nee parade which |
matty had formed a resistance group as easly me Colonel
ne was working hand-in-hand with Sheikh Mujib-ur-R, 1970 as
grateful Bangladesh government issued g commer . hman. A |
memory of their first C-in-C twenty years later. ative stamp in
Organisation
As a result of the military action ay
Bengalis, most of them Hindus had moved hee — a
Indians capitalised on this Vishnu (Hindu God) sent Siiooxtantes
and, in addition to internationalising the issue, began to mn f
train and organise the refugees to assist them in their plan to 1
dismember Pakistan.
These ‘illegal immigrants’ were sorted out into different
categories. Those students and other civilians who were capable of
bearing arms were grouped together and trained to obtain
valuable information for the impending Indian attack. The
civilians, and police formed another group and the Indian border
security forces extended a ready hand to train and transform the
young Bengalis into potential guerrillas®. Members of the East
Pakistan para military forces who had deserted their posts were
trained separately to carry out subversion inside East Pakistan.
The officers and men of the East Bengal Regiment and East
Pakistan Rifles formed the core of the Mukti Fauj, which later
changed it’s name to Mukti Bahini on April 11, 1971. According to
\sjor Saiullah that Was the day when the Bangladesh army came
x. *xistence. It was subsequently organised, eget Fee
‘ ormed into regular battalions and launched into East Pakis |
y the Indian army.
toch naa Shs We eine
(SBR) Two hey were, known as Swa son eee ae Dare
AWom tes br igades, each of 3,000 persons, We ;
*n's Wing of the Mukti Bahini was also created. .
n
en th® end of April the Pakistan army had been able to gain
ol of almost all the border posts. The rebels haa ‘os 7
ectiven the bol el p ; movement of the
*8s and were, in disarray., "The

