Causes of Alienation a
intelligentsia were more at home with Bengali Hi , /,
Bengal than their fellow countrymen in Win Pie i -
not peculiar to Bengalis alone. Linguistic affinity, sometimes,
transgresses national boundaries but only to the extent of cultural
exchanges. It does not necessarily result in disowning one’s own
country. I have known many Punjabis abroad who enjoyed the
company of Sikhs more than the company of Urdu speaking co-
citizens because of the attraction of Sharing jokes in their own
language.
A Sindhi Hindu businessman in Thailand was quite happy
when he learnt that Mr. Muhammad Khan Junejo had been made
the prime minister merely because he felt proud that a Sindhi was.
once again the chief executive of a country more so because none
so far had reached that position in his own homeland of India.
These are momentary expressions of happiness which have now
bearing on the serious aspects of national unity.
_- ulfigar Ali Bhutto (ZAB), chairman of the Pakistan People’s
_ Party (PPP), was quite conscious of the fact that Pakistan was
culturally divided. He felt that in Pakistan "unity was not flowing
from the fountain head of a single nationality"®, He, however, also
believed that cultural unity was wrongly being forced on the
different provinces of Pakistan. He writes that "there is a
fundamental difference between unity willingly forged by a people
and that forcibly imposed"2’. The Bengalis had a distinct culture of
their own. It was, according to Hafeez Malik, a Pakistani professor
at Villanova University, USA, "a particular brand of Islamic
Bengali culture"*® which they were determined to preserve, and
rightly so. Any attempt to unify the culture of the two people
would have amounted to forcible imposition of an ‘alien’ way of
life on the local Bengali Muslim. | |
A remark by a Bengali attendant at a rest house in Dhaka
aptly reflects the misunderstanding of the cultural life in East
Pakistan. While watching the TV in Dhaka during my visit to that
city in 1992 I saw and heard the maghrab azan (call for evening
prayer) being telecast on the national hookup. Being Shab-e-Barat
the significance of that day was being explained in Bengali. I was
pleasantly surprised and asked the attendant whether the azan
was telecast every day just before prayer timings. He replied with
a tinge of bitterness. Ab apko malum hua ki hambhi Musalman
hain, Hamko Hindu samaj kar mar dia" (you have now come to
|

|
58
Tragedy of Errors
realise that we too are Muslims. You took us to be Hindus and
killed us all)". This remark coming spontaneously from a Sen.
literate, lower middle class Bengali youth, twenty one years afte,
the break up, shook me. :
Behaviour of Government Officials ;
Much of what is generally believed about the arrogance ang
haughtiness shown by the West Pakistani officials while Serving in
East Pakistan towards their Bengali subordinates was tr, /
Mr. Aziz Ahmad, who was chief secretary in East Bengal in the
early 50s, is reported to have held open kutcher les (public
meeting) while sitting within a mosquito net to save himself from
the omni-present hordes of mosquitos. Such behaviour by the
West Pakistani bureaucrats while serving in East Bengal created g
feeling of bitterness against the Punjabi officials in particular. The
same gentleman is reported to have asked Mr. Nur-ul Amin, then
the chief minister of East Bengal, to dress properly on_ official
occasions as the Sherwani and pyjama, he was wearing was not
acceptable. ,
Brigadier Hafeez, recalls how a Punjabi non-commissioned
officer from Pind Dadan Khan, West Pakistan, used to address
Said-ul-Islam, one of his Bengali soldiers, as "Kaloo" (a black
_ " Person) just because he was dark. "The amusing part being that
the NCO himself had even a darker skin", said Hafeez29.
Professor Munir-uz-Zaman Taluqdar of the Dacca University
while recalling his visit to Lahore talked about a shopkeeper who
is alleged to have asked him "where are you from" on hearing that
he was from East Bengal the shop keeper without batting any eye
lid said "But you look like a Hindy30" Taluqdar, naturally felt
insulted.
Dr. Dhani relates an incident which occurred as early as |
August, 1947. While he was on his way to Dacca he stopped ove!
at Rajshahi. A local resident, who met him there, remarked "s0
you have ‘Come to rule over us", Dhani took pains to explain to him /
ee was simply a professor and he had been sent to teach at
aq ara niversity. But he certainly was taken aback by what
In several cases the Bap in the social attitude between the
armed forces in East Pakistan (Mostly Punjabi and the populace

59
Causes of Alienation
(entirely Bengali) was unwittingly displayed. A commanding
officer of the only army unit in Saidpur, a tiny railway
headquarters town in the north of Bengal, decided to provide
some organised entertainment on the pattern of the Staff College
at Quetta, where he had been an instructor. He arranged for ten
or twelve seats to be reserved in a local cinema, on payment, every
Saturday evening for his officers and their families. So far so good.
He went a little further in following military traditions in the
cinema hall by asking the mess waiter dressed in proper livery to
serve refreshments during the interval. Such army traditions
would have gone unnoticed or perhaps even appreciated in a West
Pakistani cantonment in the early days of Pakistan but it must
have created an opposite effect in that small Bengali town.
On the 23rd of March, 1969, General Agha Muhammad Yahya
Khan, commander-in-chief of the Pakistan army declared Martial
Law. The units in East Pakistan moved out to enforce law and
order. A batman of a sub-unit, temporarily located in Dinajpur,
went over to the deputy commissioners’ residence-cum office early
that morning and asked the guard to pull down the Pakistan flag
as it would now fly at the major sahib’s martial law headquarters
in that city. The soldier thought that he was just doing his normal
duty but the deputy commissioner, a_ Bengali official, and his
subordinate staff must have taken this step as an act of high
handedness by the ‘Punjabi dominated army’. Needless to say the
flag was restored at the deputy commissioner’s house that very
day*!,
East Pakistani soldiers in various army units were often
addressed by their fellow soldiers as ‘Bengali’ rather than being
called by their proper names. All of these little irritants, none of
them deliberate, when taken collectively, did convey, the
impression of a contemptuous attitude of the West Pakistanis
towards the Bengalis.
Political
What angered the East Pakistanis, politicians and pieces
more than just cultural attitude, was their inability to have t ne
due share in the administration of the country. Even gem :
days of the Muslim rule in India Bengal had been a dissi a
‘ province resisting central authority! Ilyas Shah and his a darin
defied the directives coming from a distant capital at Delhi during

60
Tragedy of Errors
the Khilji period®2, Amir-ul-Islam, an eminent barrister of Dhak
talked at length about the lack of people’s participation from Ray
Bengal and gave this a major reason for the alienation Of the
Bengalis. Most of the Bangaladeshi politicians, academicians and
former government officials interviewed had the same vie,
Raunag Jahan, professor of political science at the University of
Dacca, considers the Bengalis to be ‘the most political people gp
_, the subcontinent"*. There is much truth in her assessment of he,
~ own people. The frequent expulsions, dismissals and arrests g
prominent Bengali politicians pitched them against the
establishment in West Pakistan. What was taken as mere politica),
manoeuvring in other provinces took a more ominous turn in East
Pakistan.
Khwaja Nazimuddin was made the first chief minister of East
Bengal. He should have been welcomed as he himself was a
Bengali. But he soon became unpopular because he did not
represent rural Bengal which, after the creation of Pakistan, was
becoming more vocal. N azimuddin also ran into trouble because of
the floods of 1949 which destroyed the rice crop. Prices soared,
law and order broke down resulting in the downward spiral of
Nazimuddin’s Muslim League ministry.
By then the Bengalis had become more assertive in their
legitimate demand for a voice in the decision making process. In
December, 1949 the East Bengal Muslim League adopted a
resolution demanding full provincial autonomy in all matters
except defence and foreign affairs. They objected to the Basic
Principle Committee Report (BPC), presented by Liagat Ali Khan
in 1950, according to which the House of the People (Lower
House) would be elected on the basis of population with Kast
Bengal getting 165 seats and the remaining four provinces in West
ae oe only 135. Though this suited the Bengalis theY
House i nee ™ composition of the House of Units (uppe!
the wend ne ber sone et
a numbered i its in
Joint session of both Houses. ered in the House of Units
Kamaraddin an Sih ;
politicians began i eons eae ety laniicag. Heat Bani.
On 4 November, 1950 the Gr Pesan feelings against the a
demanded full regional auto rant’ National Convention in out
the Centre i.e.; defence, for homy conceding only three subjects
, » loreign affairs and currency. This was the

Causes of Alienation a
first major pronouncement for the demand of an independent
state though not expressed exactly in those terms. Coming only
three years after the creation of Pakistan it must have created a
stir amongst those who had struggled for a common homeland for
all Muslims of India.
After Liagat Ali Khan’s death the Muslim League split into a
Bengali faction headed by Khwaja Nazimuddin and a Punjabi
faction supported by Governor General Ghulam Muhammad.
Quite expectedly when Nazimuddin drafted another BPC Report
which gave an equal number of seats both in the lower and upper
house of the parliament to both the wings it was rejected this time
by the West Pakistani political leaders. A third draft presented by
Muhammad Ali Bogra, from East Bengal, was also considered
unsuitable by the politicians in West Pakistan as they feared
domination of the Bengalis over them, as some West Pakistani
members could always be ‘persuaded’ to join the East Bengalis on
issues which would be advantageous to their province.
The major damage to the integrity of the country was done, in
the initial stages, by Ghulam Muhammad, who began to rule over
: Pakistan as if it was his personal fiefdom. ‘A civil servant, who had
‘been propelled to the highest office of the land through sheer luck
made himself all-powerful because others around him were
minions. How else can one explain the acceptance of a paralytic
governor-general whose utterences could not be understood,
whose tantrums caused humiliation to those around him, whose
unconstitutional measures created the first crack in the edifice of |
Pakistan. His tempering with the constitution could only be given
sanction by a timid judiciary. He should have been forced to retire
for reasons of ill-health or impeached for violating the
constitution.
By dismissing Khwaja Nazimuddin, on 17 April, 1953 when he
was still commanding the majority in the constituent assembly -
and against whom no mass street demonstrations or agitation had
started Ghulam Muhammad set a wrong precedent. This,
unfortunately, became the political culture in Pakistan thereafter: © ,
He not only dismissed a-sitting prime minister but also dissolved .
the constituent assembly - an example followed by quite a few of
his successors. It is a pity that an unconstitutional act should have
been done by one who claimed to be the disciple of Haji Waris Ali
Shah, a most reverred personality of Deva Sharif (United

62
Tragedy of Errors
Provinces, India) and who in spite of being the governor-generg} ”
Pakistan wanted to be buried at Haji Saheb’s feet at Bara Bank
in India.
Amir-ul-Islam a well known barrister, and a former chief Whip
of the Awami League went to the extent of saying that "Pakista,
was destroyed at that very moment when the constituent
assembly was dissolved". He felt that Pakistan’s supreme cour,
swas responsible for the break up of Pakistan**. This, of-course, ig
‘an extreme view in which sentiments more than cool reasoning
played a part. But the supreme court decision overturning the
high court judgement in the Maulvi Tamizuddin vs State case did
set a precedent for all future unconstitutional acts under the cover
of the law of necessity. Tamizuddin was from East Bengal. The
‘unwarranted dismissals of Khwaja Nazimuddin and Maulvi
‘Tamizuddin greatly angered the Bengalis.
The Provincial elections held in East Bengal in 1954 not only
saw the demise of the Muslim League in that province but it also
threw up political and socio-economic issues which had been lying
dormant so far.
In December, 1954 the One-Unit scheme, whereby the four
provinces of West Pakistan, ‘viz Punjab, NWFP, Sindh and
Balochistan were grouped together to form one political unit to be
called West Pakistan with its capital in Lahore, was approved. The
grouping of the provinces of West Pakistan into one
administrative unit was initially mentioned in 1948 and ‘aired’
again in the constituent assembly by Malik Feroze Khan Noon in
1949.
| The 1956 Constitution was passed on 2 March, 1956, Pakistan
then took the shape of two administrative units one in the East \
ee with parity between them. Although some
carsasal ste aoe eaders accepted parity between the two wings, the
a pproved of the One-Unit scheme as it reduced thel!
majority status at the Centre. They also resented the change in
the name of their province from East Bengal to East Pakistan.
According to Zulfigar Ali Bhutto "One uni d the
polarisation between East and We e unit accentuate
the two wings vyi ist andWest. It was chiefly responsible for
appears to be a tie Day sw other as two rival states"®5. This
that Mr. Bhutto-o: Sent a8 there is no recorded evidence to prove
member of the eee the One-Unit-Scheme when he was ?
cabinet in the days of Field Marshal Ayub.

63
Causes of Alienation
The One-Unit scheme was ill founded as it neither benefitted
West Pakistan nor was it liked by the eastern Wing. It was
designed more to prevent the domination of the Bengalis than to \°,”
remove their genuine grievances. It infact created two Pakistans, *
One in the East one in the West.
‘In 1957, the East Pakistan Legislative Assembly re-affirmed
the demand for the Centre to have jurisdiction over three subjects
only viz:- defence, foreign affairs and currency. It should have
become obvious by now that the politicians and intellectuals in
East Bengal had begun to lose confidence in the central leadership
where they were under-represented, Being geographically
separated they felt the absence of authority to run. their own
affairs, in matters which concerned their social problems and their
economic betterment, more acutely than the provinces in West
Pakistan.
’ They genuinely felt that devolution of power, atleast to East
Pakistan, was necessary as inordinate delays were occurring in
solving routine issues which could be more speedily handled if the
powers of decision making was given to the provincial authorities.
Development of infrastructure, granting of permits and licenses, *”
sanctioning of loans, educational policies, raising of revenues were
in most cases being controlled by ministries located in Karachi.
This made it difficult and expensive for the provincial government
to fulfil the expectations and remove the grievances of their
people. Shifting the capital from Karachi to Islamabad caused
further resentment as it meant traveling another thousand miles
to pursue their requests. They also felt that the Punjabi influence
would grow even more with the capital in the north. "Did you take
my consent" asked Kondkar Mushtaq when this question came up
in the interview. "The selection of Karachi as the capital of v
Pakistan was not appreciated by the Bengalis" remarked Professor
Shamsul-Haq a former minister in the central cabinet. Enam
Choudhry, Secretary economic resources division in the
government of Bangladesh, also pointed to the shifting of the
capital to Islamabad as one of the factors in the alienation of the
Bengalis, .
Due to the peculiar nature of the terrain in East Bengal where
massive rivers and numerous streams bisect and divide the
countryside into several isolated areas the provincial Li,
administration had to be, per force, decentralised. The people ~~’

1
64
Tragedy of Errors |
were used to getting the redress of their grievances and Succoyp |
times of need from local politicians and government officia}, :
such an environment it was natural to expect the politica] leaden
of that province to demand greater authority to meet the Needs i
their constituencies.
There was a dire need of examining the question of
distribution of powers between the Centre and East Bengal ty
particular in the very early stages. Since East Bengal was not
contiguous to West Pakistan and the communication channe,
were both tenuous and time consuming it was necessary to haye
treated the eastern wing as a special case as regards granting of
regional autonomy. Linking the decision with the other fou
_- provinces was not necessary.
This of-course required a clearer vision of the shape of things
to come if the issue of the distribution of powers between the
eastern province and the Centre were not tackled in a spirit of give
and take. It required a greater understanding and tolerance
between the leaders in both wings and above all it needed
sincerity of purpose and rising above regional loyalties.
Unfortunately, Pakistan did not possess those kind of leaders after
the death of its founder.
The only person who had the ability and the stature to keep
the two wings together was Hussein Shaheed Suharwardy who
was also alienated when he was forced to resign from the prime
ministership in October, 1957.
“In the meantime President Sikander Mirza and General
Muhammad Ayub Khan, were making plans to increase their grip
over the administration. The law and order situation had no doubt
deteriorated. But yet the answer was not to use force, nor to deny
freedom of expression, and certainly not to impose martial lav
abrogate the constitution and deprive the people of the"
; — Sp But that was what was precisely done by the .
F105, General Ayah onc eo a that time. On 8 Osi
A ‘successful cou Th lat al sated eae a a
(7 this Catia anil peovitadal poeenaann de oetblil
“ Banned ell oot _Provincla! governments, dissolved the assem
all political parties and postponed elections indefinitely:
ai ieee met President Ayub, disposed off Sikander Mira!
presidential form of government with a strond

65
Causes of Alienation
Centre. To him unfettered democracy could prove dangerous
because the people were ‘uneducated and the politicians
unscruplous”®. A presidential system of government did not suit
the people of East Bengal. They had been demanding greater
regional autonomy. What they got in 1958 was greater central
control. The constitution commission had been warning the
, government not to introduce a unitary system as according to
them "we would be driving the average East Bengali into the
hands of the extremists in the province"’?, "Us and them" i
appeared after 1958 said Rahman Subhan,?8 when asked as to
when in his opinion the alienation between the two wings began
to take a definite course. According to Emajuddin Ahmad, a
professor at the Dacca University, "The state apparatus after 1958
became over developed. It was neither responsible nor ~
responsive” said Emajuddin. .
The leaders in the eastern wing did not appreciate the
imposition of martial law because it. meant a strong Centre; a
more powerful military/civil government in which they were
severely under represented; it also meant banning of political
parties and political activities which made them totally ineffective.
A number of them were even imprisoned which further angered
them against their West Pakistani ‘over lords’.
President Ayub had an excellent opportunity to solve many of
the political problems which had been haunting the country since
independence. He possessed a towering personality, had the total
Support of the armed forces and was well acquainted with East
Bengal having served there as the general officer commanding of
the local army formation. But he too did not prove equal to the
task. His priorities went wrong. He concentrated on rapid
: industrialisation, thinking that economic development would take
care of political bickerings. aap
The Field Marshal, introduced his own form of democracy. The
1962 Constitution took away the right of the people to chose their
Own representatives directly to the national and provincial /
legislature. They could only elect local bodies who were termed
‘Basic Democrats’. It was these 80,000 basic democrats who
formed the electoral college for the elections to the national and
Provincial assemblies. This basic democracy system, as it came. to
be called, was not acceptable to the politicians particularly those in
East Pakistan. It took away the ‘thunder’ from them for ing

af
66 .
Tragedy of Errors
could no longer hold sway over large crowds and turn them j
their favour or against a rival. The basic democrats were mon
amenable to manipulation by the bureaucracy and hence would by
_, expected to tow the central government line. "Basic democracig,
was a farce" opined Munir-ul-Hussain, son of Tafazzul Hussain
(Manik Mian), the owner of the-daily Ittefaq of Dhaka". Profesgo,
Emajuddin pointed out the fact that the East Bengalis agitated
against basic democracy and wanted a parliamentary system,
\\ The 1962 Constitution did include constitutional ASSULances
that ‘disparity would soon be removed between the two wings’ by
having aroused the expectations and not being able to fulfil then,
created greater bitterness then here-to-fore. It may not have |aig
the foundation for the dismemberment of Pakistan as K.B. Sayeeq
points out*!, but it did certainly whet their appetite for greater
regional control over their affairs. ~
Major General Fazal Mugeem, who had served in East
Pakistan, opines that the "piggest grouse of East Pakistanis was
that they did not enjoy their due share in the political power
structure and were, therefore, denied its fruits"*. This is partly
true but not totally correct as during the first decade Bengali
heads of state and heads of government were equal in number to
_ ‘the non Bengalis.
Raunaq Jahan, a renowned Bengali research scholar, claims
that "the demand for autonomy arose in the east wing in the early
fifties when the Bengalis fuund that their representation in the
power centre was virtually nil"’. Her conclusion, as that of
General Muqeem, is not bused un facts. She herself quotes
different figures in the next page of her book "Failure of National
Integration in Pakistan". She accepts that between 1947 to 1958
the ‘power structure’ was equally divided between the two wings
_as given in Table 1:
Sja. Table 1
POWER STRUCTURE BETWEEN THE TWO WINGS
(1947 - 1958)
West Pakistan East Pakistan
Heads of State D 5)
Prime Ministers 8 4
Members of Constituent Assemblies 27 27
Source: Jahan, Raunaq, Pakistan. The Failure of Nation!
Integration. Columbia University Press, 1972, p. 25.

