Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) a
Electioneering Campaign
The election campaign, which ran for over ei
was the longest in the history of the mileautonne Pareto’
a year politicians were given a free hand to whip up emotions
against their rivals and in the case of East Pakistan against the
Contte and the so-called Punjabi exploitation of East Bengal.
_-'Twenty four political parties participated in the elections. Most
of them with little or no public support. None were national in -
character. Almost all were regional in their outlook. The Awami
League did put up four of its candidates in West Pakistan but
none succeeded to get a seat in the national assembly. Bhutto’s
People’s Party did not even attempt to challenge the Awami
League in East Pakistan. The elections were, therefore, totally
regional in its context. Out of the four major political parties, the
Awami league was drumming up its anti-West propaganda and
arousing the Bengalis to rise up for their demand of maximum
regional autonomy which could have been interpreted as a veiled
cry_for total independence. To avoid being dubbed as a purely
regional political party the Awami League did show a token
_ presence in West Pakistan. The fig leaf, however, could not hide
its actual contours.
_. Khondkar Mushtaq, a veteran politician, who had been in and
out of jail several times for opposing the policies of the rulers
\ began his political career before Partition as a member of the
Muslim League. He took an active part in the Pakistan movement
but remained a nationalist at heart. But he too had second
thoughts. "The Lahore Resolution did mention two states"*® said
Khondkar to the author when being interviewed at his modest
second storey flat in a down town residential area of Dhaka.
He dilated quite a while on the question of regional autonomy,
summing it up by saying "after you got the cake you wanted it all y
and that is where we became skeptical". Although he was angry at
the domineering attitude of the West Pakistani leeatorett was
not against Pakistan per se. Infact he went on to say that Pakistan
should be here (in, Bangladesh). "History justifies it, numbers
confirm it and humility demands it’ is how he expressed his
feelings. ae
Khondkar claimed that it was not Mujib but he himself who
founded the Awami Muslim League as the Muslim League had
not been able to satisfy the needs of the eastern wing. Gradually

140
Tragedy of Errors
he too, like other Awami League leaders, began propagat
maximum autonomy for East Pakistan but unlike the hardline”
in his party he, for quite a while, wanted to achieve it whit
remaining within Pakistan. °
On March 20, 1970 Khondkar Mushtaq Ahmad while speakin
at Feni said "A strong Pakistan is the aim of the Awami Leagne
for which full regional autonomy is essential'®’. However, he to, :
was being swayed by the mood prevelant during the electioneering
campaign. He is reported to have said "If 6 Points is no
implemented, Awami League would demand only one point"
Although he aid not elaborate that point he obviously was hinting
at total independence. :
On June 21, A.H.M. Qamur-uz-Zaman, the general secretary
of the All Pakistan Awami League said at Rajshahi "relationship ,
between East and West Pakistan would be maintained". On
September 21, Sheikh Mujib categorically stated at Narayangang
that "Pakistan’s integrity would not be jeopardised" Tajuddin
Ahmad, general secretary, East Pakistan Awami League and
openly pro-India in his political stance, repeated his mentors
statement that "integrity and sovereignty of Pakistan will be
maintained". At Dacca on September 24, he only talked about
provincial autonomy and made no mention of independence or
separation. Qamar-uz-Zaman denied that his party was splitting
up Pakistan when addressing a gathering at Lahore on September
27. (He could not have said otherwise in the heartland of Pakistan
where the Pakistan Resolution was passed thirty years ago). Even
‘as late as November 6, only a month away from the elections,
while at Sylhet, Mujib talked only about East Bengal’s interests to
be safeguarded.
All this mention about integrity and sovereignty of Pakistan
was a ploy to keep the moderate Bengalis from voting against the
Awami League. Atleast Tajuddin was very clear in his mind. He
was insisting on the acceptance of 6 Points without any dilution
even if that would result in the break up of Pakistan. August 14
1970 was not celebrated as Independance Day in East Pakistan 4
according to many, East Bengal was no longer part of Pakista”.
The militant wing of the East Bengal students federation were 0”
that day demanding an independent Peoples Democratic Republic
of purbo (East) Bengal.

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) M41
Awami League leaders did not hold their punches when
attacking the West Pakistani leadership and those Bengalis who
were not seeing eye to eye with them. At Hazari Bagh, on March
11, Mujib promised to eliminate the political Mir Jafers (a word
used for traitors) and parasites from the sacred soil of Bengal. His
trusted Lieutenant Tajuddin continued to spit fire "we will wipe ~
out the exploiters and the dacoits. History of Pakistan is a history
of conspiracy of continuous oppression"®® said the Awami League
secretary general.
There were, of course, many politicians in East Pakistan who
were against Mujib and his 6-Points formula. Nur-ul-Amin and
Mahmood Ali continued to address meetings also and drew
reasonable crowds. They criticised secularism, socialism and
communism. The intelligence agencies were wrongly impressed
by the size of the audience at such meetings and gave the
impression to their higher authorities that there was a gradual
assertion of rightist forces in East Pakistan, which was not true,
The so-called alliance of Islam-pasand parties was being wrongly
interpreted in intelligence circles as a "useful development”.
Fazlul Quader Choudhry of the Pakistan Muslim League
(Quader Group) was also critical of the Awami League’s demand
for full regional autonomy and was against slogans of ‘Joy
Bangla’. But his voice did not carry very far and got lost in the
thunder of pro-Awami League demonstrators at his meetings. So
did the voice of Ata-ur-Rahman of the National Pakistan League
who criticised Mujib for his dictatorial role.
The Awami League, which even before the election campaign
had begun to show its muscle, became a fascist. and militant
organisation which was not prepared to brook any rival. It was
determined to crush by force any opposition to its formula for total
regional autonomy. Consequently no other political party was ~
allowed to hold public meetings in East Pakistan. The Jamaat-e-
Islami (JI) meeting being held at Paltan Maidan, Dacca, on
January 18, 1970 was disturbed and not allowed to continue. Four
days later its offices were raided and all its literature destroyed.
Similarly the meetings of the Pakistan Democratic Party were
disrupted on February 1, 1970 and two of its newspapers the
Bunyad and Sangram were gutted‘! by the Awami League
workers,

|
142
Tragedy of Errors
Intelligence reports also referred to the attempt by Awan;
League workers to disturb the meetings of the other Politiog
parties. The Jamaat-e-Islami procession at Chittagong on May 31
1970 was allegedly lathi charged by orders of the loca}
superintendent police*”. The Pakistan Democratic Party Meeting
at Habibgang on May 30, was disturbed by students belonging {,
the Pro-Mujib East Pakistan Students League.
Mujib and his supporters did not openly preach secession
because if he had done so there would have been a sizeable
opposition even in East Pakistan at that time to the break up of
Pakistan. Whenever the people used to ask him whether he was
for the separation of the two wings Mujib, who used to carry the
Holy Quran with him, used to put his hands on the Holy Book
and say "I do not want separation’, There were many saner
elements in the eastern wing who were on the extreme right of |
the political spectrum. They certainly would not have voted for the
Awami League if total independence was their goal. But while |
saying that "Pakistan has come to stay and there is no force which
can destroy it’, Mujib had dismemberment at the back of his
~ mind. He was aware that by gradually building up emotions
against West Pakistan he could bring the Bengalis to a pitch when
the people themselves would clamour for a complete break from
their so-called exploiters. Khondkar described Mujib. as a
Frankenstein which West Pakistan had helped to build by their
wrong policies.
Mujib is reported to have said after the creation of Bangladesh
that "he had been working for a separate state of Bangladesh since
1968. In fact the struggle for independence according to him began
from 1948"44,
Mujib got a free hand in East Pakistan also because the PPP
(the strongest political opponent of the Awami League) made no
effort to counter his propaganda. None of the PPP stalwarts
visited Fast Bengal during the election campaign, Bhutto made no
nat eriticlse or See eee mas er appearance, 7° a
While rejecting 6 Points steadily ih ek a r perm
into his campai ely Bhutto did not drag this issu
iis campaign. He concentrated instead on the economic
exploitation of the capitalists j k
about the removal rs aS in West Pakistan but did not tal
In fact he "showed hs interser aes between the two wing>:
——— est in East Pakistan at all"4, According .
|
i

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) a
to Bhutto he placed his emphasis on economic issues and on an
independent foreign policy*®. By not putting up even one PPP
candidate in East Pakistan, Bhutto had even before the elections
accepted that he had no voice in the eastern wing nor was he
interested in establishing one. He, like Mujib, had already »
bifurcated the country in his mind. His only remaining objective
was not to allow Mujib to rule the roost in West Pakistan as well.
Mujib on the other hand did come to West Pakistan to canvass
for the four candidates of the Awami League from West Pakistan
(All of them lost the election). The Sheikh’s speech at Lahore on
July 5, was disturbed. Mujib is stated to have lost his temper and
said "you want to break up Pakistan. 95 percent Bengalis are with
me. We could do the same in East Pakistan"*’ - and they did.
While in Lahore he met Lieutenant General Azam Khan (retired),
one time governor of East Pakistan and one who had won the
hearts of the East Pakistanis for the good work he had done for
them while he was there. He tried to convince Azam Khan to join
the Awami League but failed in his attempt™.
The National Awami Party (Wali Group) did hold a working
committee meeting at Dacca on June 13, but it discussed the party
manifesto in view of the abolition of One Unit and faded away
from the political scene in East Pakistan*®. Khan Abdul Qayyoom
Khan criticised Mujib’s 6 Points during the election campaign and
occasionally said that "the Hindus formed the backbone of the ,
Awami League and that the Awami League was founded on the
hatred against West Pakistan. He was not too far wrong but what
he did not try to understand was the real reason for this growing
bitterness and frustration in the Bengali mind against their co-
citizens in the West.
The East Pakistan Muslim League stood for a strong Centre
but they were totally out of tune with the vast majority of the
Bengalis. The Muslim League had lost its appeal in East Pakistan
after it was totally defeated in 1954. Bengali nationalism had
pushed it in the background. The infighting between Monem
Khan and Sabur Khan and their subservient role in the Ayub Era,
had made them very unpopular in East Pakistan. None of the
factions of the Muslim League had any influence worth its name
in East Pakistan.

144
Tragedy of Errors
The Islam Pasand parties, of which the Jamaat-e-Islamj Wag
the most organised, concentrated on religion versus state Which
cut no ice in East Pakistan. The Jamaat was mainly a Weg
Pakistani party. There were hardly any political leaders in Ray
Pakistan who were members of this religiously oriented Party,
The only notable Bengali leader who joined the Jamaat-e-Islam;
was Professor Ghulam Azam - a second or third Stringer .
politician. All that the intelligence services could report about hig
political activities was "Professor Ghulam Azam (JI) addressed g
meeting at Dacca on June 2°. No mention was made of how
many attended and what had he to say.
The Bengali Muslims participated in the Pakistan movement
because they wanted to get rid of Hindu domination but having
achieved their goal they were more concerned with their economic
uplift and participation in their own affairs than in the
propagation of Islam as the unifying factor between the two wings.
The theocratic approach of the Jamaat-e-Islami had little appeal
to the liberal and secular minded intellectuals of East Pakistan
which included the highly volatile and militant students
community. the Jamaat-e-Islami in East Pakistan was devoid of
leadership. Maulana Maudoodi’s occasional visits to Dacca did
little to create a dent in the growing Bengali nationalist feeling
amongst the Muslims of East Pakistan. Instead of tackling serious
issues all that the Jamaat-e-Islami could come up with was
protesting against the playing of tombola in a local police hall"! A *
country’s integrity was at stake but Maudoodi could only see an
innocuoys departure from his interpretation of Islamic
injunctions. Air Marshal Nur Khan’s address to his party workers
at Kushtia on October 23, made no impact on the political scene in
East Pakistan.
Another reason why the rightist parties could not make any
headway in East Pakistan was because of a shortage of funds. Not
much could be generated from East Bengal and what was raised
in West Pakistan was confined to meeting the expenses for
campaigning in that wing alone. Khwaja Khairuddin, a cousin of
Khwaja Nazimuddin and a member of the Council Muslim
League, complained that Major General . chief of
the National Security © ajor General Ghulam Umar, chief ©
Abdul Qayyoom K * y , ouncil gave Rupees 40 lakhs to Khan
ul-Amin, Faud Ahmad th Rupees 5 lakhs each to him, Nut
, ad and to the Nizam-e-Islam Party°?,

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) M49
Maulana Abdul Hameed Khan Bhashani, the chief of the East
Pakistan National Awami Party, (pro-Péking), was initially
strongly opposed to Sheikh Mujib. He was against elections and
wanted the assured supply of food before anything else. He was
later willing to contest against the Awami League provided the
President would free his detained workers. This was not accepted
and Bhashani gradually changed his stance and moved away from
his demand of provincial autonomy He later declared that the
Lahore Resolution envisaged two states and, therefore, the
eastern wing should become an independent state®3,
Khwaja Khairuddin, Abdul Qasim, Ata-ul-Haq and Shafi-ul-
Azam of the Council Muslim League did criticise the six points of
Mujib and praised the Legal Framework Order but they were all
discredited East Pakistani politicians who, neither had the energy,
nor the funds, nor the political acumen to sway the crowds away
from the demand of total autonomy which was being openly
preached by Mujib and his supporters.
The other political party which claimed to be a national party,
but had only a feable voice in East Pakistan, was the Pakistan
Democratic Party (PDP). Nurul Amin, a Bengali politician, but
discredited in East Pakistan, was its president with Abdus Salam
as the president of its eastern wing. Mahmood Ali, who migrated
to West Pakistan after the creation of Bangladesh, was its vice
president. None of them had any significant say in the politics in
East Pakistan. The PDP public meetings were often disturbed by
the Awami League workers who shouted anti-party slogans, broke
chairs and took away the microphones:**. The followers of the
PDP were not large enough to resist and quietly acquiesced.
Mahmood Ali recalls that he was ’gheraoed’ (surrounded) by a
large number of Awami League workers in Dacca who were
forcing him to sign a piece of paper withdrawing his anti-Mujib
statements which he had made earlier. He was also compelled to
come to the microphone and read that out for the information of
the public. Mahmood Ali did utilise the platform so provided to air
his own political views as well”.
He also mentioned about their unfair election tactics of
Spreading false information. Twenty-four hours before the election
day the Awami League workers in the Sonaganj constituency of
Sylhet district spread a rumour that Mahmood Ali had withdrawn

146
Tragedy of Errors
from the election contest. By the time the news was contraqj,
the elections were over and Mahmood Ali’s cousin, an Ava
Leaguer won hands down. : |
President Yahya and the Martial law authorities had giy,
complete freedom to the political leaders to say what they lik
during their election campaigning. He did appear to adopt a gq
attitude towards Mujib so as not to hinder the political proces.
This, however, made Mujib bolder and more assertive and },:
slowly converted the elections into a referendum for his 6 Points \
The LFO was disregarded, loud statements which clearly violate \
its contents were allowed to be made. The military junta was not _
inclined to take any action which might give an impression to the
outside world that they were interfering in the election campaign,
A noble thought indeed. In well established democracies and
where the territorial integrity of the country is not threatened
from within, such complete freedom would be considered
normal. ERutever, in newly emerged states, where national
cohesion is yet to take place, certain curbs are absolutely
necessary to maintain the solidarity of a country.
Governor Vice Admiral S. M. Ahsan and Commander Eastern
Command, Lieutenant General Sahibzada Yaqub Khan were not
strong enough nor were they directed specifically to prevent Mujib
from openly advocating his 6-Points formula which would at best
have led to a confederation between the two wings and at worst
total separation.
"No instructions were received from CMLA Headquarters to
prevent Mujib from speaking against Pakistan"®, said Major
General Khadim Hussein Raja, General Officer Commanding 4
Infantry Division sand one who was directly involved in martial
law duties. Even if instructions were given to the military
authorities in East Pakistan, they did not have the strength no!
the support of the Bengalis to stop Mujib from obtaining his
pound of flesh, by force if pseaeany:
General Raja Tintaned that tl + tially, was
wut thy Gereagon Ce z " . the Awami League, initia ys si
future constitution of P, —_ i e 6 - Points formula for
with President Y hk . akistan. Mujib had a tacit understandnt
fact not meani me Sout making fiery speeches in public butt |
t meaning to insist on his 6 - Points. "Yahya swallowed th _
theme" said Raja. But : “Yahya swalloy ;
hetould not ea hacen having made his promise to his vo™
E go back on what he had heen saying. |
|
|

| é
. Political Quagmire (Beginning of the Enq) oo
The army did not interfere ; ;
Although troops were earmarked io 4, “lectioneering process,
booths they kept their distance (no closer the” &* all election
8n 5 miles fy
polling’ booths) as they had been Positioned on} S from
serious disturbance occured57. Unfortunately th ame abe
so yery neutral that even when the pheeen Lea © army remained
tactics, both overtly and behind the Scenes ewe taal Pressure
~-Nietory those in uniform took No steps to ensure fairnes a ars
~ it was too late as any kind of Pressure would my = aps
greater animosity against West Pakistan. attracted
November 1970 Cyclone
At the height of the election campaign, when West Pakistan
(mainly Punjabis,) were being blamed for every ill in East
Pakistan ynature played its role in furthering the acrimony —
between the two wings. on November 12, 1970, less then a month
before the scheduled date of the elections, a devestating cyclone
struck the coastal areas of East Bengal. Howling winds upto 125
miles-per-hour lashed against the hundreds of little islands in the
deltaic region of Patuakali, and Chittagong. Twenty foot waves
crashed against the thatched houses pushing them and their
frightened inmates into the gushing salt waters of the Bay of
Bengal. The tornado, the worst in Bengal’s history, continued on Pon
its devastating path for over six merciless hours and when it
subsided Noakhali and the offshore islands of Bhola, Hatya,
Sandwip and the innumerable chores (small islands) in that area P
were under water. One hundred and twenty islands disappeared
and 2,000 square miles of territory lay battered. Nearly 500,000
men, women and childrefi lay dead, two and a half million were |
rendered homeless, property worth 4.5 billion dollars was :
destroyed,
Such a calamity would have taxed the organisational _
ingenuity and resources of even the most advance oes
Prosperous nation admitted the German newspaper ae aI
Professor Abdul Qayyoom, a Bengali intellectual from Noakhail,
Was also of the same view™®,
The Centre was slow to respond to the calamity at ae
Cccured in East Pakistan. No political leader from West ae ,
Visited the affected areas except for Bhutto sii pA
Welcome visitor. They were busy in their own election

148
Tragedy of Errors
in the West. President Yahya on his way back from Peking dij
stop-over for a night in Dacca. He flew over the flood affected are,
in a folker and promised all assistance and help to alleviate th,
suffering. But East Pakistan was a thousand miles away with
hostile country in between. Ferrying of supplies, helicopters, ang
sending of naval vessels was not easy. Only one army division (not
three as mentioned by many western writers) was located in Rag,
Pakistan then. There were only two (Mi 8) helicopters availabj,
and one plant protection PIA helicopter.
The army had been insulted, maligned and confined to the
barracks by the Awami League workers during their anti- West
Pakistan hatred campaign. Even then the soldiers did what ever
they could to locate the bodies and bury the dead. The Bengalis
did not give them any assistance in their own hour of need. "While
West Pakistani citizens collected donations for the cyclone affected
people of East Bengal, not one saree was donationed by the
Bengalis in Dacca" said/Major General Rao Farman Ali Khan, the
principal staff officer, civil affairs, in the government of East
Pakistan.
The rehabilitation commissioner was a Bengali official but he
displayed no great fervour and enthusiasm to get the goods
moving to the right places. Brigadier Iqbal Shafi, commanding a
brigade in Comilla, complained about East Pakistani politicians/
and district officials for not cooperating. According to General
Farman after the cyclone had taken its death toll of half a million
people not one man, woman or child died of hunger or disease.
on medical personnel worked round the clock to ensure that
the required medical aid reached the wounded and the sick®?, On
the contrary the Bengali themselves did little to alleviate the
sufferings of their people. Even Mujib did not go to Bhola, the
island which bore the main onslaught of the cyclone. He kept
sitting at Patuakhali miles away opined the General. Mujib
himself admits to visiting Barisal, Patuakhail and Khulna only:
-The Awami League workers did not go round collecting funds,
country craft, clothes, medicines for the flood affected victims
Mujib was controlling the entire East Pakistan. If he wanted bé
could have organised a massive relief operation indigenously. But
he preferred to stay aloof and blame the government, so that he
/ could capitalise on this tragedy by maligning the Pakistan armed
| forces and the Pakistan government.

