Role of Other Countries 321
ted time to /
Council and wanted test the wa Y
siunge into international politics. The Him ; efore taking the
slready been blocked by heavy snowfalls alayan passes had
At the military meeting between the oh;
; e
which took place in the war room oe the armed forces
indicated by means of maps, showing the rae authorities
forces around China. They, according to there Cyment of Soviet
were not only heavily outnumbered but “tke r military experts,
sophisticated weapon systems. Their ad > Were outmatched in
enlarge the conflict. "keep it confined to Rae 2 was also not” to
final comment. (The Chinese ambassador in ey ik
ing Presi maba
telling President Yahya not to open the western front) also kept
The Chinese did give some mili |
: mil : ;
MiGs, hydrofoils and gun boats to ieee including
satisfying was that they did give some a what was more
West Pakistan?2. ome assurance of the security of
Mr. Chi-Peng-Fei- acti 54
Aaa Baas oes eine wainese foreign minister, did say that
government and jected to, foreign aggression », the
aes nt and people of China will resolutely support them in!
ere ae struggle to defend their state sovereignty and naititinal| v
epe i : ; ; \
for vcully = ad not mince his words in condemning India
carryin = - erfering in Pakistan's internal affairs and for
Pakistan " subversive activities and military threats against
Mr. Ch y ng to exploit the situation in East Pakistan”.
sree, mig supported his acting foreign minister’s
movement hile accepting the agitation as a secessionist
they Would no stage, however, did the Chinese indicate that
tide of Pas a engaged in a military conflict with India on the
1stan. -
Th al
betwee. Kept on emphasising on the need of setting disputes
foree. States through consultations and not by resorting to
At —_ ;
Chinese banquet given for the Pakistani delegation by the
People ‘oreign minister, he said "The Chinese government and
and len as always, resolutely support the Pakistan government
and y Z ein their just struggle to defend their state sovereignty
reflect the S independence"*’. Banquet speeches do not always
Neto. he agreements which leaders may have made during their
One talks held in camera. But those who accompanied Mr.

322 | Tragedy of Errors |
that at no occasion did Mr. Chou-En-Laj —
Se ave ieadel promise to intervene een in an tae
Pakistan conflict. Mr. Bhutto, also did not = Ae i specific tary
but the impression created amongst pd sea at = was that
China would pose a positive threat to India i ; actn ly attackeq
East Pakistan. Both the leaders said at the end of the three days
parleys that they were satisfied with the outcome of the talks -
diplomatic statement which could be construed in any way one
likes.
The PPP Chairman, who never accepted defeat, made a vague
public statement on his return from the Chinese capital saying
that China had assured Pakistan of its support in the everit of an
_ Indian attack which could have meant anything. He did not,
however, specify as to what kind of support, moral, political or
physical Mr. Chou-En-Lai had spoken about. He went on to say
"results of this meeting should be a deterrent to aggression”,
Sultan Muhammad Khan, who was present when Bhutto briefed
President Yahya about his visit to China, stated in a written reply
to the author’s query that General Yahya was told quite clearly
that China would not intervene militarily in an Indo-Pakistan
conflict".
At a dedication ceremony in the Heavy Mechanical Complex
near Taxila (Pakistan) in November. Li Shin Ching, the first
minister of machine building, released a boxful of doves sending a
ee of ss not war to General Yahya who was present at
e ceremony*?,
Daehn Sipe did keep India looking backwards. On
saying that eine Daily in its editorial warned India by
country nei sherani 5 — in East Pakistan was followed a
fuidepéndont Went a nda could netid troops to create an
Indian military siete or a Sikhistan**, In response to this the
look out and puss . in Kathmandu was asked to be on the
Tibet. ny Chinese troop movements southwards 12
Althou i
nda frereting the ein Say as stand and ane
internal affairs of a neighbouring Pakistan by ‘ ananageot ow
about China’s negative restionise = country India came to ant
its intelligence agencies more rt Indo-Pakistan War renee
rately than the Pakist@!

Role of Other Countries 323
oa ‘s. Dr. Kissinger’ —
tary planners Ser's warnin t ‘
“4 ummer of 1971 that China wy ae indian leaders in
the § a Ould enter the confi
therefore, lost its impact. nilict,
R
4 Lf, , ehta.%,
On November 23, 1971 when Indian for @ po OS
- Bast” Pakistan « Mr. fuss orces were operating
inside pe ; ang Hua, the permanent
representative of the People’s Republic of Chi =
t Henry Kissinger at ide ote oe the United __,
Nations mé id ber At a secret hide outin New YorkyHe “-“
is reported to have told Kissinger’ gn Seéing the tes
resolution to be placed before the security council’)that cuss
would support Pakistan in the Security Council but would follow
Pakistan’s lead as to whether to take the issue there or not 3
During the debates in the Security Council on how to end the |
hostilities between India and Pakistan, China kept on insisting
that foreign troops must withdraw from each other’s territory. "If
ceasefire in situ is accepted git would mean rewarding the |
aggressor” said Huang Hua to Aissinger. "We should not give up
the principle of Indian withdrawal prior to negotiations” he
continued saying as late as December 10, 1971, when it was
becoming evident that Eastern Command would not be able to
resist the Indian invasion for too long and it would be a matter of
days when they would be giving up their resistance against far
superior forces. Huang Hua was, according to Kissinger
‘concerned that if a precedent is set,other countries may also be
dismembered by an Indo-Soviet collusion".
China continued to put the entire responsibility of the war on
India. In an article published in the Peking’s People’s Daily on
December 6, the author made a scathing attack on the Indian
government blaming them for "supporting the secessionist in
Pakistan by every meansyand for grossly interfering in Pakistan’s |
Internal affairs", The article went on to say: India cooked up a so- |
‘alled provisional government of Bangladesh on its own weg |
nd sent so-called freedom fighters into East — 0 4
Petpetuate armed harassment and subversion. Now throug jopen
om invasion it is trying to achieve its long planned aim to annex
ast Pakistan”
tis sume; as fact that the Chinese leaders
had mn 'rprising that in spite of the fa aid nob he iia position
ade it abundantly clear that they wo ~ 11. igekres
0 Dose - ia, Yahya, on December 11, 1s
bu a military threat to India, nas hat help was ‘on the
‘Potted to have confided to Nur-ul-Amin that help
,

324 Tragedy of Errors |
way and that the Chinese army would mee ane te North
East Frontier Agency on Indias border * at urs™. General
Gul Hasan speaking in Pushto to the ee or In Eastern
Command Headquarters convey at Ow ee,
Lieutenant General Niazi. "The whites and yellows are coming’
said Gul Hasan. According to him he did so on orders of Genergi/
Abdul Hamid the then chief ofstaff. These utterances were
apparently meant to keep up cee = - = eves i Bast
istan; but any army’s mor alse
vtatemetts, Credibility is soon lost when lies are exposed.
Even as late as December 16, when Eastern Command had
surrendered in East Pakistangthe Chinese government continued
to attack the Indian leaderstip and accused the Indian forces of
"most brutal atrocities”. It referred to India as an expansionist
power which still cherished the dream of a greater Indian empire,
. "They want not only to swallow East Pakistan but also to destroy
Pakistan as a whole. If a timely stop is not put to such aggression
committed by the Indian government » other countries,
neighbouring on India, will also be endangered" , stated the
Chinese in their hard hitting statement directed not only at India
but also towards the Soviet Union which,they blamed for building
up India and turning it into a superpower on the South Asian
subcontinent®!, Mr. Chou-En-Lai also accused India of massacring
the people of East Pakistan.
In a note to the Security Council on December 16, the Chinese
government alleged that Indian armed personnel had crossed the
Sikkim border into Chinese territory on December 10, and
demanded that India should immediately stop its intrusion. This
veiled threat to India was meant to prevent them from attempting
to occupy Azad Kashmir and continuing the war on the western
front,in the hope of destroying the Pakistan army in West
Pakistan as well. Although China could not prevent the break up
be Phe ap certainly played a significant role in checking
at the manta te te unten
nent. China’s close ties
Pakistan can also be judged from the fact that China vetoed
Bangladesh S application for membership to UN. The late Chou-
En-Lai told a military delegation headed by General Tikka Kha?
in February, 1973 that China would not r ‘se Bangladesh till
Pakistan did so. (The author je ee
was a member of the delegation).

Role of Other Countries 325
united Kingdom
itially the government of the United K;
ie aul in East Pakistan as an intern g 0% consider the
However, after the military crackdown ang the in ae of Pakistan,
of refugees into nad the statement of Mr. Edward He ri Sane
Alec Douglas Hume began to be more in favour : ath and Sir
pakistan. They began to applaud New Delhi for sho of India than
in view of the growing provocation by Pakistan Sa o sesttaint
the least, most unfortunate ag jt was India wii i #S"was, to say
supporting the Mukti Bahini and launching ite "@® brazenly
Pakistan: M Inside East
UK further applied pressure on Pakistan .
fresh aid and blamed the Pakistan army for a
but made no mention of the subversive activities of the Bengali
guerrillas. The British press became -€xtremely hostile to the: |
military leadership in Pakistan.
England allowed the Setting up of a high commission for _,
Bangladesh, on its territory much before a country of this name
came into existence. Numerous Bangladesh offices were opened
up in London and other British cities by the East Pakistani
community living in England during 1971. British Labour Party
was pressing the British government to urge President Yahya to
telease Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman. It, however, also urged
Pakistan to bring the East Pakistan issue to the United Nations as
it constituted a threat to peace.
Tran
The Shahanshah of Iran was not happy about the terms whteh
Rast Pakistan were imposing on West Pakistan. aaa te
lranian Foreign Minister, Zahedi "the Shah felt that : ae b
Pakistan Separated they would get into such economic tent : e oo
Political storm that they would ruin thelr province ™’.
Shahanshah y t General Yahya and President
Poon. made an effort to get hove that some kind of a
sorny to meet with each other in the hop the Bais Pakistan
wally accepted formula for the Age ring of the heads of
“S could be worked out, He chose the ga her, 1971 to join the
thin of several countries at ig a anniversary of the
Pes monarch in celebrating the h had been erected in the
ms sian empire. The tented | city whic ene of an agreement
“ent capital could have been the sc

a Tragedy of Errors
between Pakistan and the Soviet Union on a peaceful settlement
of the problem in East Pakistan. T he Soviets were the only ones
who could apply pressure on India to desist from dismembering
Pakistan, but alas 'General Yahya, it 1s believed, did not take the
meeting seriously and paid little attention to the role that the
Soviets could play in avoiding a war with India.
The Muslim Ummah
In spite of the expectations of a certain segment of the society
in Pakistan, none of the Muslim countries gave any substantial
support to Pakistan in its hour of need. The internal situation had
deteriorated to such an extent that even believers of the same God
did not feel it prudent to burn their fingers in the flames which
were engulfing East Pakistan.
A country should only expect support from its friends if either,
their national interest is at stake, or the aggressor is a common
enemy. In both cases internal harmony and cohesion within the
_ country remains the bottom line.

Role of Other Countries 327
Notes
derson, Jack, The Anderson Papers, Rand .
, ue °m House, New York, 1973, p.
cre am 2114, dated April :
» Top Secret telegram 2114, dated April 29, 19
mbassad0r of Pakistan in W ashington addres Mr. Agha Hilaly,
Muhammad Yahya Khan. “we to General Agha
» Kissinger, Henry, S. (Dr), White House Years, Lj
e USA, 1979, p. 856. ‘ittle Brown and Co, Boston,
Wilcox, W., The Emergence of Bangladesh, Americ: . ;
: Public Policy Research, Washington, D.C., 1973p 3 Enterprise, Institute of :
;,_ Ibid.
Sse Kissinger, p. 856.
7. Ibid.
§. Taken from General Yahya's personal papers.
9, Kissinger, p. 848.
10, es General Yahya’s :orsonal notes made at Nathiagali, dated July |
Ml. Kissinger, p. 867.
12. Ibid, p. 868.
13. Ibid.
AA. Ibid, p. 872.
16. Ibid, p. 875.
16. Anderson, p. 222.
(1. Kissinger, p. 877.
18. Thid, p. 890.
8. Anderson, p. 238,
_ 20, Wilcox, p. 53.
; ; “4 t of Cooperation
21. No 1726 United States of America and Pakistan, ee atone Treaty Series
‘gned at Ankara on March 5, 1969, p. 286, United Nati
1959. (Courtesy Fateh Ali Choudhry). ss
29. : _ 15-20, Decem “9,
10k Sabha Debates, Government of Indie, V9 Nos. 1
“fl, p. 195.
128 Kece: = 1972. p. 25069.
; Kessings Contemporary Archives, Tebruary 5, 1972, P
Ad, Kiss}“inger, p. 901,
05 - P ] see7 1, pe. 117, 188. Report of the
: Document S/10466 dated December 21, l tion of General Assembly
picretary General concerning the imp ome alution.
“Solution 2790 (KXVI) and Security Council Res
i

328 Tragedy of Errors
96, Nayar, Kuldip, Distant Neighbours, Vikas Publishing House, New Deyyi,
182. . . ;
a. nerve Venkata ty of Ear ae
government of India.
28. Anderson, 225.
29. Kissinger, p. 907.
30. Wilcox, p. 53.
~ 31. Ibid, p. 33.
32. Jackson Report, South Asian Crisis, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Chatto
~ and Windus, London, 1975, p. 39.
3, Sisson, Band Leo, E, Ras, War and Session, Pitan aia and te
p. 243.
A. Kissinger, p. 891.
35. Anderson, p. 261.
36. Anderson, p. 262.
wo Ali, Tariq, Pakistan’s Military R ule or Peoples Power can Pakistan Survive,
Penguin Books, Chaucer Press, Suffolk, UK, 1983, p. 77.
38. Phadnis, Urmila, Ethnicity and Nation Building in South Asia. Saga
Publications, New Delhi, 1989, p. 216.
39. Lifshultz, Lawrence, Bangladesh - The Unfinished Revolution, Zed Press,
London, 1979, p. 24.
40. Taken from General Yahya’s personal notes.
3 41. Interview, Rear Admiral Rashid Ahmad and Dr. M. A. Bhatty.
42. Ibid.
43. Pakistan Times, November & 1971.
44. Letter from the then foreign secretary of Pakistan, Sultan Muhammad
| Khan, dated August 28, 1992.
45. Pakistan Times, November 8, 1971.
” 46. Letter from Sultan Muhammad Khan.
47. Time Magazine, December 6, 1971, p. 13.
7 48. Anderson, p. 247.
49. Ibid, p. 247, 248,
50. Special Edition of the Urdu Weekly Magazine, Hurmat, pp. 145, 146.
51. Kissinger, January 29 - February 5, 1972, p. 25073.
52. Letter from Agha Hilaly to President Yahya dated February, 1971.

Role of Other Countries 329
<4 i
ars! THt Seven We bat Zi97/
Th. H, Poviat ga
mee Md: sien
sa i cele Cobden ime
Gar. tential an%l
Vaeptin pects J Chere
ha bx es - a ¢. a
he ASH and He PHE Uni
Aree Here tae Dae rrr. anekinl
KR eed firth eytin
POT |heetom oe — Ch. =
Dotita fr Cher, .
to
I Kin wher wert o—
-{ =o eas a
ara
~~ we na Big ees
wach gm pig OT
PERSONAL LE r .
RICHARD NIXON TO CENERAL A, M YAYA
KHAN IN HIS OWN HANDWRITING.

330 Tragedy of Errors
Hl
; —_ — ese Se ‘ i
= i ee ae oneal bat le co ag
ee a
be re ; os
ea weg ee 4589
} AA 7k ia S St ~ete
3 BD 2 ria 0 He
GOVERNMENT HOUSE, DACCA.
penny Prtsvecss
Poy | |
hs. __ wall
a ee
Bry: aes . a g i
if E F - | d
* * .* ae q
ay 3 | =o pe)
, = i 5 map
rae ¥ i Nana
iT] ; , =
H | —— = Be 2 oS aay he ¢ \ = Bd
4 P re 1 . en, =f
$ Cn egy : ; \ 2 q ,
Bre NEE peg Sane
~g ae a ke oe
SHAHEED MINAR, DACCA
TO COMMERATE THOSE WHO DIED
IN THE LANGUAGE RIOTS.

