250
Tragedy of Errors
By 4 a.m. a deathly silence descended on the once humming
university campus. The official casualty in the military action jn
the university area that night was 66 Bengali extremists’ dead, 31
injured, 4 army jawans lost their lives defending the territory; al
integrity of Pakistan against its own citizens. General Arbab put
the figure as 167 killed. He accepted that it was an over reaction
and over kill by the troops under his command!®,
Prof. Talugador Kumruz Zaman of the Dacca University
| sitting in his non-descript apartment in the University campus
described vividly the events of the night of 25/26 March, 1971 to
the author. According to him he could hear "a lot of firing", His
estimate of casualties ran in several hundreds. On being asked to
name some of the intellectuals who were killed in the action by
the army he recounted those of Mofussil Hyder Choudhry,
professor of Bengali; J. C. Deh, professor of philosophy;
Surajuddin Hussein, professor of music, Jagannath, professor of
English. Independent sources claimed 500 casualties that night,
Major Safiullah called it the bloodiest operation in which
thousands were killed'®. Arbab’s soldiers had been taunted,
insulted, spat at for the last one month. They took their ‘revenge’
in full measure. The militant student leaders had termed the
Pakistan army as ‘alien forces’. They behaved as such on that
fateful night and many nights thereafter creating a permanent
chasm between themselves and their people in East Pakistan.
32 Punjab, the second battalion under Arbab, cleared the
police lines in Dacca. Their attempt to disarm them was only
partly successful as the Bengali policeman succeeded in carrying
away a number of weapons.
Tikka Khan, always an early riser, was up at 4.30 am on March
26. He heard the Azan as he proceeded to the martial law
headquarters at the national assembly building in the second
capital to check the results of the military action. On the way he
a ay tall Bangladesh flags had disappeared and Pakistan flags
ea ape wi lee ath pn os
lites dee vt wine en ad atleast temporarily subsided. =
all Mary action in Dacca and its surrounding 4!
a eae que a not strike him that the result achieved oi
Ane se “. - and that no Bengali had changed his support to
gue. Infact the hatred had increased.

Military Action 251
EAST BENGAL REGIMENTS REBEL
1 East Bengal Regiment
1 East Bengal Regiment commanded } |
a Bengali Officer, was at Jessore 30 miles from ae » |
It got engaged in a pitched battle with elements of 107 eum; r |
commanded by Brigadier S. A. R. Durrani. On March 29 i? .
the commanding officer of 1 East Bengal was informed 7 sie
brigade commander that his battalion was to be disarmed he got |
furious. "It is an insult, this means that | am not being trusted" |
retorted Raza-ul-Jalil. A compromise solution was worked out. It :
was mutually agreed that the weapons would be deposited in the
kotes (armoury) and the keys handed over to the brigade
commander. The next day when Brig. Durrani came to collect the i
keys CO 1 East Bengal tore off his badges of rank and along with |
the keys threw them on the ground in front of his brigade
commander. Simultaneously 1 East Bengal opened fire on 22 and
25 Baloch which had accompanied the brigadier to forestall any
resistance. The two West Pakistani manned battalions replied in
kind. Two guns of 55 Field Regiment were ordered to fire directly
into the quarterguard of 1 East Bengal.
+1 East Bengal retreated into the area of the ranges. A full scale
attack by two infantry battalions supported by a field regiment
was mounted against 1 East Bengal at about 4 p.m. that same day.
The East Bengal regiment was finally overpowered and 130
Bengali soldiers were ‘captured’. |
|
2 East Bengal Regiment
2 East Bengal Regiment located at the old palace at Joy “
had been split into companies and platoon. A comp gi ” thind
Tangail, another at Mymensingh, one platoon v u - It’s
"ompany was at Rajenderpur and one platoon at Ghazipur.
task Was to enforce law and order.
The battalion was commanded by Lt. Col. garam
Khan an officer hailing from East Pakistan. the °
ali officer.
‘ommand was Major K. M. Safiullah, also a Beng
- March 1, (when the
Safiullah, recalls with pride that aftet he no longer felt
National assembly session had been postponed) He decided
Obliged ‘ t Pakistan officers. te
. 8€d to remain loyal to the Wes ‘ted orders from Sheikh
“UPPort. the Awami-League and awaite

252 Tragedy of Errors
narrate that after that date
Mujib-ur-Rahman””, He goes io _- the movement of he
1 began to secretly J
East Bengal bega he city hoisted black flags on Pakistan’,
cooperation. When the IIs that in his heart of hearts he was no
national day Safiullah reca ae flags on a day whet le isa’ ,
opposed to the fluttering © 4 star on his housetop?".
proudly display the crescent an | sine oft
On March 27, Major Safiullah told his commanding officer ‘We
“ch Mujib-ur-Rahman you may go away jf
intend to go over to Sheikh Mu) sa
e most welcome to join us. We can even tie yoy
nd Nerd gon in one room to give the impression that you were
nee oart of the mutiny. Lt. Col. Raquib, who had taken over from
Lt. Col. Masaudul Hasan, left the unit quietly as disloyalty was
not what he had been trained for. He was heard of no more.
Safiullah concentrated 2 East Bengal in Mymensingh and took
an oath of allegiance to Sheikh Mujib from his troops. He
broadcast a message on his regimental frequency to all those who
may have been listening. "I, major Safiullah of the East Bengal
Regiment, have taken up arms against the Pakistan army. If you
are a Bengali, wherever you are, take up arms with whatever you
have against the Pakistanis and begin an armed resistance to
liberate your country from the colonial fetters of Pakistan". He
sent Captain Aziz-ur-Rahman to Haluaghat to establish contact
with the Indian Border Security Force. Aziz met the commandant
of the BSF while Safiullah met Capt. Baljeet and Lt. Col. Sinha of
the Indian intelligence. The response, says Safiullah, to his
request was favourable. 2 East Bengal was joined by three retired
officers. Major Qazi Noor-uz-Zaman (2nd IMA course) Captain
Mati-ur-Rahman and Captain Abdul Mateen, Safiullah claims
that he was able to organise a force of 3,000 with eight officers
including Captain Sehgal who had defected from the army
aviation squadron,
2 East Bengal began to ambush the Pakistan army around
| Fenpnaingh ana in the vicinity of the Mahdopur forests which
most important one be mi Ce; They blew up bridges YY
river Ganges, Th ing the Ranipur railway bridge across the
Rajshahi virta 7 © Unit later moved across to India throug!
Sand a fom 2 East Bengal had 4 West Pakistatl
officers and a few West Pakistani soldi e ‘led
by Safiullah’s men? Oldiers. All of them were ki

Military Action 253
3 East Bengal Regiment
3 East Bengal was stationed at Saidpur along with 26 Frontier
Force Regiment and 23 Field Regiment Artille; it?
ag , 'Y- The city and it’s
surrounding villages had a very large Urdy speakin lat;
Biharis whose interest lay in g United Pakistan. seen
At 10 p.m. that night Dr. Manzoor Alam, a respectable citizen
of Saidpur, Tang up Lt. Col. Muhammad Shafi, commanding
officer of 23 Field Regiment and the local martial law
administrator, and told him about an impending attack on
Saidpur by the Awami League volunteers, Shafi sent out some of
his troops Who found large crowds converging on to Saidpur.
When a warning to them to disperse went unheeded and a brave
young Bengali bared his chest and dropped his Tahband (a cloth
worn around one’s waist) in defiance a few shots were fired in the
air. The crowd still surged forward. Fire foy effect was ordered and
one amongst the agitators was killed. The rest melted away, but
the atmosphere had become charged. The local deputy
commissioner, a Bengali gentleman, whose sympathy lay with the
crowd, was annoyed at Colonel Shafi for calling out the troops, |
without being asked to do so by a civilian official.
To avoid being confronted by his own battalion in view of the
political developments which were fast coming to a head, Lt. Col.
Manzoor Ahmad, a West Pakistani commanding officer of 3 East
Bengal Regiment, sent his subunits out in different directions for
collective winter training.
A company was dispatched to Dinajpur, 30 miles to the south-
West and another company to Bogra, 50 miles to the south-east.
The battalion headquarters and two companies stayed in Saidpur.
23 Field was occupying Azam quarters a couple of ra
way from 3 East Bengal. Shafi was given the task oe
East Bengal elements. Two units of the same army’ clashe Ae
April 1. After a short and bitter action in which guns were een 4
Tanges of only 800 yards men of 3 East Bengal were — i
40 to 50 of them were taken ‘prisoners’. Others 10 ed away
theiy Weapons to Parbatipur, a railway vn ae Remnants
leavin eis FF suffered eight casualties. '
8 behind 69 dead. 26 ipur remained entrenched
of3 East Bengal who had fled to Parbatipur
there.

254 . ‘
Tragedy of Errors
Two companies of 26 FF finally cleared Parbatipur but could
not prevent the remnants of 3 East Bengal from fleeing ~*
Dinajpur where they amalgamated themselves with the;
comrades in that town.
The company of 3 East Bengal at Dinajpur joined hands with
the wing of East Pakistan Rifles and the two together took over
Dinajpur. They massacred the West Pakistan! officers and men
including the commanding officer and his second-in-command,
Later 26 FF supported by a battery of 23 Field had to mount a
major operation to retake Dinajpur from the rebels. When Shafi
entered Dinajpur he saw both banks of the Kanchan river littered
with thousands of bloated dead bodies. The non-Bengalis in
Dinajpur had ben butchered mercilessly. Aslam Azhar from
Pakistan television who was accompanying Brigadier Abdullah
Malik and Colonel Shafi recorded the massacre on his TV
cameras. Dinajpur was cleared within a day.
93 Field Regiment was also responsible for clearing Rangpur,
and Bogra areas (northern East Bengal). The regiment moved out
in sections without guns on night 25/26 March in three different
directions. They came across road blocks established by felling
trees. The obstacles were, however, not covered by fire and so
- were not difficult to remove. The area of Rangpur was cleared
without much resistance from the Bengali elements who had
rebelled.
The task given to 23 Field was to ‘liberate’ Bogra, arrest all
MNAs and MPAs there, take over the administration, disarm the
3 Kast Bengal and EPR elements in Bogra and defend the
ammunition dump against any sabotage attempts.
. When 23 Field Regiment troops reached the outskirts of the
city, they found the gates to the railway crossing locked. They
‘aigla | r by the rebel group of the East Pakistan Rifles wh?
\ a evolte and taken over the ammunition dump at Bost
ements of 23 Field already in Bogra were in danger of being
surrounded by hostile elements., Reinforcements were asked for
which were dispatched al vay ;
patched along with a section of guns.
A fire fight soon devel . the
company of 3 East Bengal ee vetween the aoe ae
The regiment as a last resort h a B BOnses i ie built-up flus!
out the thitincers, It was ad to resort to artillery fire to as
an open fight between the secessio™®

Military Action 255
and the leyalst. (Lieutenants Quddoos, Salaam and Alauddin, all
Bengali officers of 23 Field Regiment, dig
é ; » Cid not defect and stayed
with the unit). Bogra was eventually Cleared by the end of April
put not before hundreds of lives were lost including ¢; ili , he
were caught in the cross fire23 6 civilians who
Further north at Thakurgaon the E . .
mutinied and killed their West Pakistani cumitindiay eee
Bengali elements of 29 Cavalry at Ran ur, h ics
weapons without resistance. me owever gave up their
4 East Bengal Regiment
4 East Bengal Regiment at Brahamanbaria (Comilla)
commanded by Lt. Col. Khizar Hayat from West Pakistan could
not be disarmed. ‘It’s second-in-command, Major Khalid
Musharraf, placed his West Pakistani officers including his
commanding officer under arrest and moved his battalion across
to Agartala, in India, intact"24.
8 East Bengal Regiment
8 East Bengal Regiment, commanded by Lt. Col; Abdur
Rasheed Janjua, of number 8 platoon, 9th PMA course, was in
Chittagong. He sent his second-in-command, Major Zia-ur-
Rahman to the port to oversee the unloading of a ship from West
Pakistan, Zia, however, did not go to the port and soon returned
back. It was still dark when Zia woke up his CO and took him into
custody. Janjua was soon, thereafter, shot dead by his own
batman,
Major Zia-ur-Rahman was the first Bengali officer to declare
the independence of Bangladesh. A day after the Pakistan army
“ommenced their operation to disarm the Bengali units Zia ie
an announcement in the early hours of March 26, on radio
Chittagong in which he declared himself as the eat
Bangladesh and said that he was fighting against the Pakis *
army. At 2.30 p.m. on March 27, he made a gag
from the Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra —_ oebliched ct
Bengal), a clandestine radio station which he had e
Kalurghat near Cox’s Bazaar. ini
He announced the independence of Bangladesh oh he
Sheikh Muithony ade himself the provis
Mujib-ur-Rahman and m cnaeation army: He
“ommander-in-chief of the Bangladesh libera

256 Tragedy of Errors
. f the East B
eo ; yiots that personnel 9) eh
informe all bis compa gs andthe police have sutoun ie
nt, ar ae
nd West Pakistani troops and heavy fighting 1S continuing in
everal cities. He appealed to all governments to mobilise public
, inion against the so-called prutal genocide 1n Bangladesh”. Hig
oe station claimed imaginary victories Over the he tgs army
which was picked up by All India Radio, BBC and radio Australia
and re-broadcast to the world.
Major Zia put up the maximum resistance as Chittagong had a
very large number of Bengali troops at the East Bengal
Regimental Centre and with the East Pakistan Rifles. 20 Baloch,
the only West Pakistani battalion in Chittagong was heavily
outnumbered (20 to 1).
Troops available to suppress the insurgency in Chittagong
were : HQ 53 Brigade at Comilla: (Brig. Iqbal Shafi), 24 FF located
at Comilla (Lt Col Shahpur Khan); 20 Baloch located at
Chittagong (Lt Col AH. Fatimi); and 53 Field Regiment (Lt Col
Yaqub Malik).
25 FF which had arrived from Karachi on March 26, was flown
to Chittagong the same night to reinforce 20 Baloch. Brigadier
M.H. Ansari, the Log Area Commander at Chittagong, was asked
to assume command of all troops in the Chittagong area, till
relieved by Major General Khadim Hussain Raja who flew into
Chittagong along with Lieutenant Colonel Suleiman, CO 2
pore | Lee A company of 2 Commando Battalion was
move ittagong.
Brigadier Iqbal Shafi was ordered to move to Chittagong with
es ml ieee pressure on 20 Baloch. He left 53 Field Regiment
aie : ae and proceeded towards Chittagong. All went well
ed Kumera on the outskirts of Chittagong. A r0#4
block on March 28, established b
Regiment prevented his furth y 3 sonigany at8 Hae" Beng
company of 24 FF tried urther movement towards the city:
ambushed. Lt Col Shah bg out flank the road block but it was
| extricate those who h — r Khan, then led his second compaby to
just off the coast also nm en surrounded. A naval gun boat lying
Shahpur was killed. aN the battle. In the fire fight that ensued
to keep his country united er gallant officer had sacrificed his life

Military Action ani
Brigadier Iqbal Shafi then took over the command of 24 FF.
Lieutenant Colonel Suleiman was ordered to link up with 24 FF
which was trying to clear the road block a few miles vite At 1700
hours on March 29, Ghazi company of 2 Commando Battalion was
also ambushed by the rebels. Lieutenant Colonel Suleiman
Captain Sikander, Subedar Allah Din and i9 ORs were killed. By
March 29, the road block was cleared and Iqbal Shafi eathad iin
outskirts of Chittagong next day. He finally reached Chittagong on
March 31, and linked up with the garrison in that city25, On 1
April the East Pakistan Rifles headquarters in Chittagong was
captured. The same day the clandestine radio station was |
destroyed by an air strike. By 10 April, the river port of Chandpur, |
was cleared by 33 Baloch and 12 FF had secured the area of
Laksham.
8 East Bengal continued to give resistance around Chittagong |
till 11 April. A major skirmish took place at Kalurghat astride the
Karnaphuli river east of Chittagong. Zia occupied a ‘strategic’
railway crossing and ferry site. He deployed a company ahead of
the river to cause attrition on the Pakistan army while keeping his
three companies on the home side. A full scale battalion attack
had to be launched by 3 Commando Battalion to clear the
opposition.
Major Zia then moved his unit into the Chittagong hill tracts.
A company went to Rangamati, another to Kaptai and the third to
Cox’s Bazaar. Zia finally crossed over to India on 11 April to seek
assistance from his erstwhile enemies.
East Bengal Regimental Centre
East Bengal Regimental Centre (EBRC) was located also at
Nautanpura cantonment, 6 miles from Chittagong. It was
commanded by Brigadier Mazumdar, a Bengali officer. He had
under him 2,500 armed personnel nearly all of them Bengalis. |
These could pose a serious problem for the Pakistan army if they |
mutineed enmasse. Mazumdar had to be moved away tactfully. |
General Khadim Hussain Raja flew in a few days before -
military action and informed Mazumdar that he had been e .
There and without much ado he was whisked — me
‘'onel Shighri his second-in-command, took over the ¢ for 20
. the East Bengal Regimental Centre. This made peetingel -
on - ' to capture the kotes which was i ere killed while
asec April. Safiullah claims that 1,000 Beng
P at the centre26, |

ae Tragedy of Errors
10 East Bengal Regiment . .
vs ast Bengal Regiment rated in aces Te Msarmel ha
not before 10 lives were lost in an internecine connict.
East Pakistan Rifles
One thousand personnel at the East Pakistan Rifles
headquarters at Peelkhana, Dhaka, were disarmed without too
many casualties. .
Rajshahi came under the control of the rebels of the East
Pakistan Rifles immediately after the commencement of the
military action. Two companies of 25 Punjab, (Lt Col M.H. Malik),
located at Rajshahi was surrounded by the EPR. His two
companies had earlier been wiped out by the rebels. General
Tikka ordered Brigadier Arbab to re-establish the government’s
writ in Rajshahi which was the largest town in the western sector
of East Pakistan and was the centre of Awami League activities.
The. Rajshahi University was the focal point of all dissident
elements. Rajshahi was about 150 miles northwest of Dacca and
was separated from it by the Ganges and the Jamuna rivers each
several miles wide. It lay close to the Indo-Pakistan border. Three
separate columns advanced towards Rajshahi. The brigade
headquarters with a battalion plus two companies moved by road
on night between 7 and 8 April. Another column, battalion-strong,
went by boat. A third force was landed in Rajshahi by helicopters.
Arbab’s force was supported by 31 Field Regiment. In spite of
aca - on the way he found the bridges demolished and al
te tis _ mos country boats absent, Arbab continued his
rei pee ae fr
either side by 12 April?? ee a major ag
number of Bengalis fled to India, = s maatany Gperanon® fu
a algo: wich Seinal, Eek ia to the increasing nu”
developments in East Pakistan ia to capitalise on the trag!
A com
thereat and cold no deed eas eosin was i
locals. It was completely vt a f against the mass frenzy of i ‘
cleared by 13 FF on 15 April’, ped out. Kushtia was “event

Military Action a
More Troops Arrive
General Tikka Khan realised that he would heed more troops
to quell the insurgency. He sent an assessment of the situation to
headquarters CMLA and to General Headquarters and fectiontad
for reinforcements. These began to arrive from 1 April bateetih at
the rate of a battalion a day but they came without their heavy
weapons and without the support of their direct support artillery
This deficiency greatly affected their performance in the war
which was by now looming on the horizon. On the return flight
West Pakistani families were flown back. 9 Infantry Division and
16 Infantry Division reached East Pakistan by the first week of
April.
The areas of responsibility of the three incomplete division
present in East Pakistan from the second week of April were:- |
9 Infantry Division
HQ Comilla Maj Gen Shaukat Riza
Responsibility East of river Meghna
313 Brigade Sylhet Brig Iftikhar Rana
117 Brigade Comilla Brig Khushi Muhammad Khalid
53 Brigade Chittagong Brig Muhammad Iqbal Shafi.
14 Infantry Division
HQ Dacca Maj Gen M. Rahim Khan
Responsibility Mymensing-Dacca-Jessore Area’
27 Brigade Dacca Brig Noor Ahmad Hussein
\I7 Brigade © Mymensingh Brig Muhammad Atif
57 Brigade Dacca Brig Jahanzeb Arbab
107 Brigade Jessore Brig Muhammad Hayat
16 Infantry Division
HQ Nator Maj Gen Nazar Hussain.
Responsibility between rivers Jamuna and Ganges.
23 Brigade Rangpur Brig Abdullah Malik
34 Brigade Bogra-Nator Brig Mir Abdul Naim.
eee et at ee Sel Bee fon oe
" i. in clearing road blocks, flushing encle re
Bahini were operating, securing river ports an
hUnication centres ushing back rebels occupying strategic
hil tops a + ape santas ithout suffering casualties.
nd raid/rail junctions, not wi

