Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 401
‘ment was not possible leave alone Concentratj
eo nal artillery on vital defensive fiz, task ng the entire
qivision hed to a border S (DF tasks), A lone
qn was even Pussies 10 8 border outpost to hit the Ingj to
‘,artala Which could only cause some harassment to the wn of
iit happened the gun was Sverrun in the ye fi © enemy.
aa k but not before bear; Y Atst phase of the
,jemy's attack bu © Dearing the brunt of fire directed b
jn number one, havildar, Yasin, his layer Ikram and his .
viz. Their riddled bodies were still defending the gun ith shoe
mortal remains ahead of the infantry they were to Support, ™
The Indian IV Corps opened their main offensive on 28/29
ovember with a simultaneous thrust against 27 ang 313 Brigade
By 30 November elements of 57 Indian Infantry Division.
wmmanded by Major General B. F Gonzales managed to
penetrate the defensive Perimeter of 12 FF. The right forward
bmpanies were overrun and by 1 December the border Village of
angasagar Was in enemy hands but the left two companies were
sill intact holding on to Akhaura although 4 Guards Battalion
vere milling round in the rear of the town.
Qazi Majeed along with Lieutenant Colonel Yaqub Malik, his
artillery adviser, came forward and met Brigadier Saadullah in
Akhaura on 2 December. Both of them discussed the situation and
made their plans to occupy another position at Brahmanbaria
When holding of the forward defended localities became
Mitenable. 12 FR defied the enemy for six days before falling back
® Brahmanbaria on 5 December. A company of 12 FF held up 12
“put Battalion for three days from 2 December to 5 December
AKhaura4l. |
,, Ceneral Majeed claims that on 4 December when 2 fator,
, Under Pressure at Akhaura he told Comman . de along
Mand that if he wants he can withdraw the briga limb to
D 'h all its elements from Sylhet, which was out oh General
acca } ; " ‘ding to Majeed Gene
Nien ather than to Brahmanbaria. According to ted that Sylhet
— did Not approve of this suggestion and insis hile the
‘Ust b h , her stated that while y
: © held at all costs. Majeed further its seers
Te at By te river craft still to g
Dacca rahmanbaria they had adequa ital but he was not
Ben snd reinforce the garrison in the tern Command to that
Affect any Indication by headquarters Easte

402
Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre |
33 Baloch defending Kaska delayed the attackers till they Were
asked to withdraw and join 12 FF. Although the guns of 31 Fiely
Regiment had been re-deployed to support 12 FF and 33 Baloch in
their new locations, unfortunately the defensive Position at
Brahamanbaria could not be organised in time. When the hastily
prepared defences were threatened on 6 December, 27 Brigade fe}
back to Ashuganj on the eastern bank of the Meghna astride the
road/rail bridge.
_ The Indians made a frantic effort to encircle headquarters 14
Division and 27 Brigade before they crossed over to Bhairab Bazar
and to capture the all important bridge intact, but they could not
succeed, After holding the attackers at bay divisional tactical
headquarters and remnants of the brigade were safely on the
home bank of the Meghna on 9 December having destroyed a few
spans of the erstwhile life line. Just_before slipping away
Lieutenant Colonel Aftab (33 Baloch) counter-attacked the enemy
and captured eight enemy tanks. All the guns of 31 Field
Regiment and section of 53 Field Regiment managed to get across
the Meghna at night through improvised ferrying.
Commander Eastern Command, had by now realised the folly
of not keeping any troops in Dacca. He was now clutching at
straws. General Majeed received a panic call from General Niazi.
He wanted two companies to be sent to him immediately to
defend Dacca against an imminent attack. Majeed dispatched two
companies of 12 FF by river transport to Dacca on night between
. ane 7 December*”, They never reached their destination. Even if
toe latat it would have had no impact on the outcome. Too little
Pi rare Saadullah was organising the remnants of his
rigade at Bhairab Bazar to put up a last ditch battle, the ene
. : ae “ y -passed him totally. It was Sagat’s idea to helilift
withdrawal “= 7 S the Meghna and cut off 14 Divi
helicopters for thi acca. Aurora agreed and provided him 4
D pters for this pur pose, "The airlift began at 3.30 p. m. On
ecember and by next morning a ¢ , lion of 311 Indiaa
Brigade al g a complete battalion 0 the
P ari sient ong with a section of heavy mortars was on
stani side of the major water obstacle. On 10 December they
rested"4 said Aurora. Th 235 e. On and
finally two § rigs helilift was resumed the next day é
y two infantry battalion guppo
were air-landed betw 's along with some artillery
etween Bhairab Bazar and Narsingdi.

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre #8
General Aurora, mischeviously confided that he had not told
Manekshaw of the crossing of the Meghna on 10 December
pecause he was not sure that the forces Singh had sent across
would be able to hold on against a determined attack45. There was |
no attack on them. |
73 Indian Brigade along with guns, heavy weapons and |
vehicles were taken across in country boats at a crossing place |
between Bhairab Bazar and Narsingdi. The PT 76s tried to cross
on their own steam but had eventually to be towed to the bank. |
The crossing of the Meghna, more than three kilometres wide,
would have been an extremely difficult task against opposition.
; PAF aircraft and the regiment of artillery would have had a field :
day drowning most of the advancing motorised columns while on
the river. It, however, became a TEWT (Tutorial Exercise with
Troops) for IV Corps in the-absence of any unfriendly aircraft and
with no tanks or guns to obstruct their movement. Naib Subedar
Fateh Muhammad of 53 Field Regiment commanding a section of
105 mm (Pack) Howitzers, was the only lone gunner who fired
_ directly into the PT 76s while they were in the river, sinking some
| and forcing them to withdraw temporarilly. A journey by train
| during day light hours in enemy territory would normally be
unthinkable but with all the cards stacked in their favour Sagat
_ Singh’s troops were having a joy ride. |
By 14 December two Indian brigades established a bridgehead |
and put up a road block between Bharaib Bazar and Narsingdi to |
prevent 27 Brigade from moving towards Dacca. Bhairab Bazar
was kept under constant aerial bombardment and shelling.
_ Napalm bombs were also used mostly against the guns of 31 Field
| Regiment. There was nothing Majeed or Saadullah could do to
Prevent the enemy’s further advance towards Dacca as all river
craft had been destroyed, and the road blocked. General Niazi s
belated directive to Majeed to do something about the heli-landing
Went unanswered. On 12 December Narsingdi was secured by the
enemy and the road to the East Pakistan capital from the east lay
Open but progress on this front slowed down. East bank of the
lakhaya river was reached on 13 December. Enemy troops
‘tossed the river next day By 15 December/Indian 57 Mountain
| Division had closed in on Dacca from the east.
____ It took 57 Indian Division 10 days to reach the Meghna, a
distance of 32 kilometres from the border. The rate of advance
"

. an Tragedy of Errors
MAP 11
\? & 4 <
- O: te =
{ = cof 2)
neg ~ 2 & sog a
z; eje° Ke 7 ;
Ole SI. “> xX] at : ”
ct tke C nN «
| Oe a Ys 2 “Gi 3
<| his a Be >a
<| aloo ema WN, a =
me Ox) a = 2 » ° a
i = o < ‘ a 4 q m fa )
) ols wt ~ \# *¥ a Lor
<I] oj. \\ ~ 3 x = ia)
asian ~F-=% | Tv a. a
& he
S = ¥ oa “on
a (Xd. Me = a
© a z i" m x +
Z y " +
> Tp to] XIX fy 6 / wAG
eae Li3
A Seg a\ x A
mere 3 <, Sat >
AW, / 2 af
a a o * ro
4 » ti
fe  WN@8 eT fe
fz \ bY
a w 1 4, 4 .
w Sg | nite iA =
a 2 Fy P ‘ oo
N N & ANS 1 we 4s
sto" ashy z
S 9 Nae | § ip z
B\ Bs AQF 7S ay
a val x
- >
xX] 2 Eu \ oc z <
= 8a be = 2
on Ya
rs S29 < ¥ 5
us S58 5% = a z
SSe. en vB es
et ae "ee ae
ahs Ve ASS
voova sauvmo, NO .
go iggy SSN OZ ~vI9Vva
a

Indo-Pakistan War - 197) Eastern Theatre #0
peing 3 er ‘dive very light Opposition, General
Gonzales did not believe eneral Majeed when he was told that it
yas only one Pakistani brigade which was Opposing him. He is
reported to have asked Qazi Majeed where is your second brigade
which was fighting i, his area? Majeed in his slurring tone
replied "you look for it"**. There Was none. It was only 27 Brigade
that had delayed the whole of 57 Indian Division for over a week.
313 Brigade (Maulvi Bazaar - Sub Sector)
313 Brigade was being commanded by Brigadier Iftikhar Rana.
|" He too, like other formation commanders had only two regular
battalions. Two companies of the East Pakistan Frontier Corps, a
mortar battery and nine field guns made up his total brigade. (A
far cry from the required three infantry units, a field regiment (18
guns), a squadron of tanks and air support when needed).
He was responsible to defend a 640 kilometres frontage from
Munshiganj to Shamshernagar. 30 FF (Lieutenant Colonel Amir
Mukhtar) was covering the northern approach while 22 Baloch
(Lieutenant Colonel Yasin) was guarding the southern approach
leading to Maulvi Bazaar were his brigade headquarters was
located.
The Indians launched their attack against 313 Brigade on the
night of 28/29 November. The enemy, while containing the front
companies, moved another force in the rear of 30 FF and sat on
the road leading to Maulvi Bazaar from Shamshernagar. Rana
was lucky not to be trapped while he was going to visit his forward
battalion on the morning of 29 November. His escort jeep was
fred upon in an area which he thought was still in the hands a
his own troops. A hurried defensive position was organised to
Prevent the further advance of the enemy.
» Another Indian battalion resumed the ian ee A es
e >
leet 30 FF on 30 oh a in Indians all over the
bl servation artillery officer, ‘ve fire task on his
Cody place. He immediately called a defensive tre ae
°WN Position, Twenty seconds later the shells of his own gu ;
landed all ar kers being in the open, suffere
‘a ai! around him. The attacker Zamir, however, had to
'Y casualties and had to withdraw. eee position to
wittificg his own life in his brave attempt to deny di
the eng eae wed soon after, succeeded in
my. A third attack, which follo
&

406 Tragedy of Errors
over-running another company of 30 FF which Captain Khusro
had placed around Munshi Bazar a few kilometres in the rear of
Shamshernagar. Khusro died while doing his duty to his country,
After a day’s respite 30 FF came under attack again. On 1
December another company was attacked by a fresh enemy
battalion. The brave soldiers held on to their positions, in spite of
a heavy artillery bombardment. Company commander Ehsan and
his mortar troop’s observer Altaf were in the forward localities
moving about from trench to trench to keep up the morale of their
men. A mortar shell of the enemy cut the life span of these two
brave officers.
After stopping the enemy’s advance on the borders for four
days Rana concentrated his two battalions around Maulvi Bazar
on 3 December. The Indians in spite of their best efforts could not
dislodge them from there till the night of 8/9 December when the
brigade withdrew northwards to the Sherpur ferry, though the
GOC had ordered them to fall back to Bhairab Bazar and link up
with 27 Brigade which was operating south of 313 brigade. War
has it’s own momentum and plans cannot always be implemented
when there is a live enemy to disrupt them. On 11 December 313
Brigade, tired and weakened after thirteen days of continuous
fighting, reached Sylhet and joined 202 Brigade*’. There they
remained in comparative safety till the end of the war.
202 (Adhoc) Brigade (Sylhet Sub-Sector)
Sylhet tucked away in the northeast corner of East Bengal,
known for its terraced tea gardens and pineapple plantations, lies
only a few kilometres from the Indian border. It was the resting
place of the famous Muslim saint Hazrat Shah Jalal.
Brigadier Saleemullah, an artillery officer, who had spent his
early days as an air OP (observation post) pilot, had been sent to
East Pakistan for martial law duties. It was only on 1 October that
he was given the command of a motley ‘crowd’ of soldiers from
various paramilitary forces which was designated as 202 Brigade.
His adhoc formation had only one regular infantry battalion (39
Punjab) to give it some respectability as an infantry brigade.
had ahs Brigade area the enemy, supported by the Mukti Bahinl,
sady captured several border outposts just across a
international frontier in the north as early as October. A guenil®
orce, was under a rebellious major, occupying Tahirpur- Tw

Indo-Pakistan War - 197} Eastern Theatre aa
ies of the so-called freedom fighte;. _.
a which had mutinied ae honiaet Sunamganj, 3
jete Indian brigade ex 8 Indian Divig. |..°t Chatak. A
mp * . S10on had taken ;
iapur. A battalion of the Muktis wa ; over
gntiapu ie . as In Companygan d
rigadier C.A. Quin’s 59 Brigade was Sitting astride Zaks g an
these cities were on the Pakistani side of the border sg All
d been occupied by the Mukties ang the Indians emake ney
ereal war began. efore
Saleemullah, deployed his rag tag ‘army’ so as
fve approaches leading to Sylhet. A company of the} Khyber Rite
gnd two companies of the East Pakistan Civil Armed. Forces
(EPCAF) were kept as brigade reserves. This was all he could |
gare to influence the battle if and when the enemy broke through |
the crust.
This decoy of a brigade did fool the enemy. After testing the
defences on 21 November in the area of Karimganj the Indians
decided not to get inextricably involved in a area far removed from
their main objective. 5/5 Gorkha Rifles tried to capture Charkai
oily a couple of kilometres from the border but Saleemullah’s
‘men held on to their position till 12 December“®, Even an attempt
toland 4/5 Gurkha regiment behind enemy lines by helicopter on
1December failed. A lone gun engaged the Gurkhas and in spite
oftheir war cry ‘Aya Gurkhahi’ (Gurkhas are coming) they could
not advance further. About 90 men, including the commanding
officer Lieutenant Colonel A. B. Harolikar, were on the ground
but they were forced to disperse. The helicopter flights were
‘sumed on 8 December but the link up with other troops was
"nly possible on 14 December.
By 10 December Sylhet was reinforced by 313 Brigade. trom
t December till the cease fire ‘friendly’ exchanges of oe
ine Place between the two opposing forces in a ne yay,
al’s home town. His blessings kept the non-believ
South Eastern Sector _—
nay South-eastern sector of East es nts, aul tact and
Y terrain, dense forests, protruding salients, he capital.
Tat pen co ‘ovided the shortest route to the cap
Dag Seni. a. . he eastern border, as the
being only 80 kilometres from the like an inverted
"OW flies, The segment in the extreme south, “ neck of
byta ; em : a and by a narrow
tein’ “aS connected with the mai h which passed the
“tory barely 16 kilometres across, throug

408
Tragedy of Errors
MAP 12
EAST PAKISTAN
SYLHET SECTOR
OPERATIONS OF 313 & 202 BRIGADES
‘3ONOV 15 DEC. .
-0eee r ringer are -_——e™ ” ,
ae ~~ o
fe ™ as —— Vy
(Gunam@ans? — Ha eee i
JANTIPUR
} ae Gey ie
TS = taavics
$ , bes \
\ SYLHET = Ve
Lg en
5 ye) 9/\I_DEC HELI WZ
) 3S
) Se
i< ae nn oe Or = Je, as a
a — sis \ = wa es
fo” TF ‘evenec J ¢
f Z 3I3 / | re
yy a ;
LZ * 3 7 ‘MAULVI BAZAR A
aa 3-@ DEC SRS 30 FF ;
| _MUNSHI pee a
( . 2!
G HABIB-GANJ AMSHER NAGAR
_* 28/29 NOV
a / ~ SHAIST \ el W
AGANJ fe]
27 X 313
\ 22 BALLUCH Peer d (sonov |
$ N
Ss + \\ fa ’
27 Ws’ 313 5 New? KHOWA x |
iy i 8 A
f
NGS INDIA
PAKISTAN ARMY [J
® AKHAURA -
Y, INDIAN ARMY [53] AB

Indo-Pakistan War - 197 Eastern Theatre #09
only road and railway track to the Port of Chi
south numerous inlets of wate; channels intertwined be fon os
combined delta of the Ganges and the Meghna. The Bay of Bengal
into which these rivers flowed was dominated by the Indian han
in the absence of any Pakistan naval ship. me
In the west the Meghna, with a span : ;
was a —e oven to both the detande rect dome
While East istan was surround = ;
territory a 75 kilometre stretch meee ric eee
giving this sector a slightly different 8e0-strategic environment.”
When the clouds of another Indo-Pakistan war began to gather
_ commander Eastern Command Started shuffling his pack of cards.
' He had no jokers to play about with. The honours remained the
same irrespective of where and when he would like to use them.
In spite of this he juggled with them. Giving to Peter what he had
taken away from Paul. Towards the end of October and early
November a number of formation headquarters were raised. He
had quite a surplus of brass hats in the martial law headquarters.
They were given command of so-called brigades and divisions. To
accommodate all of them formations were split. Existing
formations were depleted of their fighting strength to give some
teeth to the new adhoc ones being raised. This ensured a
headquarters on all fronts but without guns, armour and regular
infantry units. They were paper tigers only. Infact this gave the
enemy something to boast about as they could truthfully say that
_ they forced five enemy divisions to surrender. In actual fact
Eastern Command had only three half-baked fighting formations
| (9,16 and 14),
Major General Muhammad Rahim Khan, a Kashmiri officer
from Rawlakot, a veteran of the 1948 and 1965 war, which were
fought to give his people the right of self ieee
to be pitched against another ethnic group asking a ‘a th
Medicine to cure their perceived ailments. Rahim had been tre
chief instructor of the armed forces war course (afwc) ei
Command and Staff College Quetta. He had brought his c
| Students several times to East Pakistan and was fully ——
With the defence problems of the country’s detached province. es
| ‘ t war the eastern wing
as aware that in the event of an all ou
. jor onslaught. Much of the
Would not be able to withstand a major 'e the defence of vital
territory would have to be given up to ensure the de
areas at all costs.
"

410 Tragedy of Errors
This concept of operations was particularly applicable to the
sector which had been assigned to him on 18 November. The
Chittagong hill tracts, though it contained the only major sea port,
could be easily cut off by a speedy thrust southwards at Feni. The
Belonia salient had a width of only 10 kilometres at the base and
was virtually undefenceable. Comilla, an important army garrison
town was a stone’s throw away from the border. To try and defend
these areas would expose the most direct and most dangerous
approach to Dacca, where the centre of gravity of East Pakistan
lay. However, by the time, General Rahim took over the newly
formed 39 (Adhoc) Division, the Indians had launched their
offensive and the deployment of formations and units could not be
changed even if he had wished to do so. He did, however, make an
attempt to re-group the dispersed platoons and companies into
battalions wherever possible. The artillery was also concentrated
in batteries of four guns or mortars each. Untenable positions
were abandoned.
39 (Adhoc) Division had to look after a frontage of 320
kilometres from Salda Nadi in the north to the Burmese border in
the south. The deployment of 39 Division on 21 November was as
follows:
117 Brigade (Brigadier Manzur Atif)
The Brigade Headquarters was at Comilla and its area of
responsibility was Salda Nadi to Comilla. Laksham and Daud
Kundi on the route to Dacca was also in the brigade defended
area. It had the full complement of infantry units but inadequate
guns to support them. Only 13 guns of 53 Field Regiment was
available to Brigadier Atif. He had placed his two forward
battalions between river Feni and the border. 30 Punjab was
covering Comilla while 23 Punjab was guarding the approach to
ct oy to the wide frontages allotted to both, a gap
€ two units was left uncovered. 25 FF was in depth
stretched along the road and railway track from Laksham to
Daudkundi.
53 Brigade (Brigadier Aslam Niazi)
The brigade headqu : : e
defended stretched from Chater ha are Patel a
Belonia salient. It had only two battalions 15 Baloch was inside
the Belonia salient, an indefensible bulge of territewy. 39 Baloch
was deployed between Chuadagram and Feni. 21 Aue Kashmir
was split up. Each brigade was given a company of this unit.

