Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 199
General Yahya gave the following decision
pe lifted; (2) provisions should be made for =a a i
provincial cabinets; (3) assemblies should be full oe emer:
Fast Pakistan should be given greater autonomy ne oar ed 4)
‘aphically separated and (5) there w; ° Be being
geograp € will be no martial |
regulation but a proclamation, ical
The president, however, clearly indicated that an i
agreement, by all political leaders was essential before he aad |
consider agreeing in principle to any plan in the interest of a
peaceful transfer of power"'*’. The drafts prepared by the two
negotiating teams, one by the Chief Martial Law Administrator
Headquarters and the other by the Awami League was put up. |
Cornelius, who was averse to the lifting of the martial law |
before the national assembly session again put a stopper to the
negotiation process and tied Yahya’s hand. "If there is no martial |
law regulation there can be no proclamation said the theorist until |
ratification of the constitution, CMLA should remain" insisted the
chief justice. _ :
Sheikh Mujib assured the gathering that heas” prepared to give
a promise that he would uphold the proclamation in spite of the
legal lacuna.
On the night between March 20 and 21, there was a euphoria
as all believed that an agreement for the transfer of power had
been reached, An unscheduled visit by Mujib and Tajuddin to the
president’s house on March 21, however wateréd down the
optimism when he asked that the establishment of eee
cabinets be deleted from the proclamation. Yahya and as anaes
took this suggestion by Mujib to mean that he was 20 —
interested in a united Pakistan. Kamal Hussein also Ne eon
with a draft which was different to the one which ha
hammered out by the two teams a day earlier. ,
, iti lution an
Yahya had by now given up all hope for a poiieal © 1) who is
Was becoming more and more convinced that it NF Genet Tikka
responsible for the impasse. After Mujib left penn
The bastard is not behaving. You get ready - —"
ch} in Dac
Since all the West Pakistan top leadership vxcent the PPP
Participate in the constitution making proce. Dacca and help
chief th . + tad Bhutto to come to Vac
e president again invite

|
200 Tragedy of Errors |
= _ however, did not oblige. On yy,
te ee ae ert sent another message to hint
. A . -efused the invitation as he wag | oUt
once again he politely re Mujib Deinp
invited to meet the president and not Mujib.
i ured that Mujib is now willing to meet };
Bh paccheys join the West Pakistani leaders, already i
Dacca, to try and reach an understanding on the broad Principleg
of the new constitution His arrival in Dacca on March 22, Was
ironically commented upon by a leading local newspaper "Like the
despotic Chengiz Khan the arch villain, on the stage of Pakista
politics, has arrived on the scene under the fabulous protection
machineguns to the front and rear’, wrote the daily People in jt
editorial of March 23, 1971, in a reference to the escort provided ‘i
him by the army. Slogans of "Bhutto the killer of democracy"
were raised.
Bhutto was opposed to the formation of two separate
committees to draft the constitution. He felt that such,
committee in West Pakistan would be unmanageable as serious
differences existed between the various political parties in that
wing. He, therefore, felt that instead of putting up a common front
against the Awami League the politicians of West Pakistan would
being quarrelling among themselves. His own party may split on
the question of the constitutional draft. "It would mean two
Pakistans, different measures of autonomy to the two wing
would be difficult to control’ surmised the PPP chairman!®!. He
ae ot not being able to mould other West Pakistam
Balochistan a dicing i manning. He quotes a leader from
could they wt ni at i there could be two committees why
€ committees! *2,
lesson"!53, General Akber. ¢ tea firm. We will teach them 2
_ bastards rule over West Pakistan wre OTL Bet
Bhutto .
between idtvead See € president on March 22. A med
them were at ease in was arranged the same day. Neither
brought Bhutto upto wy each other face to face. The preside!
them that copies of the mr. the presence of Mujib. He als0 tol
two leaders that afte € proclamation would be. delivered to
rnoon.

|
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 201
Bhutto introduced a red herring by talki
‘pondon plan which according to the Ppp nerds _
~ conspiracy against his political party. The matte; we “ire ri |
when Yahya suggested that Mujib and Bh us cropped |
‘BEM utto should meet alone
to sort out their differences. Although they talked free] thin
substantial came out of the conversation. The draft nrodl wate
was delivered to both the leaders on the afternoon of 22 March.
4 Both the political leaders put the blame on the military
government for creating a feeling of ill will between rival
politicians and the government. Mujib is reported to have told
» Bhutto "do not trust the army" whereas Mujib’s supporters claim
that it was Bhutto who warned Mujib not to have any trust in the
_-army.
Since this time Mujib was not prepared to attend the national
assembly session on the new date (March 25),the president once
again postponed the inaugural session of the parliament.
Bhutto asked for another meeting with the president on the
evening of March 22. According to Peerzada he accepted the idea
of the draft constitution being prepared by two separate
committees. However Abdul Hafeez Kardar writes that the PPP
was against two constituent conventions as it would mean
secession'**, Siddiq Salik also confirms that Bhutto's comments
were that Mujib’s proposals contained seeds of two Pakistan’*’.
Lt The fourth session between the Awami League and the
president’s team was held at 11.45 a.m. on March 23, at the
president’s house. Tajuddin and Kamal Hussein presented 2 26-
page document which, if accepted, would have ammonite e
accepting a separation of East Pakistan in writing. It Te
three sections dealing with constitutional matters, — an |
administration. The Awami League had upped the ante. »
th
Peerzada, having received the document hese met =e
government’s team would study it ,but voneient had by now
‘euphoria of having nearly reached an agreemen ante gee
Vanished. The meeting between the two oe ae again very
March 24, and according to Colonel Hasan they
close to an agreement. ld General
to en
Justice Cornelius and General pete ile the Awami
Yahya that if he naall the document prop
www.balochlibrary.com

202 Tragedy of Errors
League it would mean a confederation which was not Within hig
right.
Pakistan’s national day falls on March 23, each year when the
historic Pakistan resolution was moved by a prominent Benga;
citizen demanding a right for the Muslims of India to have thei,
own homeland. Exactly thirty one years later the same Bengali
were demanding a separate homeland fr OPA themselves, this time
to get rid of Punjabi domination. Not religion but SOClO-econom;,
and political factors were this time the reason for the Secon4
divide, The Bangladesh Kendra Chatra Sangram Parisha
(Central Students Action Committee) announced that March 23
would be observed as Protiorodh Dibash (Resistance Day),
All government and private building flew the Bangladesh flag
Instead of the crescent and star the golden sun in the centre of a
rich green field fluttered atop every shop and housetop, Taxis,
rickshaws and hand carts sported tiny flags indicating their
support for an independent Bangladesh. The Bangabondhu took
the salute as Col. M. A. G. Osmani (retired) led his marching —
column (later to become the core of the Mukti Bahini) in front of /
the makeshift dias. Retired Maj. Gen. Majid stood by the side of
Mujib, proudly proclaiming to the world that Bangladesh had
come into being. The martial law authorities apparently looked
the other away at this ‘unilateral declaration of Independence’. -
(People in Saidpur in North Bengal, where there was a large
concentration of Beharis, however, had the courage to defy the
Awami League by openly displaying the Pakistani flag. No amount
of personal danger could sway them away from their loyalty to
their country of adoption).
There was no way to stop this display of anti-Pakistan feelings
except to use military force. The question that must have kept
many of those in authority awake for nights on end.must have
been: Do the citizens of a country have a right to ask for secession’
If they do, what is the duty of the government? suppress it with all
the force at their command or become a party to the break up of
one s own country? Political scientists have not found an answe!
' tp this waxed and complicated problem. .
2 The Sikhs of Punjab have been asking for a separate homeland
from New Delhi since’ 1984. They sacrificed more than 15,000
a Tens of thousands were in detention without tit:
é indian Security forces had unlimited powers and orders
shoot to kill. Amnesty International in thei képort(fok |the ye"

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 203
1 blamed the Indian government ¢.. ve
anab, But India was not prepared 14 — atrocities in
independence. Kashmir was in flames The Kash = Sikhs their
were fighting for severing the artificial linkage With wahideen
Union, but 500,000 Indian soldiers were ensuring th the Indian
come to pass. They had been given wide ranging . at does not |
arrest, detain, and kill the freedom fighters and there oe
Gang rapes, modern methods of torture Were being Bo sin |
S recalctrants to line. All this'to prevent the break up of their |
+»,/pn2The Sri Lankan government had be
“al "Tamil guerillas for a decade. The amg mpeg tt te
“gunships and aircraft were being used to suppress the separatist
movement in the north-eastern provinces of J affna. Help was also
‘sought from neighbouring India who willingly despatched a so-
called Indian peace keeping force of 60,000 crack Indian soldiers.
» They too used helicopter gun ships, aircraft, heavy guns, naval
vessels to try and disarm the Tamils whom, ironically, they
themselves had armed earlier to keep Sri Lanka under their heel.
Sri Lankan authorities did not allow the Jaffna Peninsula to
become independent just because an ethnic community supported
~ by a powerful neighbour wanted to break way from Colombo.
Yahya made a last minute effort to try and get Mujib to find a
way out to keep a united Pakistan. He sent other political leaders
y to convince Mujib to do so. They all came back to tell him that he
was not prepared to listen.
Dr. Kamal Hussein, made the intention of the Awami League
clear when he on March 24, came and proposed that the word
federation’ in the Awami League’s document be changed ‘to
‘confederation’. Hasan claims that when he was told about this he
‘ang up Mujib and asked him as to why this sudden turn around. |
Mujib asked Hasan to give the telephone to Kamal Hussein who, |
after getting directions from Mujib, said that the word ‘federation
Would stay'®6. Kamal Hussein admitted that such a proposal i
made but he went on to explain that he had also said that t s
could be left to Bangabandhu and Yahya to settle amongs
themselyes!57.
Dr. Kamal Hussein and Rahman = aa
*mphasised to the author that whereas the Awami Leagu

204
Tragedy of Errors
had made elaborate preparations for discussing the 6-Poing
formula, including various alternatives, the other Side diq fie
appear to have “done it’s homework"”’. hey aad that this Wag
nizo evident during the Round Table Conference held in Feb, aty
1969 under Field Marshal Ayub when the Awami Leag,,
presented their 6 Points.
Subhan went on to say that neither Yahya nor Bhutto Wete
willing to discuss the matter seriously. He claimed that during the
discussions with Kamal Asfar, Abdul Hafeez Peerzada ang
Mahmud Ali Kasuri of the PPP he came to the conclusion tha
‘these guys were not serious’!®?, j He, however, admitted that the
government and Awami League negotiating teams did arrive at
mutually agreed formula on March 22. The Awami League
according to Subhan and confirmed by Colonel Hasan, hag
accepted the amended draft and were now waiting for the joint
proclamation. But when the came to know that M. M. Ahmad
and Justice Cornelius had been asked to fly back to Karachi they
felt that the negotiations were a "side show" and the "Niyat"
(intention) to hand over power was not there. "They were only
trying to buy time” he said. When asked about the last minute
change of the word federation of Pakistan to confederation of
Pakistan Rahman Subhan tried to gloss over it by saying "The
formula Was not changed. One did not have to go to war on the
basis of one word",
Bhutto claims that Mujib told Ghulam Mustafa Khar, a
prominent PPP leader, then in Dacca, on March 25, to tell Bhutto
to be the prime minister of West Pakistan and leave East Pakistan
to him and his people!, Tajuddin, declared the same day that the
Awami League had gone as far as it could go and had nothing
further to talk about. Yahya then made up his mind to execute
what Ite already had decided i.e. use the military instrument to
impose the will of the central government. He went to General
Tikka’s headquarter at Kurmitola and gave him the green signal
for operation SEARCH LIGHT which had been planned as early
as March 17, a .
At 3 p.m. Yahya told Peerzada "we are leaving tonight. | want
you to draft a speech to be delivered at Karachi panning th?
Awami League". Seven hours later, in the darkness of the night
Sene ral Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, president of Pakista®,"’
es martial law administrator and commander-in-chief of the
Pakistan ,army. left. Tejgaon aixport-ynceremoniously, never

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 208
return again. East Pakistan was left to be consumed by a civil war
From then onwards the vultures floating with the monsoon douds
in the skies over East Pakistan did not have far to look for their
food. |
: _Aritical Analysis
Unfortunately democracy and democratic traditions had not
‘taken root in Pakistan even decades after its existence. The army |
having broken the barrier of non-involvement in politics in 1958.
found it easier and easier as successive opportunities arose to |
‘save’ the country from anarchy. The civilians too began to look up
, to the armed forces to ‘put things right’ which gave the generals
further encouragement to step in and take on their
unconstitutional role of administering the country.
In 1969, Field Marshal Ayub had become extremely unpopular,
his health was failing. A bunch of self interested politicians were
quarrelling with each other on the Pakistani stage with the men
in uniform waiting in the wings. What should Ayub have done in
such a situation. After 10 years of martial law and a decade of
controlled democracy the people were agitating not only against
an individual but against a political system which had been thrust
upon them by the man in uniform. The next step, therefore,
should not have been handing over power to the commander-in-
chief but to a civilian caretaker administration which should have
held general elections under the 1956 Constitution. The Army’s
take over, even when it was tamely handed over by a beleaguered
”! president, was incorrect, unconstitutional and a follow on of a
\ . Wrong precedent set in 1958. It set the stage for political
negotiations after the elections which led to the hardening of
attitudes and the eventual break up of the country.
General Yahya was, no doubt, initially sincere in handing over
power to the elected representatives but was planning to do so in
the hope and belief that no single political party would be un, 8
Position to form the government jand thus , his position as
President and the importance of the army as the protector of the
Solidarity of the country would remain.
General elections on the basis of one-man-one-vote was
hecessary to give the people the sense of participation but It —
have been more appropriate to have restored ithe. 195
Constitution first and held the elections under a,laid down

si Tragedy of Errors
constitution which had been accepted oon eague, This
would have avoided the damaging Pos an Pal YS. One COuly
¥2 dvocating 41s oints formulg
not prevent Mujib from a an
Le ’s manifesto. But he would have to
including that in his party $ Ber
h ssed in the national assembly where he would have t
rre two-third majority. Zulfigar Ali Sate ould NOt have
been able to play the destructive role that he did if the nation,
assembly was to meet under a restored constitution.
| A short electioneering period of say three months, could have
reduced the danger of a breakdown of law and order In either or
both of the two wings. The year-long election campaign cam,
under criticism by almost all who had given some thought on the
development in East Pakistan after the army’s take over. There js
much weight in this reasoning as it gave a considerable amount of
time for the Awami League to whip up sentiments against the
West Pakistani leadership and drum up support in favour of
Sheikh Mujib’s 6 Points. |
Forming a government and framing a constitution is quite
different. The former requires a simple majority the latter a
consensus amongst all federating units. Comments on the legal
frame work order have been given earlier but it bears repetition to
say that a major error was not to specify that a constitution would
need the approval of atleast two thirds of the members of
parliament before it could be passed. This would have ensured the
need for modifying the 6-Points to make it acceptable to the
political leaders in West Pakistan. Leaving the voting procedure to
the national assembly to decide was a major error. The question of
the extent of provincial autonomy should have also been made
clear so that it would not have become the main stumbling block
= ne Stections, This should have been settled before and not
r the elections.
a be.
their intlige nae oe eeeneies ave to blame for being subjective
Shor’ hal whiites 4 eaaiee and putting up to their seniors W ‘
Bhutto. He was ear, "They performed miserably" surmis
Bhutto. hot too far wrong. A detailed study of the
intelligence reports submitted b : “ i thei!
superior headquarters in Isl y. the official concerned to Jent
years of 1970-1971 show S my, pertaining to the turbu os
true situation. The’ a remarkable absence of depicting
€ popularity of the Awami L had not, bee?
assessed correctly. C ‘ x cague na ‘on
results wer y. Vonsequently their predictions of the electi?
esuits were way out. On the contiiahy the Js/am-Pasand groups

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 207
been shown as gaining more stren ;
ae nikon sth. This was contrary to
_ ‘The intelligence SEpOres od, however, occasionally mention
violation of the legal framework order by the Awami L
politicians and recommended that stern action be taken mains :
them. But the martial law authorities in Dacca had me ith
received clear cut orders nor did they posses the ability to dam th :
flood gates which had been opened by allowing full scale political
activity by the Yahya regime. It is also true that both the governor
and the martial law administrator were gentlemen of the highest
order who saw nothing wrong 1n allowing a fully unhindered
democratic process which was set in motion after the date of the |
general election had been announced.
The Awami League, under a benign government at the Centre |
and with a non effective martial law was given full reign to whip
up emotions in favour of complete regional autonomy amounting
to a virtual confederation. Yahya made the mistake of believing
Mujib when he said that he would modify his 6-Points formula, -
He should have read his intentions more profoundly. After a
landslide election victory fought on the basis of obtaining complete
regional autonomy,jt was naive to except the Awami League Chief
to adhere to his earlier promise. Mujib was correct in saying that
his 6-Points formula was no longer his objective alone but the
trust of 60 million Bengalis. — |
The mistake that made the transfer of power reach a point of
ho return was the postponement of the national assembly session
Without specifying a new date. This not only _witnessed the
dismissal and resignation of two very senior, brilliant and honest
representative of the armed forces, it also was the proverbial last
straw on the Bengali back. The democratic train had been ersiled
and it required a herculean effort to get it back on the tracks
again. Mr. Bhutto drove the first nail in the coffin by refusing he
attend the assembly session at Dacca, Yahya, goaded 7 the
hardliners in uniform, did the rest by going back on his word.
The response to the postponement had not been pay
analysed. The sudden outburst at Paltan Maidan o she-anntife
1971 and the total control of Mujib-ur-Rahman nae the fatal
administrative machinery in East Pakistan atte
“nnouncement.was totally unexpected.

208
Tragedy of Errors
Notwithstanding the fact that the Awami League Negotias
team were equally non-compromising I stage In the negotiat ng
had come on March 22, when with a little give and take on ‘ie
sides a mutually agreed formula could have been found as five =
half points out of the six and had been agreed upon. At that Hay
Yahya, as the chief executive, should have given a firm decig; lage
. . = ; 10n
how to settle the foreign aid and foreign trade issue with in
weakening the Centre too much. Out
Justice Cornelius. did not help in finding a solution to
questions of lifting martial law. He was either not aware of i:
| consequences of his rigid interpretation of a legal vacuum or a
man on the bench, he was only looking at it from a legal poi “i
view. His attitude was not conducive to arriving at a sol ee
acceptable to both the parties. ution
From the statements made by some of the generals clo
President and the presence of the principle staff officers of CHO:
Dacca during the negotiations it appears that the hardliners i .
army were not willing to allow General Yahya to hand . aw
to the Awami League. The President should not have allov ie
hawks to have had their say. sine
The latter group of milita .
conclusion that Mujib could ‘ Stier Come fo Bway
biect jib could be prevented from achieving hi
objective by using the full for ’ ieving his
party. The effect of Loree martial law against him and his
. ect of the proposed military action of 2
1971 under the directions of a loyal and —~ Kagheore
Wis reputation of carrying out ord x a ne acetone
“" ofgthere is not to reason why b tt according to the soldier's code
appreciated. | oo! he: to do and die" was not correctly
His mission was
; to r : .:
he did - fe dldaE matte to ine writ of the government whic!
throw the baby out with the ae that in the process he woul?
tenuous link that existed Soins and that he would deste
ew or after-effect’ of a the two wings, , Politic!
sublie % He ensured that the Paki “ep wae a
Pt ic buildings, that school istan flag flew once again 0!
ndance in office ols and colleges r d. that #
ldier s and factories r eopene”
soldiers were ries returned . hat
Zine aoe no longer humiliated to normal and t
he heard Bhutto say that ‘ on the streets. He felt satisfie!
at but what W@ did St at ‘Thank Allah Pakistan has be”
eater . B see or . ae
ater catastrophe yet to se Th, nea was the rumbling. a
- The bitterness and animosity ha

