Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre iia
MAP 3
EAST PAKISTAN |
.?_
INDIAN PLAN OF attack :
[21NOV EMBER 1971 |
¢ x )
; ASSAM
+ 4
® S| Pee
4 RANGPUR MEGHALAYA x
so a t XU 1 COMMN zove/, |
XXX Wl lal 2 ° J nw - a :
CORPS Ld S cE |
we BOGRA : |
u V¢ ef & rs
sama  \Maveones |
xx x—V D ch RHAINAS BAZAR
i e eS Coy TRIPURA oN |
a VES F HA DPUR,’” |
D ( cuenta 4 y D |
| Ticorrs Rat ree | |
A =| ) @ KHUL NAY A |
e a
CALCUTTA. ga~ @ CHITTAGONG
(Va oc Ve
9 OS, a i \ |
a“
_ _ a
i BAY OF BENGAL \',
~ uF BURMA
| € & KHULNA
Il CORPS - CAPTURE KUSHTIA JESSOR
| XXX) cores- CAPTURE RANGPUR BOGRA & RAJSHAHI
 BNEOMMN « - tuREATEN DACCA FROM THE NORTH
|TV corps - CAPTURE SYLHET SONELA
BHAIRAB BAZAR AND FE

362
Tragedy of Errors
then to move into Pakistan territory in hot pursuit. One such
incident which drew international attention was the Bogra
engagement of 21 November between Indian and Pakistani forces,
"The political directive, which tacitly accepted probing attacks
across the border, laid down that no Indian soldiers should
become prisoners during their forays into Pakistani territory, as in
that case surprise would have been lost and an international
pressure would be built up to prevent India from launching a full
scale offensive", acknowledged the army commander. Actually that
would have provided evidence of a military involvement by India
as early as October.
Indian forces entered East Pakistani territory with full force
alongwith the Mukti Bahini on the night of 20/21 November. The
attacks were no longer limited to border raids or provision of
artillery support to the rebels. Proper brigade size operations were
now launched against the Pakistani border posts. The Mukti
Bahini were directed to by-pass the defences and establish
blocking positions in the rear to cut off all routes of withdrawal. In
ordinary circumstances it would not have been easy for the enemy
to infiltrate forces deep into the rear and continue operating from
there. Paramilitary forces and local citizens could deal with such
isolated intruders but in the case of East Pakistan, by the year
1971, the Mukti Bahini were getting the support not only of
Indian troops but even of the local population.
Military situation in November
When the main Indian attack against East Pakistan began the
military situation was most unfavourable to the defenders. The
political mission of not allowing Mukti Bahini to establish a
| Bangladesh government on East Pakistan territory remained
| valid. All the troops were strung along the border in penny
packets. Most of them were deployed in the internal security role
which forced dispersement as against concentration to meet 4
major attack. The officers and men had been carrying out counter-
insurgency operations without relief for the last eight months and
were by now getting tired of continually fighting. There were
serious imbalances in the newly arrived and newly raised adhoc
formations. Some were only about two thirds of their strength.
The divisions were without their standard component of artillery
regiments. Not only were medium guns not sent to East Pakistan,

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 363
infantry divisions were short of field guns as well. Armour and
engineer units were mostly deficient. Brigadier Arif Raz h
was commander Corps Signals in Eastern Command ee who
his debriefing report that signal communications wae ae
dependent on radio sets imposing immense Security probl ainly
T&T and PL routes were not extensive and subject i. om as
disruption by subversive elements, aetna
Second line forces were totally ill equi
communication infrastructure had my yp raliry ‘ee
insurgents. Inland water transport had been depleted i to
sabotage activities. Expected air Support was minimal. East
Pakistan had been completely isolated because of a naval blockade
and banning of overflights over India. Out of the 8 battalions
promised only two had arrived and Dacca had no regular troops at
all for its defence.
Battle of Hilli
Notwithstanding the fact that the entire concept of operations
of Eastern Command, for the defence of East Pakistan, against a
full fledged Indian attack, was wrongly conceived one can derive
some solace by recalling those few battles which were fought with
courage and determination, irrespective of their outcome. If one
was asked to pick up a few pieces from the ashes of the military
debacle the most significant amongst them would be the actions of
205 Infantry Brigade, part of 16 Infantry Division, which was
responsible for the defence of the Hilli - Bogra section in the
north-west sector of East Pakistan.
Hilli was a small town containing a few thousand inhabitants,
most of whom had fled to safer areas during the ensuing battle
between the army and the insurgents. The town was _—e
tight on the border between West Bengal and East Pakistan. ‘ :
city being only a couple of hundred yards away from the ee aad
The main railway line from Calcutta to north Bengal ie aati |
India had passed through Hilli. So close was the frontie ie
the two arch rivals that many of the windows of the mu
*Pened on Indian territory.
‘ : ich jutted
_, illi was located on the eastern Up ore Sedat land
nto Pakistan. The protruding Indian finger creates * ded an ideal
between it and the river Jamuna. It, therefore, provicet’ ld
abe : this direction cou
objective for the enemy as a rapid thrust along
Unhinge the defences completely in this sector.

564 Tragedy of Errors
The area around Hilli was plain and dry in the month of
November. No major water obstacles existed to break the
momentum of the attack. Everything seemed tailor made for the
attackers, but yet the brigade defending Hilli withstood the
onslaught till the very end.
205 Brigade was commanded by Brigadier Tajammul Hussein
Malik who had earned his spurs at Batapur, (West Pakistan), as
the commanding officer of 3 Baloch, in September 1965, when he,
alongwith others, had stopped the advance of the Indian army
towards Lahore. This time his task was to prevent them from
reaching Bogra.
Tajammul was a product of Chakwal in the martial belt of
undivided India. He was commissioned in the 7th Rajput
Regiment in February 1947. He was known in the army for his
doggedness and his determination to pursue a course of action,
which he perceived to be correct, to the limit, irrespective of its
consequences. A streak of religious fanaticism made him
unmindful of his personal safety. It also gave him perseverance in
adversity. It was this trait in his character which made him insist
eo every inch of the area assigned to him would be defended and
at there would be no withdrawal to the designated fortress of
Bogra. (a correct attitude at the company and battalion level but
not necessarily so when fighting a corps or theatre battle).
205 Brigade consisted of three battalions:
Regiment (Lieutenant Colonel Syed kaa pe
later Lieutenant Colonel Mumtaz), 8 Baloch (Li ]
Beg) and 13 Fronti az), oc ieutenant Colone
g rontier Force (Lieutenant Colonel Amir Nawaz). It
was supported by 80 Field Regiment (Lieutenant Colonel Tari )
and one troop of light tanks (Chafe). The f i ‘
thes exere hate). The formation was deployed
sector of 16 Division with 2 ; i
and 34 Bricad 3 Brigade on its right
_o4 Brigade on its left and with the mighty J iver
behind it. The brigade was to defend the veh dex
approach as its failure to stop the enemy’ rama weed bare
split 16 Division into two. mys schaatnies, sree?
Tajammul i
a, Kee ai ; directed by Eastern Command to defend his
ponsibility by taking a defensi iti
border . ve position as close to the
be as tactically possible. He was also to deny the line
awabganj - Maheshpur - Khetial which ’ to
fight well forward of i ch meant that he had
orward of it and that the mai r
ahead of this line which was f, ain battle was to be on ©
Lia ar away from the designated Bogt@

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 365
The brigade was deployed with all its thr .
in order to cover a frontage of over 100 ‘ekimoeixes Warring
frontage of a brigade being 5 kilometres). This deprived the
formation of the requisite depth needed to absorb the advance of
the enemy before putting in a deliberate counter attack. The main
hub of the defence was around the village of Hilli where 4 FF was
deployed with bs ~ het ari on the right and A and B
Companies on the left of it. Battalion Headqua :
the rear at Maheshpur. quarters was located in
Indian Plan of Attack against 16 Pakistan Division
XXXII Indian Corps, commanded by Lieutenant General M.L.
Thapan, was given the task to destroy the bulk of the Pakistani
forces in the sector between the Jamuna and the Ganges (Padma)
rivers. He had two mountain divisions and an armoured brigade
to carry out this task. 20 Mountain Division was to advance west
to east along approach Hilli - Goraghat - Gaibanda - Bogra while 6
Mountain Division was to move from north to south along
Pachagarh - Dinajpur and Rangpur. The two were to link up at
Bogra.
Major General Lachman Singh Lehl (48), an artillery officer
from Hoshiarpur, Punjab, who had begun his army career as a
mountain gunner in 1943 was commanding 20 Mountain Division
in 1971. He gave a colourful account of his exploits in the Hilli
sector, to the author, over lunch at the Delhi Gymkhana. He said
that an offensive against Hilli was planned as early as 1967 in the
normal course of military planning in peace time when Jagjit
Singh Aurora was a corps commander in that sector. He went on
to admit that a proper attack on Hilli was planned in May, 1971
when Army Commander, General Aurora, told him “others are
doing something why do’nt you go in, but ensure no one Is taken
as a prisoner". According to him even the local ia of police
was asking him as to when he would attack Hilli®.
Lachman Singh insisted that he was against a frontal attack
and so was his corps commander but Aurora thrust his plan on
him, Major Praval, author of the book ‘Indian Army After
Independence’ also confirms this fact!®.
To ensure a quick victory 20 Mountain Division was phe an
additional infantry brigade and two armoured regiments. its p _
Was to attack along the narrowest portion of the sector thoug
"

366
Tragedy of Errors
that was the toughest, 202 Brigade was to work its way eastward
capturing Hilli, Palasbari and Goraghat thus linking itself with
the downward thrust of 71 Brigade ex 6 Infantry Division. 66 ang
340 Brigade were to contain Dinajpur and act as reserves. The
plan was based on breaking through the Pakistani defences on a
narrow front so as to turn the defences and get to their rear as
soon as possible with a view to trapping then and not allowing the
Pakistani forces to fall back to their well prepared and well
stocked defensive position at Bogra. Though it took much longer
than they had planned they did succeed in disintegrating 16
Division before its troops could fall back to their designated
fortress of Bogra.
‘The Battle Begins
8 Guards Battalion of 202 Brigade launched a frontal assault
against Hilli at 0100 hours on 24 November. The attack was
preceded by intermittent artillery fire concentrations for over
seven hours, which was a sheer waste of ammunition as it
achieved precious little. The Indian artillery commander failed to
point out to his supported infantry of the futility of such a long
preparatory bombardment against well dug in positions. So
instead of a walk-over the attackers, in spite of their numerical
ea Si got entangled in a web. C Company of 4 Frontier
=i inom bala imal the main brunt of the attack held on
aa b i. ee - m1 vo erat nent battalion had to put in two
were able to vernal Ce - i ap pia ee ee
That too only for a short while. area ff ere oars mre
9
Second Lieutenant Salim was undeterred by the presence of
ne vei around him. His personal bravery in the thee of the
rs encouraged his men to get out of thei h d
| push the Indians back in a hand feademan. 4 a schaaetines
fall unon th in a hand to hand fight. Havildar Isaf Khan
aca . the enemy with his section and charged those who had
“ay . ice Gen He succeeded in driving the enemy
umbered for which action he was
awarded the Tamgha-i-Jurat. A third attack on the same platoon
Md a fresh company was again beaten back. By now it was day
nln hemi ee decided not to disturb the hornet’s nest any
| and settled down to lick its wounds. 8 Guards had lost 139
men including 8 officers and 4 JCOs in this attack.

| Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre aes
| When night fell the attackers
‘jime trying to outflank D r leges move forward again this
again the Indians had to suffer a ae, Tom the north. But once
istani Shing blow at th
plucky Pakistani platoon of 4 FF Which hon at the hands of a
‘yeplenishments of ammunition at night h aving received some
‘when Dawn broke the battle-field could ‘om on to its position.
dead bodies of the Indians in various or © seen littered by the
had been killed on foreign territory o oe esque Positions. They
ambitions of their leaders. The cinonat, - Satisfy the political
which were seen digging-in in front of “ the Indian company
driven back. € platoon were also
The Indians suffered, in all,
three company commanders, two commas oe amualties including |
commissioned officers. 4 FF lost 11 of its va “un five junior
them were wounded. Amongst them was young flee oe — “
i . <3 oO
* battle. * against the’ Marathas a shining example of leadership |
Having failed to capture even a la iti
Indians tried to outflank the posting He nt ey a |
succeeded in overrunning a complex of villages. A counter attack ;
by the depth company of the battalion succeeded in partially |
evicting the enemy. In the ensuring engagement Lieutenant |
Colonel Abbasi’s bunker received a direct hit from an artillery
shell wounding him seriously. He was evacuated and replaced by |
Lieutenant Colonel Mumtaz who was the GSO 1 of the division.
Lieutenant General Niazi visited the battalion on 26 November
: alongwith some foreign journalists who took back pictures of the
Indian tanks destroyed in front of 4 FF. |
Tajammul, however, was not satisfied with this partial success
of his battalion. He ordered them to counter attack again and
bush the enemy back towards the border. The counter attack by B
Company of 4 FF on the night of 27/28 November succeeded in
ecapturing the villages. The Indians put in a fresh battalion
attack (5 Garhwals) on 30 November, after having regrouped their
frees, Supported by a squadron of tanks they engine _— |
faibagh on the northern flank of 4 FF. Another von ee !
‘ € defenders became necessary. This time it ar Sn et |
in Pen to prove their metal. They saan inferior to their
4 one-to-one fight they were in no way
|

568 Tragedy of Errors
adversary. Raibagh was retaken on the night of 1/2 December ang
the Indians were thrown back into their own territory. 165 and
902 Brigades of 20 Infantry Division kept on trying to create a
dent in the defences around Hilli but even after ten days of battle
in front of Hilli the enemy had not been able to break the will of 4
FF inspite of its vastly numerical superiority of six battalions
against one battalion. 5 Garhwal, alone, lost 65 men, 4 JCOs and 4
officers.
On 5 December the Indians resumed their attack against Hillj
This time they combined an outflanking move from the north
with a direct assault on Hilli. The attack again floundered because
of the tenacity of C Company which held on to its defences in spite
of four consecutive attacks and inspite of heavy casualties
Subedar Gul Muhammad sacrificed his life for the honour of his
en ie mom one trench to another keeping up the
‘ irty odd men.
Major Akram whose company was under attack decided to
a io agp sei were firing on his position. He
mm Chinese rocket launcher and alongwith sepoy —
Akram crawled to within 100 yards of the enemy tanks. Then
firing from different positions he destroyed three enemy tanks —
before being hit in the throat by a machine gun bullet while —
a aed to fire at the fourth tank. He died instantly. His blood —
. ee oa soil which he was determined to keep out of —
ames and. Alor Akram received the highest honour the |
Sears (anh Hes eT enemy ir Nishan-e-Haider. But more
a shin
eared theseedl of dite ing example. of bravery in battle
Contrary to what some India i i
Division contained Hilli and oe — claim that 20 Infantry
tixtada its chicctive furth anked the position by advancing
e further north, the division did its utmost to
capture the town to salvage som i
hack e of its lost pride. Repeated
attacks continued to be put in but every time it failed to evict 4 FF
from its defensive positions. ae .
After a hard fight lasting 19
from Hilli on 11 December. 7
The enemy in the meanti
: time h . ‘ the
inter-brigade boundary at Phulb ad already broken me f 4
PE with the two other be ari about 10 kilometres north ©
er brigades of 20 Infantry Division. 66 and 54°

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 369
Brigades succeeded 7 outflanking the defences of 4 FF and were
well behind Tajammul s brigade While he was tenaciously
resisting the enemy’s attack on Hilli,
It was time to do some quick re-grouping to ¢
enveloping move of the enemy, Tajammul pulled out veal
each from 8 Baloch and 13 FF, who were guarding an
ynthreatened sector, and hastily prepared a blocking position at
Bahaduria.'Alongwith the depth company of 4 FF a fairly strong
defensive position was, therefore, created, To give time to prepare
the defences at Bahaduria a screen of two platoons was deployed
ahead of it to delay the enemy’s advance. They did so for one
complete day which is more than is expected from a screen
position.
It took the Indians another two days to Stage an attack against
Bahaduria. At about 4 p.m on 8 December the enemy started
shelling the area. When the artillery fire lifted an enemy
armoured regiment was seen moving forwards. Sepoys Faiz and
Yaqub who were in the forward platoon were crushed under the
tank tracks. Subedar Maskin Shah got out of his trench and
engaged a tank with his 75 millimetre recoilless rifle. He died
seconds later hit by another enemy tank. Subedar Sher Afzal, on
the orders of Major Sabir Kamal, loaded another recoilless rifle
and took a pot shot at an enemy tank 500 yards away. But no
sooner had he exposed himself, a couple of Indian tanks fired
simultaneously at Subedar Sher Afzal killing him instantly. Major
_ Sabir Kamal who was the moving spirit behind these two actions
also gave the Supreme sacrifice demanded of a soldier. No greater
honour can be given to these brave men of the Pakistan army
than the words of their bitterest enemy. Lieutenant General Jagjit
Singh Aurora, Commander Eastern Command, confessed that one
of the bloodiest battles in East Pakistan was fought at Bahaduria
Where according to him 17 Kumaon suffered 55 dead and 27
Wounded!7,
Second Lieutenant Shahid Haroon, with only a year’s wens
had imbibed in himself the spirit of comradeship and unmindfu
of the danger to his own life he went back to the area, nee
overrun by the enemy, and brought back the dead bodies of his
fallen brothers-in-arms for a decent burial. »

1
aio Tragedy of Errors
A fresh attack by 8 Guards was put in on 9 December. The
attack was beaten back. The next day both 17 Kumaon ang 8
Guards tried to push through but again the defences at Bahaduria
held out and the two Indian battalions could not break through, A
third attack on night of 10/11 December enabled the Indians to
overrun some positions of the forward company. Captain Ashraf
and Lieutenant Munir, the artillery observer, were Seriously
‘wounded. The remnants of this gallant body of troops, who defied
the advance of a force three times their strength for three days,
finally fell back to brigade headquarters a few miles away, 17
Kumaon lost 132 killed and wounded including 5 officers and 4
JCO'®, in their second attack.
Seeing, that the encirclement of Tajammul’s brigade was
causing heavy casualties and delaying the advance towards Bogra,
General Lachman, had ordered his troops to make a second
outflanking manoeuvre. His troops succeeded in capturing Pirganj
further east. They then turned south towards Palasbari in order
to cut the route of withdrawal of 205 Brigade. So while the battle
of Bahaduria was being fought the enemy was already behind
Tajammul’s brigade and sitting on the road Rangpur-Bogra which
was not known to the divisional and brigade headquarters!?.
Major General Nazar Husain Shah, general officer
commanding 16 Division, and Brigadier Tajammul were coming
back to divisional headquarters (then located at Bogra) from
Rangpur on 7 December after attending an O Group (orders
group). They ran into some enemy tanks near Pirganj at about 5
p.m. They immediately Stopped and jumped into a ditch for cover. |
The tanks opened fire, but luckily neither of the two commanders _
were hit. Nazar Husain and Tajammul managed to escape t0
Rangpur on foot with the help of some Bengali guides. Tajammul |
later passed through the enemy lines to rejoin his brigade at Hilli
General Nazar re-deployed 34 Brigade, which had been split in
two with Brigadier Naeem and newly arrived Brigadier Nawab
Ahmad Ashraf commanding a battalion each. It had so far not
come under attack. The brigades took up counter penetration
positions along the Karotaya river astride Gobindganj. The
position was occupied on 8 December well in time to block the
enemy’s advance to Bogra.

