472 Tragedy of Errors
Notes
1. Interview, Lt Gen Jagjit Singh Aurora.
2. Hamood-ur-Rahman Commission Report (HCR) (photocopy of an alleged
original) para 444, page 111.
3. Ibid, para 30, page 210.
4. Ibid, para 27, page 209.
5. Special De-briefing Committee Report, (SDCR) 1972.
6. HCR, para 28, page 209.
7. Interview, Brig Bagir Siddiqui.
8. Interview, Lt Gen Jagjit Singh Aurora.
9. HCR, para 33, page 211.
10. SDCR, HCR, para 31, page 210.
11. SDCR, p. 59.
12. Ibid, p. 60.
13. Ibid, p. 74.
14. HCR, para 365, p. 211.
15. Ibid.
16. Ibid, para 33, p. 211.
17. Tbid, para 107, p. 443.

causes for the Break Up of Pakistan
No one individual, person or act can be blamed for the °”
dismemberment of the country. It was the tragic result of a:
cumulative effect?of inept leadership and incorrect’ domestic and
external policies over the years which brought the nation to the
brink of disaster. A faulty decision in 1971 pushed it over the
precipice. CG
Political Causes ae
‘ Unfortunately the founding fathers did not realise the impact
of the unique nature of Pakistan’s geography. To a set_of Wiser’
men it should have become evident that East Pakistan, 1,600 °
kilometres away with peninsular India , in between jutting
menacingly into the Indian ocean, required a special political and
economic dispensation.
The inability of the first Constituent Assembly to arrive at a
consensus on the sharing of political power between the two wings
sowed the seeds of discontent, suspicion and bitterness between
the East the West. For nine long years they quarrelled over the
quantum of authority each should wield in the parliament. When
they did finally come to an agreement git was torpedoed by
unconstitutional means which added to’ the animosity of the
Bengalis against the West Pakistanis in general and the Punjabis
particular,
The abolition of the 1956 Constitution removed the only plank
°n which the weakening edifice was standing. The 1962
Constitution which ushered in an era of controlled democracy,,
Only satisfied sychophants of the Field Marshal. East Pakistan
\, Pegan to simrher from within as it was being denied its rightful
Place in the corridors of power.
The repla nt of an unrepresentative government by a
Second maeliel skew increased tt, teniperature mounting under

ays Tragedy of Errors
the steamy surface of East Pakistan. The expectations of the ~
Bengalis had been aroused. They were looking forward tg
handling real power for the first time. Suddenly Yahya pulled the
carpet from under their feet letting loose a flood of resentment ,.
which he could not control. Having allowed the Bengali emotions
to rise to a pitch, Yahya made the migtake-ofthe-century by not
handing over power to the majority party which had the support
of almost the entire population of East Pakistan. After starting a
democratic.process he should not have changed his stand in mid-
stream. Whatever may have been the repercussions by the
People’s Party in West Pakistan, what should have been crystal
clear wasy that the will to stay united would be broken if the
political right of the Bengalis to form a government at the Centre
As taken away from them.
\"? The most significant cause for the break up of Pakistan was,
therefore, the postponement of the national assembly session”
without giving a fresh date. The Sheikh’s uncompromising
) attitude set the/ship of staté on a collision course. The refiisal of
' | the chairman of the People’s Party to join the national assembly
; session on 3 teh pashiot it further into more troubled waters,
: leaving president ahya the impossible task of saving it from
| being wrecked.
One can only come to the conclusion that Mr BHutto, either
failed to make the correct assessment of the reaction by the
Awami League to the Postponement of the Session., or else
deliberately upset the democratic process for personal gains.
por ati Yahya was in a very difficult position, as
neith wh the two main actors were cooperating, Bt he who.
c=» “ae Crown must accept the credit andallthebldme. “~~
») Foreign Policy
# scum ed pouey has been dictated i ocurty
oe Presence of a powerful and unfriendly neighbour —
forced the Pakistani leadership in the 50s to join the anti- —
Sate no dot srentiongy ama alliance vith the Une
into the lap of the Soviet Unig ret orees, but it pushed et
door against Pakistan. =e = paper
‘ |
General Yahya’s success in arranging a rapprochement
ad byrlineonee States and China ran. set appreciated by
on who did help Pakistan, ‘marginally, during the

Causes for the Break Up of Pakistan 478
gast Pakistan crisis, 1n spite of the US Congress and the US media
ing totally pro-India. The secret visit of D issi
peing sg octor Henry Kissinger
from Islamabad to Peking a July, 1971, which was a fore-runner |
of Nixon's trip to the Chinese capital, turned USSR furthee |
against Pakistan. Ms retaliation to Pakistan’s mediatory role |
Podgorny willingly signed the Indo-Soviet Treaty in August, 1971 |
"This gave the green signal to Mrs Gandhi to go aheas with her |
plans of a military invasion of East Pakistan aS a possible threat |
from across the Himalayas had been neutralised. ~/< |
|
| Pakistan government’s instructions to its permanent |
representative at the United Nations not to take up the issue of
India’s military intervention in East Pakistan in November, 1971 |
i lost the opportunity for the world community to declare India as |
the aggressor. Ironically, due to the failure of Islamabad to strike
when the iron was hot, It was Pakistan that was blamed for
starting the war. ;
| Economic Disparity
‘ Much has been written) already in this book about the
perceived, and in many cases genuine feeling of economic
deprivation of the people of East Pakistan, against the economic |
planners at the Centre. Although one-sided economic indicators, ;
and statistics were used by unscrupulous politicians to prove the ”
fact of the exploitation of the East Pakistanis,they did have a case
for one-country-two -economic systems due~to the wings being
located in two separate regions. ae
Not examining this issue sincerely gave more than, adequate
ammunition to the Awami Leaguers to blow the Unity of Pakistan
into bits.
? The Social Attitude
The demeaning attitude of the West Pakistanis towards their
Bengali brethren cannot be glossed over. The misconcep Afevan 4
they were lesser Muslims because culturally they nil Es 4
led to wrong conclusions that they needed purl Se saitions r
unfortunate that the colour of the skin, dress, autany me
and cultural values were equated with loyalty to one’s country.
€ Domestic Scene affected by
; i ecte
_ Thougha country’s foreign policy cannot my worrect internal
its domestic follies a forceful presentation ©
7

476 Tragedy of Errors
‘ a large extent sminimise the ill effects of a ski)
Lee od carmeler by one’s enemy. The throwing out of ts
an gn} ournalists from Dacca prior to the military peered a
Pakistan in the, dock. General Yahya in his press confer Ce in
aneuai try some damage limitation,but by then it was too late.
The correspondents had gained, or had been wilfully provided,
enough ammunition to shoot Pakistan S case down. The White
Paper should have been issued in March immediately after
Mujib’s non-cooperation movement and circulated amongst the
members of the Security gunl along with publicity in the
foreign media. That may have, to some extent, provided the
reason for the eventual military action.
The political divide had become so wide that none of the
twenty-six political parties were national in, character. They all
appealed to regional and ethnic interests which created political
polarisation between the two wings. —!
~ Intelligence Failure
The intelligence agencies in East Pakistan could seldom send
ireliable reports as most of the personnel assigned intelligence
duties were from West Pakistan. Not knowing Bangla and unable
to understand the psyche of the Bengalis,they could not assess the
mood of the people in East Pakistan correctly. Some of those who
did, were not courageous enough to call a spade a spade. Their
assessment was coloured with what their bosses wanted to hear.
The popularity of the so-called Islam-pasand political parties
was highly exaggerated, they were wrong in their prediction of the
election results which ipset all the plans of the military regime.
the pstponement tke nao ae et fh
koala 4 of the national assembly session ey gave
ning to the Chief Martial Administrator that all hell will be
let loose on the 3rd of March- the re erwin: f the military
action within and. without +t : mi a RES f the f
Mi CORRE | ast Pakistan s ‘not correctly
assessed; the impact of the exodus of millions of B i refugees
to Indis-Was not portr. “Vs pone agen Ee
portrayed to the military regime by the ISI. The
fact that a large Population in India w id: at alise the
internal problem of Pakistan nev od tp ee
er occured to them.
| ‘? Military Crackdown )
By 25 March 1971 East Pakistan was totally under the control |
of the Awami League, Radio, television, print media road, rail and |

Causes for the Break Up of Pakistan ae
jver traffic, banks and business instituti .
| ljepartments, the local shopkeepers, infact See ee et
| ‘minority of Biharis, all and sundry were anawaring to an call of
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman. The armed forces were being taunted
insulted, abused even manhandled and in isolated cases brutally
killed by Awami League militants Who were fai;
with deadly weapons. ere fairly well armed
Use of force to restore the writ of the '
: : government
back a semblance of law and ordery had become necesen an
there was no excuse fora disciplined’ force to go beserk,and bernot a
only permitted but encouraged to eliminate the miscreants. After
the indiscriminate killings and the general moral terpitude of |”
some elements in uniform, who attempted to purify the blood of
the Bengalis, there was no way to regain their confidence, India
had taken the millions of Bengali refugees, who fled because of the
military action, under its wings and made political capital of the
opportunity provided to them.
An ill advised, uncontrolled, and promiscuous military
crackdown on the Awami Leaguers and their sympathisers 59
virtually broke up the country into we and them. Even those who;
till then, were sympathetic towards Pakistan or were sitting on
the fence changed their loyalties overnight.
© Bhutto’s statement on the day of the military action that
Pakistan has been saved ,indicates that he did not have the
foresight to assess the response by the East Bengalis and the
Indian leadership. He, must share the responsibility for the
dismemberment of Pakistan and the humiliation of the armed
forces in the East.
Yahya’s efforts to revive the political ed ane =?
ernment in Bast Pakistan by holding tye eee eta
exercise in futility. He had shot the arrow by declaring Mui &
traitor and banning the Awami League. There wa
he could do after-that to nullify its effects.
“The Press and the Media «ind 1/ dent
: ck of indepen
The gagging of the press and media . Het unaware of
and investigative journalism fapeber Pakistan: Everything the
the reality of the situation in East

478 Tragedy of Errors
government did,was eulogised. There were no checks and balances
no opposition to present the other side of the picture. No one g5-1
bold as to stick his neck out and criticise the government. h
, Reliance on Allies
It was unwise to have relied on the assistance of the Uniteg
States and China in the event of an all out war with India. Having
brought about a civil war in East Pakistan due to onés own errors
it was naive on the part of General Yahya and his advisers to”
"expect others to pull out his chestnuts from the fire.
Due to the follies of the political leadership,a stage had come
where even Pakistan’s friends had begun to realise that the
country would not remain united for long, and i) made no special
effort to ensure its territorial integrity. / “Y
Hamood-ur-Rahman Commission Report (HCR)
The public in Pakistan has been clamouring for the publication
of the Hamood-ur-Rahman Commission Report , but no
government whether it was civil or military, non-representative or
elected ccould pick up courage to make its findings public,
Obviowdly the recommendations in it, if implemented, would have
been harmful to them or to the mage of their political party.
Every now and then ,there-is-a demand’ from a section of the
public for its publication, but just as in the’case of numerous other
similar naeiseymach successive government has not found it in
their interest to divulge the contents of this much-talked-of
document. Very few have had the privilege of having seen the
HCR. No government or agency acknowledges that the report-is in
their possession. But Photocopies of unauthenticated versions are
in circulation. These have been Picked up by several writers and
quoted in their writings articularly by those who wish to malign
their opponents, es
Soon after taking over as the President and the Chief Martial
Law Administrator Mr Bhutto set about ensuring that no one
from the army would try to blame Gin) for his alleged role in the
dismemberment of the country. He, therefore, constituted @
commission of . pay 3 8 July, 1972 to “enquire into the
circumstances ‘which ed to the ignominious surrender of the
Pakistan Armed Forces, in East Pakistan on 16 December, 197!

Causes for the Break Up of Pakistan a9
d the sudden acceptance of the Unilateral ceasefi
Prime Minister of India on the borders of West eee = —
Kashmir ‘
The Chief Justice of Pakistan Mr Justice Hamood-ur-Rahman
a Bengali gentleman, wes nominated as its president. The other
two members were Mr Justice Anwar-ul-Hag, Chief Justice of the
West Pakistan High Court and Mr Justice Tufail Ali A. Rahman
former chief justice of the Dacca High Court. Major General Altaf
Qadir was incorporated as the military adviser to the commission.
(PCPPI-S68/Def. 19.8.72, page 452 of the alleged HCR).
The Commission examined 213 witnesses and submitted its
main report in July, 19792. After the return of the Pakistani
prisoners of war another 72 persons, including Lieutenant)
General Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi, all major generals and } a4
brigadiers, chief Secretary, inspector general police and two
divisional commissioners were interviewed. According to the
Commission “even after the interrogation of the POWs i main
conclusion of the report remained unaffected by -the fresh
evidence".
The terms of reference given by Mr Bhutto were intentionally
kept limited so as to keep the focus on the military) defeat. It did
not ask the Commission to probe into the factors which led to the m
alienation of the East Bengalis as that could drag the role of his 2...
political party as well.
The Commission came to the conclusion, that "the defeat
Suffered by the armed forces of Pakistan was not merely the result
of military factors alone, but had been ee about 1 oe
Cumulative result of the political, international, moral an
military factors". Amongst the political causes it pave Se Bary
8enesis of the Pakistan movement and the political developments
that took place between 1947-1971. According to parame
the effects of two prolonged martial laws a ~ - a btibeal
the political culture of the country. "It helped ne say valicieal
vacuum, increAsed frustration, amongst mse pu comet
institutions in limbo and distahted the rulers from the go :
* being insincere
The Commission blamed _General_Yahya for ome. over the
‘nd dishonest as according to them ."Yahya ‘mal conditions and
country in order merely to restore nor mS) ®%
fe

480 Tragedy of Errors
re-introduce the democratic process, but he did so with a view 4,
obtaining personal ire ore those who assisted him did so with
full knowledge of his intentions".
It clearly blamed both the Awami League and the Pakistan
People’s Party for “bringing about a_ situation for the
postponement of the national assembly session" Which ',
exacerbated the bitterness between the Bengalis and those at the
helm of affairs in West Pakistan. The Commission went on to say
"we cannot also help feeling that the Chairman of the Ppp, also
displayed lack of political foresight by failing to make 4 proper
assessment of the intensity of the reaction likely to be created in
East Pakistan to the pdstponement of the National Assembly
Session. If Sheikh Mujib was uncompromising in his attitude the
leader of the PPP was equally adamant" wrote the Chief Justice in
his alleged report.
"We have not also been impressed by the explanation given by
the PPP and its chairman about the refusal of the Party to join the
v’ Session of the National Assembly called on 3 March" stated the
Commission (para 83, p. 437).
Justice Hamood-ur-Rahman and his colleagues believed ‘If any,
compromise was to be arrived - could only have been arrived at \
on the floor of the House or d ring the committee discussions"
(para 83, p. 437). They went on to say “Sheikh Mujib also
displayed lack of statesmanship in insisting on a collision course
which ultimately led to the dismemberment of the country" (para
80, p. 436).
Justice Hamood-ur-Rahman also felt that the negotiations
which were held at Dacca between 15 March and 25 March wee
only to buy time for a military build up in East Pakistan to crus
the Awami League, and that there was no intention to find a
political formula for handing over power to the elected
~ representatives.
This contention by the Commission was categorically denied by
those who represented the government at the negotiations
between them and the Awami League in Dacca prior to the
military action. They believéthat Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, and be
his close aides were raising the ante as the days passed by placing
conditions which were progressively moving towards breaking
away from Pakistan.

481
Causes for the Break Up of Pakistan
As regards the military crackdown the Commission conceded
that a military action had become necessary because the illegal
‘take over of the, gntire administration of East Pakistan by the
Awami League,reduced the authority of the government to the
army barracks “alone. Hamood-ur-Rahman and his members were
of the view that a political settlement was feasible, once law and
order had been restored within a matter of a few dronks after the
military action. They appear to be Oblivious of the fact that
General Yahya had banned the Awami League, arrested Sheikh
Mujib-ur-Rahman and Dr Kama] Hussein, the other ‘birds’ had
flown’ to India and were ‘captives’ in their hand. In their own
words the military action “had alienated the sympathies of the
people of East Pakistan", They admitted that the general amnesty
offered by General Yahya in August, 1971 was ineffective,and that
the elected representative were in the hands of India. "They were
hostages and were not allowed to return. Large number being
Hindus who would be mortally scared to return’.
How then did the Commission expect that a political
settlement acceptable to the people of Pakistan was feasible under
those circumstances. The bye-elections were indeed a farce as
those being elected were really nominees of the government and
were being fully supported by them. Foreign reporters and
academicians gave no importance to the one-sided elections held Ag
in October, 1971 in which the most popular party which had won
% percent of the seats in December, 1970 elections had been
debarred from participating. Leo Rose, a well known’ American
Scholar of South Asian affairs at the University of California,
setkeley treated the bye elections with the contempt they
served,
Justice Hamood-ur-Rahman, ‘however, very rightly, pointed An,
out that it ‘was India which was keen to do everything to “\’
Precipitate g crisis in East Pakistan.

