Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 381
task of 9 Indian Division wa
cision as soon as possible. Dalbiy Singh tod eee —
ara using the
Mukti Bahini to obtain the details of the defensive Positions of 107
Brigade. Brigadier Tiwari told Brigadier Hayat after the war that
he had even obtained the Photographs of the brigade and battalion
commanders.
/Probing attacks against 107 Brigade began as early as 1]
November when a company of Jammu and Kashmir Battalion
occupied a border security post near village Chandpur in the
Chuagacha area. Elements of another Indian battalion crossed the
frontier on 12 November and Occupied Masalia BOP. The next day
Hayat ordered a company each from 38 FF and 22 FF to push the
intruders back. Major Anis, while leading his company into the
attack, drunk the cup of martyrdom. He was buried with full of
military honours by Major General Dalbir Singh - g befitting
_ tribute to a soldier by a soldier.
| Having softened up the border the Indian army entered 107
Brigade area with full force on the night between 21 and 22
November. 42 Brigade crossed the river Kabadak at Boyra (a
small village 32 kilometres west of Jessore and located inside a
salient jutting into East Pakistan) and attacked Gharibpur village.
The assault was supported by a regiment of tanks and a couple of
air-to-ground sorties. A 200 foot, class 40 bridge, over the water
obstacle constructed by the Indian engineers helped the armoured
Vehicles to move into the bridge-head before first light. Gharibpur
twas held by a company of 38 FF spread out thinly to cover its ten
kilometres front (a standard company frontage is 300 yards by 200
yards with other companies in the rear to provide depth).
Since the orders were not to allow even an inch of territory to
fall Hayat was ordered to counter attack the enemy which had
‘tossed the Kobadak (Ihchamti) river. He was given 21 Punjab
(R&S) less three companies (i.e. only one company): and two
“ompanies of 6 Punjab (a total of three companies). The attack
a to be supported by 3 Independent Squadron, Pacts
pty and a troop of 120 mm mortars. Major = a eenth we
Bree led the attack and succeeded in Si, & aati 2a
a ine casualties were heavy. His PT 76s of -- the enemy. The
ingens and outnumbered by the T 55s 0
“ns admitted the loss of 7 tanks.

382 Tragedy of Errors
Ten out of 12 tanks were lost. It was a heavy blow to the only
armoured squadron in 107 Brigade area. Hamid, however, was
not to give up so easily. He continued to stay in Gharibpur while
the guns and mortars kept the enemy away. The enemy’s strength
was much more than initially asssessed specially in the case of
armour. General Ansari, therefore, decided to withdraw 6 and 2]
Punjab to the Afra nullah a few kilometres to the rear and
immediately in front of the Jessore cantonment. The enemy —
moved back to Gharibpur on 22 November.
' The same day the PAF went into action. Four F 86s attacked
the enemy in Gharibpur area. Indian Gnats intercepted the planes
and in the dogfight two Pakistani aircraft were lost. The Pilots
bailed out. They landed in their own country and would normally
have lived to fly another day. But the locals handed them over to
the Indians instead.
On 23 November a company of 38 FF defending Chuagcha was
attacked and overrun the next day. Remnants of the company, in
danger of being surrounded, were withdrawn to Afra. Some also
went to Jingergacha.
A conference was held at the divisional headquarters in
Jessore. Both Brigadier Hayat and the colonel staff of the division
Colonel K.K. Afridi recommended a readjustment of the positions
as the Indians had established themselves in strength across the
river and were now re-organising to attack Jessore with full force.
Hayat also asked the GOC to give him the full complements of
6 Punjab (the divisional reserve) so that he could organise a
proper defensive position along Afra. Hayat claims that he also
asked General Ansari to permit him to withdraw one battalion to
Jessore proper as the Indians are likely to put in a major attack
soon and he would not be ale to fall back to Jessore while fighting.
According to the brigade commander the GOC did not accede to
his request as he (GOC) felt that by withdrawing a battalion age
the front line a dangerous gap would be left and the possibility
the establishment of Bangladesh on East Pakistan soil woul
increase, By pulling back troops he also felt that the morale of his
men would be affected2’,
Brigadier Hayat re-organised the brigade position aloné -
Afra embankment a few miles west of Jessore. he placed 6 Se
on his right flank and re-adjusted 22 FF so as to prevent

383
Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre
MAP 6
’ EAST PAKISTAN
eS
YESSORE SECTOR
YESSORE SECTOR
107 BRIGADE POSITIONS
21 NOVEMBER isn
87
G y CHANOPUR ®@ i
<< KALIGANG 4
j
| = ‘
SHPUR
( a yp 38 FF C. A TIACK f
N Ba dy Xi Z1PRi-) xp / —
eI ty * = \ cnuackcn Py 6Ps SJerac  /
07 3% 8 <t he wr,
? oe a NSA ,
ese” S “ 6 Ps,
| eg = ABDULPUR 21PBI-) E
Bi s2 bat
20/21 NOV By 320 JESSORE
A xx oF /
o
a ys [inceRgacna \
a %.. i N
we bee
aan ® NA
SENAPOL ‘e ML
+ PHULTALA
| ’ ree
ow o ;
—|N ? : \
4 DALAT PUR
D 7° cavcutta - ‘ 4
ri 30 MILES KALAROA }
al KHULNA
| IS FF ¢ =
JS =— a
A f ,
SATKHIR A
To CALCUTTA :
—30 WES BASIRHAT
PAKISTAN army CL]
| INDIAN ARMY [D]

ae Tragedy of Errors
further enlargement of the enemy’s bridge head. On 25 November
12 Punjab, a fresh battalion from Pabna (16 Division), was given
to 107 Brigade to reinforce the Afra position.
Even after five days of intense fighting Jibannagar in the
extreme north of the brigade position and right on the border was
still out of reach of the enemy. A threat to the village developed on
926 November. The same night a company of 38 FF was ordered to
move from Hasanada to Jibannagar. It was, however, too late to
take up a proper defensive position. The Indians had already
started shelling the area and later that night the enemy succeeded
in capturing Jibannagar. The company of 38 FF fell back east of
Khalispur where it joined 50 Punjab which had come from 16
Division to reinforce 9 Division. This new force was commanded
by the colonel staff of the division.
Hayat claims that he again asked his GOC to allow him to
withdraw 15 FF from the less threatened sector in the south to
Jessore as the city was lying vacant and the enemy was likely to
break through the defences north-west of the town but he was not
allowed to do so. Ansari is reported to have told Hayat "you have
effectively contained the enemy. Let us wait and see”.
Hayat quoted a signal which was received by his brigade, on
the eve of an all out war, from headquarters Eastern Command
which said "no withdrawal from present positions(.) brigade
commander can only withdrew screens (.) GOC can withdraw
only one company (.) fight on present positions till 75% casualties
have been suffered"2®,
Indian Attack on Helsa - 27 November 1971
21 Punjab minus two Companies, 12 Punjab and a Company
22 Frontier Force was assigned the responsibility to defend area
‘Muhammad Pur - Helsa approximately 10 kilometres from
Jessore on a subsidiary axis. This was the shortest approach t
Jessore which would have helped the enemy to by-pass the main
defences along axes Chuagacha - Jessore and Jingar Gacha -
Jessore.
Based on the information provided by the Mukti Bahini 7
Jammu and Kashmir Battalion (Indian Army) attacked the
extreme right shoulder of 21 Punjab position. This area Wa5 held
by approximately a platoon plus. Indians probably thought it was

Indo-Pakis r
aKistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 385
a gap between 6 Punjab and 21 Punjab
st the company/battalion level ba fons A spirited battle
night 27/28 November 1971. sht, on this ground on
At about 1930 hours all localities ;
: S in
intense artillery shelling. After a ly soy sector came under
reliminary bombardment b an hour and a half
P ' ©gan as a prelud :
) attack. The artillery observer engaged three q ‘ to a full fledged
front of Brunda position. the enemy ady elensive fire tasks in
-hours. 21 Punjab held its fire till the Sates started at 2200
yards. Subedar Haq Nawaz (21 Punjab) Closed in up to 200
millimetre recoilless rifle (RR) hbnniatt ll ee to man, a 75
rounds of HEAT. The fire alongwith oth ne he fred 7
k ‘ia er automatics broke th
enemy's attack and inflicted heavy losses on th e
two dead bodies in olive green littered the area ri ten nn. Roly
of the trenches. Soon the enemy fire died away eee eat
At 0530 hours next day a troop of tanks wi
with
again attacked the defensive position. The move ae Fi
accurate artillery fire. The defenders again stood there like a rock.
A battalion size attack was blunted and finally destroyed by a
small force of a company of 21 Punjab”®, An Indian havildar
(Bansi Lal) of 1 Jammu and Kashmir Battalion, who was taken
prisoner and was brought to the battalion headquarters for first
aid and Interrogation, spelt out the orders given to his unit which
left no doubt about the Indian army’s military intervention in
Fast Pakistan,
According to him 1 Jammu and Kashmir was to capture
tunda and Kaim Khola by first light 28 November, 1971. H
our was 2200 and A Hour 2300 hours. (This was clear evidence
at the Indian army had begun its planned offensive against East
akistan before the second front was opened by General Yahya). A
tery of foreign correspondents and photographers visited the
ttalion headquarters. They met Havildar Bansi Lal of 1 Jammu
my eashmir Battalion. They also saw the dead bodies of Indian
diers ang other captured weapons and equipment. This ates
le proof of Indian’s blatant aggression which was being denie
them go far.
,eneral Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi visited 107 rhage
*mber, Hayat recommended to him that some Aevolntling
Pulled back to Jessore as the threat to the city was

- Tragedy of Errors
MAP 7
EAST PAKISTAN
JESSORE SECTOR.
-“ 167 BRIGADE POSITIONS
“et A 27 NOV, 6DEC 1971
57
(HALISPUI TL 4 > x —
je Costs KALIGAN 107 N
ome KOT CHA DPUR Cf
{ wa :
é *; MAHE SPUR
at ol —“eHAugaca A -
— —Y wv 4
| “~27™ {SGHARIBPUR ® ‘o?
Lx B are
, ELSA Pa JESSORE
et ey
\\ Se eile.
a il To
wn Laat KHULNA
ENAPOL 40 MILES
D a 22 FF |
| ie
(
; LA, . 7
; KALORA
A yn
f IS FF
(
SS. e
>) SATKIRA
g—_TO CALCUTTA :
30 MILES ?i
(
PAKISTAN CQ. | |
INDIAN ARMY |

| Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 387
gnd the town itself atl ang fighting elements in it. Niazi is
rted to have said "No! No Shera!
= cate any more territo ren ie Hot understand. If
got aie ty the Muktis wil] declare
. ;
The harakiri-type instructions were m
withdrawal of troops from forward localities and he lapremeen Ge
subordinate units to display their tenacity and doggedness in their
fight against the enemy. It, however, allowed no flexibility to the
ect ial arn i Ht a
el ;
_ The Enemy Breaks Through
| There was a lull in the battle in front of 107 Brigade position
between 29 November and 5 December. That was the time to
have re-adjusted the defensive position, to have occupied Jessore
in strength while maintaining strong screens and delaying
positions west of the town. 15 FF, which was not facing any
threat, could have been withdrawn to Jessore. But the policy of no
_ withdrawal from forward positions made the defences rigid and
left Jessore empty of fighting elements when the enemy
_ breakthrough occurred. |
| The Indians re-commenced their advance towards Jessore on 6
December, after having re-grouped, re-plenished and re-inforced
their units. The two-brigade attack along road Chuagacha -
Jessore was preceded by an intense preliminary bombardment
from the divisional and corps artillery.
‘The main thrust was by 32 Brigade at the junction of a
‘ompany of 12 Punjab and 6 Punjab which was holding the Afra
Position. On 6 December, 2 Sikh Light Infantry managed to punch
’ hole in the defences which was soon enlarged to pa a
‘iad and 7 Punjab, which was mechanised, to a Sh ote
“te Was no depth in the defences, Jessore, only 1 , nat ‘ab
iY Was threatened. The brigade lost contact lua ‘ moving
et an exaggerated estimate of the enemys al = 2 Hapat
Wards Jessore was received by the brigade eae le be
' ade a quick assessment and concluded that - one oan ithe
ot be able to reach Jessore before the enemy @0es 5° roper
anaged t ld not be able to organise a prop
defo 0 do so he wou impending attack. He
nee around Jessore in the face of an mi jor Praval
theres n the south. Major
ore decided to fall back to Khulna}

388 Tragedy of Errors
AST PAKISTAN
TO KALIGANG JESSORE
S mn \O7 BRIGADE POSITIONS
4 Was 6 DEC - 9DEC N
: a urfiag. ae Ss¢
. CHUABACHA vec ~~, fh
B}s2 a » \" TO MAGURA
oe Nh
AFRA = \ =
6PB “Ny
AR REMNANTS OF
Bs LY, 6PB FELL BACK
‘e db fy SOUTH OF JESSORE
>\\ WS ra ON NIGHT 6/7 DEC
= ° LSA > x.
(2) ss0 bh ON e- 7 \ i eps
ay SEN iY
‘Bd 2ipdk-) ope Re |
KAEMAKOL =| WY xq as ‘y
4
0 Han MOOPUT ES $6
yee MFG pr= a Vax c
—— = Pye ; CA] izpe , +»
- » Gazrs N ew
JSpinceffoncn 2 exes ; Samii
\ i — a 40 MILES
fapee > 22 FF (-) ye na
ez >
gon M/POEC . / warns ¢
15 FF BRIGADE
seeks Va pantry wT KHRIA INTACT \
PAKISTAN army [_]
INDIAN ARMY * fo]=—>

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 389
that Hayat took bol ;
acknowledges a bold and a .
marshy area north of Khulna would slow din ee tis the
felt that Hayat carried out his Withdrawal With skill! Aceon: a
to him 9 Indian Infantry Division consequently o,, ccording
Khulna and could not move to Dacca32. Y got stuck in
Defence of Khulna
The bulk of 107 Brigade, When the break through occurred
was south of Jessore extending as far as 100 kilometres from the
town. It could not have reached Jessore in time. The Indian a
pleasantly surprised to find Jessore without troops when they
approached the cantonment. This was the first and the only town
of any significance which fel] into their hands before the
surrender. It, however, gave the Indian a lot to crow about and the
international community food for thought about the outcome of
the war in East Pakistan. -.
The withdrawal towards Khulna was, initially, uncoordinated.
Each battalion rushed back without knowing whether any
position en-route to Khulna was to be occupied. Hayat managed to
stop the rearward movement and re-established a delaying
position at Nawanpura, about 12 kilometres southeast of Jessore’
on the road to Khulna.
22 FF was still at Y junction just outside Jessore. The enemy
contacted 22 FF at 0800 hours 8 December and to speed up his
movement and in an attempt to encircle 107 Brigade Indian 42
Brigade by-passed 22 FF and succeeded in cutting them off from
the rest of the formation. The guns, however, came to the ps
of 22 FF. Major Azmat Hayat, the battery commander of t e
direct support field battery (201/55 Field eee ee ; ions ta
ditected the fire on the advancing enemy and sia number ot
"treat. Using open sights and direct fire he — Me FF cane
“nemy tanks which broke the back of the attacke Soe ayes
»’ of the ring because of the bravery courage and deter d
of Az reme sacrifice by laying down
. “Mat Hayat who gave the supre ’ ‘
his life on what became soon thereafter foreign soil. head
; ieved a proper brigade
weg te finally a clean br ae at ae astride Daulatpur
“nsive position was organised by battalions up
‘bout eight ki ide Khulna. He put two batté .
“ight kilometres outside fensive posture. 15
PP Ird battalion in depth. d 6 Punjab was on the
“8s deployed on the left of the road an

390 Tragedy of Errors
right. 22 FF was in depth covering the coat bigs teins 12
Punjab was guarding the Mairampur approach. - a y each
of the recee and support battalion (21 Punjab) wer otted to each
unit. Screens were sent forward to give early warning and to cause
as much delay as possible on the enemy.
For the first time the brigade was to fight as a cohesive whole
according to the book. They were still short of armour as only one
tank had been left. The fire of a regiment of artillery was
available. Because of this the brigade gave 4 good account of itself
as it broke up several prigade-size enemy attacks. It kept two
brigades at bay from 11 December to 16 December outside
Khulna. Three enemy attacks by the enemy were beaten back by a
combination of artillery, tank and infantry fire in front of
Daulatpur**. The Indians suffered heavy losses and had to bring
in a fresh brigade (4 Sikhs, 8 Madras and 13 Dogras) but with no
success.
A commanding officer of the Indian artillery regiment,
directing fire from an air observation post was shot down and
killed in the crash. Pakistan lost two brave young officers. Second
Lieutenant Salar received a direct hit from a tank and was
martyred. Captain A-Y. Akhund died while firing a machine gun.
A tribute to his valour was paid by Major Thakur of the 13 Dogra
Regiment. He is reported to have said "One young looking soldier
who was bleeding from all over the body was still leaning on his
machine gun. His ammunition had been exhausted. The young
officer asked for some water but before I could come back with the
elixir the brave boy had received another hit. His arm had been
blown off. His soul had flown to heaven to join those of other
shaheeds". Thakur, while searching his body identified him as
Captain Arjuman Yar Akhund"4, 7
dessore was not evacuated as General D.K. Palit mentions,
neither did it fall like a mango ripened by a long Bengali summet
ae ti by William Stewart. The fact is that it was not eve?
“ans ee ry nor later. 107 Brigade had placed all its
defences west of . and when the Indians broke through the
of moving to Jess re. Th the brigade withdrew to Khulna instead
shattered a few days | e pride of India’s 9 Infantry Division 7
aig irae oe Si aca earn anna aie
Dashes and rehnnes e from its defensive position betwee?
|

