. . 169
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End)
was a senior Bengali armed forces officer. Brigadier Iskender-ul-
Karim (Bachu) and three Bengali ministers were sent to Dacca
but they too failed to convince Mujib to change his stand. Mujib |
paid no attention to the appointed ministers even though they”
were Bengalis.
General Farman, by now an old hand in the government house
in Dacca,and on the best of terms with Mujib and other Kast
Pakistani leaders, was also unsuccessful in getting Mujib to accept
the president’s invitation to him. On Farman’s insistence Mujib
promised to be in Islamabad on February 19, but when on
February 18, Bhutto again announced his refusal to go to Dacca
saying that there he would be a double hostage, Mujib renegeg®8,
Yahya was getting more and more upset at the turn of events,
The smooth path which he had planned to charter soon after the
election was now strewn with obstacles, "He was feeling let down",
opined Peerzada. To get to know the mood in East Pakistan
Farman was asked to come over and brief the CMLA with regards
to the local situation And if possible bring Mujib-ur-Rahman with
him. |
On February 17, President Yahya dismissed his nominated
civilian cabinet, which in any case was only a show piece, as all
‘Major decisions were being taken by the President, advised by an
inner circle of military officers headed by the PSO,
In the meantime Bhutto, Sensing that he might be by-passed
asked for an interview with the President which was immediately
agreed to. They met on February 19. By now Yahya had begun to
have second thoughts about Mujib’s real intentions. It did not
need a great deal of effort by Bhutto, therefore, of painting Mujib
as the real villain in the piece. He told Yahya that if he gave in to
Mujib West Pakistan would be exploited and there would be no
one to‘look after West Pakistan’s interest. Mujib would become a
dictator and could manipulate things in favour of East Pakistan |
alone.
He exploited Yahya’s desire of sorting the constitutional issues
outside the assembly before the inaugural session for which more |
time was needed. He also convinced the President that_a walk — |
by the Ppp would create a bigger crisis, hinting that he stern
enough strength in West Pakistan to creaté trouble in the we
Wing,
i

170 Tragedy of Errors
There was a distinct division within the — faces ste i
the question of handing over power to me oa CARNE atte
their landslide victory in the elections. ose in Kas ‘akistan,
who though being West Pakistanis, were ues in thei,
v ews that the majority party should Pe given the - t to form the
next government. Being in the eye of the storm they were awar,
of the consequences if that was not done.
The top brass in West Pakistan, however, were skeptical about
Mujib-ur-Rahman’s <ntentions. They believed that he should he
prevented from becoming all powerful as he would try and seek an
accommodation with India at the expense of Pakistan’s interests
-They were also afraid that financial resources would be
‘transferred to East Pakistan which would curtail the economic
growth of West Pakistan. 7
_ Yahya was also concious of the fact that the army, bureaucracy,
industrialists and feudal aristocracy were concentrated in West
Pakistan and they would not accept the down grading of their
importance by the new set of Bengali legislators. A coalition
government or a strong opposition to keep the radical elements in
Fast Pakistan in check was necessaly and only Bhutto could
provide that check. But still Yahya stuck to his guns and did not
give any indication to Bhutto that he would postpone the national
assembly session. So Bhutto told the press on February 19,
“National assembly session will take place on the appointed date
* but without the PPP".
To brow beat the government-and the Sheikh, Bhutto called
for a PPP convention at Karachi on February 20. It was attended
by 600 PPP members of the forthcoming national and provincial
assemblies. AWami League’s 6 Points were discussed formally for
te Bre time. Bhutto’s main concern was not to allow East
Pakistan to dominate over the rest in West Pakistan.
All members took an oath to abide by the decisions of the
ae ae ‘ the convention "The government should
days time limit", H ational assembly session or waive the 120
a "pliabl it'®. He blamed Admiral Ahsan, for having become
pliable tool in the hands of the Awami League"!
B .
Bean et idea in the mind of Yahya that
According to Bhutto what wae and that they were pro-Mujib.
firm and was able to im s needed was someone who could be
pose a stronger martial law in East

171
Political Quaginire (Beginning of the End)
Pakistan. So when Farman came to Rawalpindi on February 20,
to brief the CMLA on the current situation in the eastern wing
+ Yahya admonished Farman "you are all impotent. Why has he~
* (Mujib) not come" blurted out a bulky Pathan president to a soft
~ spoken lanky Farman a ‘Rangarh” from Rhotak (East Punjab).
"Are you governing or are you taking orders from Mujib?"
continued the President. How far removed he was from reality!
All the president’s men could not have forced Mujib to come
against his will except in chains. He had 60 million Bengalis
behind him with 93,000 ‘Shala’ (a mild abusive term) Punjabis
hostages in their hands. Mujib may have acqueisced but his aides
were extremists and persuaded him not to go to Islamabad.
Yahya chose to consult his close aides on the next course of
action. A meeting of governors and martial administrators was
held on February 22, at the President’s House in Rawalpindi.
Chief of the General Staff, Major General Gul Hasan Khan;
Director General Inter Services Intelligence Directorate, Major
General Muhammad Akber; Chairman National Security Council,
Major General Ghulam Umar; Director of Intelligence Bureau,
Naseer Rizvi; Inspector General of Police, Agha and the Principal
Staff Officer, Lieutenant General S.G.M.M. Peerzada attended.
From Dacca came governor, Vice Admiral §.M. Ahsan;
Commander Eastern Command Lieutenant General Sahibzada
Yaqub Khan and Deputy Martial Law Administrator (civil affairs)
Major General Rao Farman Ali Khan. The meeting began with
the usual round of drinks followed by a discussion that would
alter the map of the subcontinent once again. The foundation of a
). new country carved out of Pakistan was laid in the drawing room
.of the President’s House that evening.
The conference opened with a briefing by GHQ and ISI on the
situation within the country with special attention to East
Pakistan. The sentiments in the military leadership in West
Pakistan had turned against Mujib for not coming to West
Pakistan. The general impression given by the army was that
pressure must be applied on Mujib to force him to control the
extremist elements within his party to which General Yahya
teplied “There is a lot of lawlessness here also. We should put
-Ptessure on Bhutto as well". General Akber, was not prepared to
deal with Bhutto in the same manner as with Mujib whom he had
by now begun to dislike. "Any action against Bhutto would be very

172
Tragedy of Errors
strongly resented both by the civilians and the junior officers" .,; ‘
the DG, ISI. Peerzada maintains that he was against the Atri
‘ application of martial law whether it was to be in East or in West
Pakistan.
General Yahya then described very briefly the dilemma he was
facing and the crisis that would erupt if the political leaders gia
not cooperate with each other. He, with a heavy heart, told them
about his intention to postpone the inaugural session of the
national assembly if major political issues were not resolveq
between the Awami League and the People’s Party. Generg]
Farman claims that he told General Yahya not to postpone the
national assembly session. Admiral Ahsan and General Yaquh
were also against the postponement but their voices were lost in
the wilderness.
The President then moved into a smaller room with only
Hamid, Ahsan, Yaqub and Peerzada. He then spelt out his next
step. "My intention is to postpone the national assembly session as
the East Pakistani leaders are not being helpful. I intend to
reverse the direction and re-introduce strict martial law in East
Pakistan alone. I have lost confidence in Mujib. We have been
; weakening the martial law proportionately as the democratic
process moved forward. Now it is going to be a reversal of my
earlier policies. We should knock sense in the head of Mujib and
hold the assembly session only after the Awami League has been
crushed. Let us get the train moving again and this time by force’
concluded the President - for the first time speaking in the tone of
a commander-in-chief to his corps commanders.
Sahibzada Yaqub listened to his boss with quiet disdain then
elucidated in his accustomed grace and style using all the war
course terminology he had mastered over the years and put across
his views clearly, candidly and politely.
‘I cannot comment upon the political wisdom of such a
decision" said the general. "As commander Eastern Command I
shall, however, point out the military consequences of the
postponement of the national assembly session. In the situation
prevailing in East Pakistan every assessment must perforce be
intermingled with politics", peminded Sahibzada Yaqub.
newt els * holding of elections and generating the hopes of a
sha: cciintests government to take over from the military regime
| pirations of the Bengalis in East Pakistan had changed

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) ns
drastically. Those holding key positions were looking forward to
exercising authority. If that was denied to them there would be
frustration and bitterness" were Yaqub’s comments,
Martial law" said Sahibzada Ya "j sat
agencies With shortage of tops Gar ipguetse through iu
Pakistan. The civil administration had changed their loyalties and
were now looking towards the rising sun, If their ambitions were
suppressed there would certainly be trouble even if there were
more forces available to Eastern Command", explained General
Yaqub. He continued to emphasise that in the event of a stricter
martial law the loyalties of the East Bengal Regiments and the
it a ry would be put under severe strain. "One ugly
ent could lead to very seri 4 "war 1 of {
mare it Hat Peninnns ry ous results" warned the head of the
Referring to the reaction from across the border Sahibzada
Yaqub pointed out that the Indians would exploit the situation to
the full having already penetrated into the area. An Indian threat
in such a situation would be disastrous as Eastern Command
would be torn between inward deployment to deal with internal
security and outward defence to meet the external threat. The
general went on to say “with draconian measures and
reinforcements from West Pakistan we might, in the short term,
‘retain a degree of control but not bein a position to do so for long”,
The main point, however, was what was the effect desired? "If
the aim was the integrity of Pakistan) then it could hardly be
achieved by such measures as a strict application of martial law
would mean casualties which in turn would spread hatred and
resentment against the armed forces. Thus we would be achieving
results quite the opposite of the political aim intended. Even if we
succeed in bringing back law and order by force of ammege would
have failed in the ultimate objective", said Yaqub. " r success
would be our failure. The naked sword of martial law against the
60 million people of East Pakistan, who had given their verdict in
favour of a particular political party, would be suicidal. It would
only be taken as an imperial act of revenge against a. colony
opined the force commander.
"The decision, therefore, to reverse the direction would be
"nsound, it would fail and bring about the disintegration of
Pakistan under the most unfavourable circumstances’ was
Commander Eastern Command's closing remarks to his
commander-in-chief.

“ Tragedy of Errors
He ended his assessment by recommending that the CML
should; (1) continue to seek a political solution; (2) should Make
political leaders, specially in West Pakistan, realise the
consequences of the postponement of the national assembly
session; (3) place the blame on their shoulders and not on th,
army and (4) create pressure on them to get together.
General Yahya and the rest heard Sahibzada Yaqub’s sombre
reflections in pin drop silence. All that Yahya could say "now let ys
have dinner. Will see you again tomorrow at 10 ’clock".
Yaqub and Ahsan came back to the East Pakistan House. They
were both in connected rooms and heard each other tossing in
bed. Neither of them could sleep that night. Yaqub says he had
tears in his eyes and through them he recalled all what he had
said a few hours before to the President of Pakistan. He got up
and, in the stillness of the night, penned down all that he could
remember. He wrote down the whole of the conversation while
his memory was fresh and sent his handwritten note to Peerzada,
but not before showing it to Ahsan who, Sahibzada Yaqub says,
"agreed with every word".
Yahya asked Yaqub and Ahsan to see Bhutto on their way to
East Pakistan and persuade him to attend the inaugural session.
Ahsan, Yaqub and Peerzada went to Karachi and met Bhutto on
February 24, at Admiral Muzaffar’s house who was then the
commander-in-chief of the Pakistan Navy. The spokesman was
Yaqub. He told Bhutto "We do not see any reason for you to
boycott the national assembly session. We have been sent to ask
you to attend the session. Bhutto, jarrogant and proud as he
always was, replied "Instead of telling me tell Mujib to come to
_West Pakistan". Yaqub to pacify him said "We will speak to him
also" Bhutto then toned his voice down and commented “I cannot
ay I will call a meeting of my people and the decision will
epend on them . There was muted laughter all around as the
meaning was quite clear!!,
Bhutto went out of the room and said I ‘will ring up Abdul
Hafeez Peerzada, his confidant and came back to sa Tha panty is /
adamant that they will " y
y not attend". That was that! General
Peerzada went back to Rawalpindi and dutifully reported the
proceedings to General Yahya. utifully reporte
When
Ahsan se Re der re after reaching Dar
of the date of the wiationaljassembly

. 175
Political Quagmire ‘Beginning of the End)
session being postponed to Mujib he
assembly Lo on the scheduled a only ruthie eee
After the address by the President the assembly can be adjourned
to discuss constitutional matters outside the House as desired by
the PPP. When Peerzada told this to Yahya he saidPeeroo He is
making Ahsan a fool, Mujib has been breaking his pr Suntice 6x
several occasions". Yahya cited the question of 6 Points which
Mujib had said would be negotiable but was now Saying that it is
in the hands of the people. "He Promised three times to come to
Rawalpindi" said the President "but Mujib went back on his word", ~~
Looking toward his PSO he continued "you want me to get into his
trap now. He will not adjourn the assembly till he gets the
constitution passed. It is bette; to change the date and keep the
situation in our hand". Peerzada claims that he Suggested to the
President to give an alternative date when postponing the national
assembly session. Yahya is reported to have replied "I gave a date
once but Bhutto made a hue and cry. Next time we give a date we
must consult both". The matter ended there.
The next day the President was going to Karachi on his way to
attend the national assembly session. That is what everybody
thought. All preparations had been made. Tickets had been
bought, seats had been reserved but before leaving Yahya told his
PSO to prepare drafts of two proclamations. One draft of his
inaugural speech to be delivered on March 3, at the national
assembly session at Dacca and the second one a proclamation
about the postponement.
When questioned by his PSO he said "Peeroo. We have not yet
decided .... I do not want to be caught unawares”. But it should
have become clear that by now Yahya had moved closer to the idea |
of postponement and dealing with the consequences by using |
force. The staff work carried out by the CMLA secretariat for the
President’s departure to Karachi was more of a facade as General
Yahya had already made known his intentions about postponing
the assembly session at the MLAs Conference on February 22.
Infact he was contemplating a military crackdown if the reaction
to the postponement was violent.
While in Karachi the President met Bhutto, Peorzada
remained behind in Raw alpindi preparing to join the President
When he left for Dacca), who did not take long to tilt Yahya
Completely towards his way of thinking.

176 Tragedy of Errors
, utions
Military Prec@ pvious that @ postponement of the nationgy
When it became © + be done because of the uncompromig,,
assembly would have of the two largest political parties the igi
attitude of the leader's Fast Pakistan to deal with the likelihoog of
to send more troops to nd order was felt. However, commande,
a breakdown 0° did not press for a large contingent to be sen,
Eastern ee to give the impression that a politicy
across as he a in the air. Since Ahsan and Farman wer,
settlement was rts to persuade Mujib to go to Rawalpindi for
continuing their ane they did not want him to come to the
further political negotiations,'™ .
, iti dh tion was no longer being considereq
conclusion that a political so? d to Karachi and was at 19
Only one brigade was, therefore, move at 12
hours notice to move to East Pakistan.
ry 25, Mujib wanted Yahya to visit Dacca and gave a
Sic tint tar sodify his 6 Points'™. "If federating* units of
West Pakistan do not wish to have precisely the same degree of
. autonomy as Bangladesh or wish to secede certain additional
power, to the Centre, 6 Points formula does not stand in their
way" said Mujib!.
On the morning of February 28, Peerzada received a telephone
call from General Umar (a close confidant of General Yahya) who
was then at Karachi. He told Peerzada to see that the
proclamation about the postponement goes on the air at midday
March 1, 1971. Umar also mentioned that they had already told
Ahsan at Dacca to inform Mujib before the announcement is
made on the radio,and that Bhutto is already in the know. (Quite
naturally, as it was he who was preparing Yahya for this move).
While the military coterie in West Pakistan wet?
contemplating about the formal announcement of the
lomo of the national assembly session, the martial law
; nistrator in Dacca was anxious to get the clearance fot
aunching operation ‘Blitz’. This was to be a short, swift and local
operation to contain the violence against th a t which
was certain to erupt § , st the governmen
pt as soon as the session was postponed. A
signal sent by General Yaqub to this eff, Febr 26, to
CMLA HQ went unheeded. , ect on February 4°,
Ahsan also rang u ; ; .
informed to say that he Hei cid ee aay ane 7 wt
the new reality but only if the a ee a d
ment is not sine die a?
|

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) mu
, that the pono mace Out to appear as if it was for
administrative reaso on eerzada agr eed with Ahsan but could do
'  sittle about it. According to him he tried to get in touch with
' General Yahya at Karachi on telephone but could not do so
' Neither the President nor the military Secretary nor Umar were
“ available.
He rang back Ahsan to say that he had not been able to convey
| his views to the President. Ahsan also tried to speak to the CMLA
| directly. He also could not trace him. He could only get through to
| General Hamid at Sialkot who spoke to Umar. Finally the
| message was relayed to Yahya through a very circuitous route but
| Yahya according to Peerzada did not agree with either of the two \-~
suggestions made by Ahsan.
On March 1, Admiral Ahsan sent for Mujib to convey the
; decision about the postponement of the national assembly session
, and to inform him that an announcement to this effect would be
| made in the afternoon. Mujib, accompanied by Tajuddin Ahmad,
, secretary general of the Awami League and Kamal Hussein, came |
to the government house flying a Bangladesh flag. When Yaqub
and Ahsan told them about the postponement they were shocked _.
' and flabbergasted. Tajuddin said "we knew that West Pakistan.“
' will not hand over power"!4, Mujib took Yaqub and Ahsan aside
' and told them "please get a new date for the session”. As he would
| not be able to control the forces which would be released if that /
' was not done. "The picture is now quite clear. The parleys at\/
' Larkana have tilted the balance in Bhutto’s favour. There will
' now be a pressing demand by my people for a unilateral
declaration of independence (UDI). After the announcement even
, if] try not toI will be carried away with the flood" confided Mujib.
, ‘Twill still try not to declare the UDI. Please save the situation. If
, thatis done i.e. a new date is given, I would be able to control the
, Situation" was the Sheikh’s final comments. He then spoke to
Peerzada who promised to convey this to General Yahya.
| When they left, Ahsan sent a telex to CMLA Headquarters. It
Stated: I beg of you to announce a fresh date tonight, tomorrow
| will be too late." The plea went unnoticed.
___Influenced by Bhutto’s arguments at Karachi, Yahya whose
'’ Mind had already been made up, crossed the rubicorn. The
) Message postponing the national assembly session went on the air
{

178
Tragedy of Errors
at midday March 1, 1971 as planned without giving a fregh :
J That an ie beginning of the end. Yahya took rrticen deca
y Without giving any weightage to the assessment of his top bras i
‘Dacca. As it turned out later the men on the spot knew i
‘consequences of such a decisidn better than those sitting 1,004
miles away.
Yahya was very unhappy with Ahsan for not being able to fores
Mujib to come to Rawalpindi and for, what he perceived to be
supporting the Awami League’s demands. On the night of the 1g
of Marchi soon after the postponement of the national assembly
session Yahya asked Peerzada to issue orders for Admiral Ahsan’,
dismiséal and for General Yaqub to take over as governor anj
martial law administrator of East Pakistan in addition to his
duties as commander Eastern Command. Peerzada claims that he
wanted to protect Ahsan and tried to pacify Yahya’s anger agains
Ahsan by saying that the Bengali leadership havea certain
amount of trust in him and CMLA Headquarters may need him,
He may therefore, be allowed to stay on. But Yahya considered
Ahsan a weakling and he repeated his orders "do what I have told
you_and I want it done straightaway’. And so Ahsan, who had
established a good rapport with Mujib and was generally liked by
the Bengalis and non-Bengalis alike, was given his marching
orders unceremoniously. Ahsan was an honest gentleman, who
had no ulterior motive nor any wild ambition. Whatever he did
and the advice that he gave,was in his judgement in the best’
interest of the integrity of Pakistan.
Peerzada rang up Ahsan to convey to him the decision about
his dismissal. It was, however Yaqub who picked up the phone
Peerzada, therefore, was relieved that he did not have to convey
the unpleasant news to Ahsan directly. "Please tell Ahsan to hand
over toy opal Vectmae to Yaqub. The general was told that the
president had decided to dismiss Ahsan and wanted Yaqub to take
over from him immediately.
Postponement of the National Assembly Session
b mig leaders, except the PPP wanted. powers to be |
anded over to the Awami League. In the prevailing situation
where aminosity against West Pakistan had ly surfaced
East Bengal, breaking up of Ral BA. OPEMy : mal
one vote was'd r iol errr, amin ing
maedeecris momentous decision which could have far reach
quences affecting the very foundation of Pakistan. Since the
|

