331
Role of Othor Countriog
aaa .
a P_ ——. aj a)
a a
yp er
r Ke 5 oF
. ts : as LT GEN
wea ee AMIR ABDULLAH KHAN N1A7Z1
i ieee) . COMMANDER EASTERN
| q- he g COMMAND
a Boe cs ” :
% " Pxe Be, Fs on
$ 2 ‘ But Bee aS 58) eee ;
' ‘2 . er pate iy nt
ae & oP * ee
st i Ay i
i ok Es
1
a Bas : ae
bcp Re sae
‘ ; Sere ee Sires #
LT GEN i, vam Ree ae
. JAGJIT SINGH AURORA Me We
‘OC-in-C EASTERN COMMAND ae
INDIAN ARMY

| 332
Tragedy of Errors
ee =
% 4
y NK }
E c/s
i af
; . ~ 3 :
x y 4
‘ ite *
¢ °° aa Ps
y |
COL ATAUL GHANI OSMANI
CHIEF OF THE MUKTI BAHINI
LEGEND
FOR SUBSEQUENT MAPS
PAK ARMY SINGLE LINE
IND ARMY__DOUBLE LINES
| | PLATOON
| | com PANY
pail
| BATTALION
x
|] BRIGADE
xx
| | Division
XXX
| | CORPS
KA
| | ARMY
ee

jndo-Pakistan War - 1971
(Eastern Theatre)
Strategic Orientation
The geographical separation of the two wings of Pakistan made
it virtually impossible to plan for a co-ordinated defence of the
whole of the country. The options available were either to raise
two self-contained independent armed forces, each capable of
defending its own area of responsibility against a numerically
superior enemy, or to provide for a minimum force in a less
vulnerable region with the major defensive strength lying in the
other. |
In the case of the former, the Indians would have been
compelled to pay a heavy price to achieve their objective of
dismembering Pakistan. Economically, however, such an option
could not have been sustained and the danger of the country
crumbling from within due to its people being deprived of the
basic necessities would have been very much there.
In the latter case one or the other wing would remain
dangerously exposed. Working on interior lines the Indians had
the ability of concentrating their armed forces against one flank at
Pane while denying that facility to Pakistan. Both the wings of
akistan had their strengths and weaknesses.
| stan kre of Pakistan lay in the West. Punjab was the
mel # t e country. It was the soil from where the bulk of the
centre es a was drawn; the abode of the elite; the cultural
capital tn th ub of all communications and the gateway to the
route té ch eet the open terrain of Sindh provided a direct
Where all ae metropolis, the largest city of Pakistan,
Outlet to th ajol industries were concentrated. It was the only
depth, There outside world. West Pakistan as a whole lacked
armed for € were no major obstacles to the movement of large
mations. The main road,anq-yail link between the north

334 Tragedy of Errors
hin striking distance of enemy ground forces
a oat Stier offensive formations were located opposite
West Pakistan. The disputed territory of ee wes ee
to the western wing. Indian-held Kashmir ( ) overlooked the
main Grand Trunk road. On the Indian side of the border the
terrain was suitable for the manoeuvre of large armoured
formations making it possible for capturing territory in the west,
All this necessitated concentration of forces in West Pakistan.
East Pakistan, on the other hand, did not face a serious threat
from India as it was far removed from the area of tension. Indian
offensive formations were located with a bias towards its western
frontier. It also had a large Hindu population with links on both
sides of the border. An unprovoked attack on East Pakistan
without any serious provocation from that wing would not be
appreciated by the world community. China, in particular, would
make a lot of noise as its supporters in East Bengal would be
affected.
East Bengal was also ideally suited for protracted defence. Its
mighty rivers would be difficult to negotiate against opposition.
For most part of the year the terrain, except in the north,
remained unsuitable for large scale military operations.
Chittagong hill tracts in the south-east and the Sunderbans in the
aan were insurmountable obstacles suitable only for guerrilla
fener teen no offensive plans were visualised in the east a
as, therefore, needed for East Pakistan.
lay woe ae z eae also had several advantages. It
the two could be cut off provid ae and the narrow neck joining
for such an offensive tictation thay sales in could be spared
Calcutta the pride of India and te ’ keeping the defences intact.
miles away. It was well within _ ~ economic soul was only thirty
Pakistan, Any movement of r ge Of the PAF stationed in Bast
Calcutta could cause a ase | i" und forces in the direction of
people. The dissident elements of sprawling nly of 10 million
encouraged to rise up against a. agas and Mizo could be
Delhi. China could contain she le central government in New
border, during the a fot amount of Indian forces along !t5
stew hound ‘en the Himalayan passes were not
East Pakistan als ae
jutting into Indian ‘terttgy etabilites, A number of salients
easily be chopped off. Al!

| Indo-Pakistan War - 197 | Eastern Theatre 305
communications, to Chittagong and Sylhet could be cut off
without difficulty as the rail and road network Passed very close to
the international border. Due to major water obstacles the defence
had to be compartmentalised. The concept of keeping central
reserves would not work as movement. to threatened sectors
would take a considerable amount of time. With hardly any air-lift
capability it would be virtually impossible to react £. ie
threat in time.
sae the centre of gravity lay in West Pakistan and the
political and military power was concentrated in the hands of the
non-Bengalis the policy of defence of the East lay in the West
found favour amongst the national Strategic planners. From the
Bengali point of view this recipe was not palatable. It would have
been little consolation for the Bengalis, if their own province came
under Indian occupation, to know that the Pakistan army was
holding a chunk of Rajasthan territory.
Distribution of Forces
Militarily the distribution of forces was sound. The direction of
threat, the terrain and infrastructure and the location of enemy
offensive formations all pointed to the fact that in any conflict with
India the major and secondary efforts of the Indian armed forces
would be against West Pakistan.
However, national strategy should not only take into account
military considerations but should also analyse the political and
socio-economic fall out of major decisions - on various segments of
Its citizens,
The presence of troops in an area in peace time does not only
help in achieving a measure of security but it also contributes to
nation building. Cantonments bring with it economic benefits to
those who live in and around it. Contractors, petty shopkeepers,
wtisans and a host of other traders derive their daily bread from
the money circulated by the armed forces personnel. Cunlign
“dlonies come up around cantonments to serve the need of a _ oa
Uniformed population. That being so it was West Pakistan t a
benefitted most from the defence budget. A natural response,
East Pakistan, to a significant imbalance in the eS aes
mn otments between the two regions acne - exploit
the el Standable. It gave an opportunity to the p
Situation to their advantage.

336 Tragedy of Errors
At the time of Partition only one brigade was stationed in Ras,
Bengal out of a total strength of four infantry divisions. Late,
when the Pakistan army expanded, the force in East Pakistan Was
raised to one infantry division.
After the 1962 Indo-Chinese conflict the Indians began ty
strengthen their armed forces even further. They began to pay
greater attention towards their eastern and northeastern flank. A
second Indian fleet came up in the Bay of Bengal. A ring of air
bases was constructed around Pakistan’s eastern province. The
infrastructure close to the international frontier in the east began
to be developed. India began to be concerned about the
vulnerability of their chicken neck connecting West Bengal with
Assam. They were bitter against Islamabad for closing the more
direct land link which had passed through East Pakistan.
Even during the 1965 Indo-Pakistan War no need was felt to
bolster up the defence of East Pakistan as India had made no
military moves in that direction. The Bengali politicians, however,
| capitalised on the lack of sensitivity shown by the Centre towards
the security of their province.
| By now the eastern wing was becoming volatile. The frequent
arrests of some of their political leaders; the mishandling of the
Agartala conspiracy case; the agitation against Field Marshal
| Ayub; the continuation of a military regime in which the Bengalis
were under represented and the gradual escalation for the
demand of greater autonomy in running their own affairs had
begun to show signs of troubled waters ahead. India’s hand in
encouraging an agitation against the Centre and its support of
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman’s 6 Points was also becoming evident.
Defence Planning
sgnfens Maning fo the scusty of East Pitan hens
realised that one inf ier ae However, it was still not
elements to talk off wo a hoes wih no naval or air —
internal rebellion su st 4 oo seinen paige
neighbouring uleseaan : ee ay an aELNG involvement of :
written by the armed ‘re ear ole national strategy P ae
recommended a substanti +s wre tse Studies during that per
theory of the defence of th Bast 1 of forces in East Bengal. The
soteptea by military strat e Kast lay in the West continued to be
londs whieh Wage in Pakistan, in spite of the ominous
ng over the Bay of Bengal.

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre we
decision to despatch some additi
agit only in 1969 after Genera] Yahye noes ott Pakistan
; ad taken over as th
president and the Chief Martial Law Administ as the
neadquarters was finally raised in Dacca. nator. A. corps
Lieutenant General Sahibzada Y. :
Nawab family of Rampur (a princel ae, a 8 SOR GF
y State of undivided Indi )
armoured corps officer who had earned his spur: a), an
' scholar of military strategy, who could grasp the . ack brilliant
military problem and could judge the centre ec pin of any
balance of forces with absolute clarity. A linguist wh co
aloss to express his thoughts in the choicest of w ls wen eer
; ords was sent to
East Pakistan to command the newly raised 3 Corps (late
Eastern Command). ater-callod
General Yaqub had been the chief instructor of the armed
forces war course at the prestigious Command and Staff College
Quetta. Later he was appointed Chief of the General Staff of the
Pakistan army. He was then sent to do a course at the Imperial
Defence College, (IDC) London to complete his studies for the
higher direction of war. Since it came so late in his career it was
generally rumoured that he had been pushed aside because of his
superior intellect.
When he came back he was over qualified for the job in hand
as he had only a division plus some additional troops to command
While those military leaders, whom he had studied at the IDC, had
mnoeuvered armies in theatres of operations very much different,
: Where he had been sent. Time and space had completely
‘ifferent connotation in East Pakistan than in Western Europe or
i the deserts of Africa. The Seine and the Rhine were little
oa compared to the several miles wide Ganges, Jamuna and
a i The effects desired were more political than
lig ry. There was an enemy within, whose potentiality of
membering the country had not been realised at that time.
-. should not have taken him long to assess the sae ns ;
bet situation in East Pakistan. He was certainly incl “
times at his area of responsibility could be ae Y sata “wich
* of tension. It was surrounded on all si ht wal 230 ike
W multiple routes of entry into his area. Eas " ee
est Pakistan, lacked depth as most of the towns including

438 Tragedy of Errors
er + formations, Mp;
i thin striking range of enemy . » Major
capital iy sacri though a hindrance to advancing columns, would
water 008 force into independent sectors. The communicatio
divide his own force into indep n
infrastructure was poorly developed.
He must have also sensed the growing ey between the two
wings of Pakistan. The anger of the average engali against the
West Pakistanis in general and the Punjabis in particular was
Written clearly on their faces. Anti-government rioting was taking
place and it should have become apparent that the troops in East
Pakistan under his command would be committed to counter.
insurgency operations. He had also heard Mr Ata-ur-Rahman a
former ehief minister of East Pakistan, telling Governor Admiral
S.M. Ahsan, that the people of East Pakistan wanted to know
when the West Pakistan army of occupation would leave East
Pakistan to enable the province to determine its future,
The defence of the province in such a situation against an
external aggression would be extremely difficult. There was a dire
need, therefore, of lowering the tension by means other than the
use of force.
India’s Eastern Command located in Calcutta comprising of IV
and XXIII Corps had a total of eight front line divisions. Five of
them were facing the Chinese in the north while three were
deployed around East Pakistan. Some of these elements were
engaged in pacifying the Naga and Mizo areas, During the winter
months when the passes across the Himalayas become impassable
to haere forces the perceived threat from the Chinese is greatly
Lg two of the five divisions could be made to change
to iititey formations The conversion from mountain divisions
equipment. would, of course, need time for re
Formations f, :
be moved to the E, ee Vormand (army reserves) could also
conflict Pakistan’ ast Pakistan border if need be. Thus in aly
vastl : a Eastern theatre had to contend with an enemy
envire superior in numbers and material. In such a strategic
offensive actions vould have been unrealistic to plan on majo
Even wh Y the troops in East Pakistan in 1969.
ven when adopti . ;
Veith: was tinea te 4 Jo ely defensive attitude Gener!
rearward posture. Mannin ee of adopting a forward o
€ the entire border in strength wou
p

{ndo-Pakistan War - 197} Eastern Thea -_ 339
mean dissipating one’s forces. Co
Dacca and a few other major 9 wall ine, Gefence around
by-pass opposition with ease and threaten —— the enemy to
major fight. © capital without a
The Corps Comma ‘
sontingencies: nder, therefore, based his defences on two
Contingency A: A local uprising with Indiia i
material support but not carrying out a vlipehiiaties” moral and
Contingency B: A major insur Se
. invading East Pakistan. gency accompanied by India
' Tn Contin :
Troops were a ioe pate posture was to be adopted.
ll eh uprizinge rad me sone out all along the
ere in Kast Pakistan and
prevent the capture of . and to
any chunk of territory b i
elements. In Contingency B: . ty by rebellious
| y B: the main defences
Dacca which was to be str were to be around
strongly defended with lich
dep] ight elements
i to delay the enemy advance towards the capital.
| Gtaligenese was to be given to shift from Contingency A to
i Thi
; Dislbeaee 6 d keeping with the Commander-in-Chief’s earlier
' neutralise as m ugust, 1967 which said "In the East contain and
t casualties Seiten enemy troops as possible inflicting maximum
§ November 19 a running the risk of annihilation". On 12
(Command was j an Operational Directive specific to Eastern
i Corps (Eastern aie by GHQ which stated the mission to 3
i defend East “rt ommand) in Just five simple words "3 Corps will
| Were: (1) we enn stan". It also spelt out certain assumptions. These
a maximum of = a to geta warning of an attack by India upto
With India: (3) mate Sie > initiative of starting hostilities will lie
resulting = main effort will be directed against West Pakistan
theatre: % salon and decisive battles to be fought in the western
' Pakistan wil a communications between East and West
I Political state © disrupted; (5) China’s support will be confined to
' border me 6) oes and demonstrations along the Sino-Indian
full Scale milita ° Pakistan-army should be prepared to continue
1 As TY Operations for atleast three months.
We
| Omman ners Ree later out of the six assumptions specified by the
| dig inform ages! four of them came true. Intelligence services
©, 8overniment /of-am impending\ attack) by) India

340 Tragedy of Errors
; .. advance. Normal communicatio
against East Baldatan 9 ita were actually disrupted. It es
mae nee an all out war by invading Pakistan on 2]
Somsiket China’s support was confined to moral and politica
support only.
Only two assumptions proved ta: be wrele: Thdlia's mili elton
was directed against East Pakistan and not against the West as
conceived. Indian armed forces were initially to contain an attack
by Pakistan in the West if launched. It ‘was only after the
capitulation of East Pakistan that Mrs Indira Gandhi began to
think of eliminating the thorn in her side once and for all. A
warning from the United States prevented her from launching
another military adventure in the West. The second assumption
which did not prove correct was the period of the conflict. The war
was over in twenty six days as against an assumption that
Pakistan should be prepared for a war of three months.
In the summer of 1970, the armed forces war course (afwe)
students of the Command and Staff College, visited East Pakistan.
General Officer Commanding 14 Division, (the only formation in
East Pakistan at that time), Major General Khadim Hussain Raja,
in an hour and a half’s talk to them on the defence of East
Pakistan made some valid observations. He pointed out that while
the quantum of troops in East Pakistan had increased since 1965
the frontages were still vast, ratio of troops to space was still very
meagre, there was lack of adequate armour, artillery and engineer
support. The enemy would enjoy total air and naval superiority.
ital tb we jig ware na
a be less important than afflicting attritio”
mainly on strong cinta Se SOURS neon
vafillerldene We aNGalte ie Hise ae add ohne planning |
ultimate annihilation. He did re lie é ~~ shea om ' To
him, as to many others, "Da scien Biteonk | or — ould
mean the end of all resista ch lpg nga cage wer
io ‘be walisfied by allan nce. General Raja, however; a th
fortress and the Mymen ine " nly some resources for th® ot iD
favour of a pre-emptive i a sector as a whole. He was © ing
forward to have hi mar by advocated a strategy of cree?
nome ing at the bargaining counter’.

