Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) a
at he would not be spared if the constitution j
pr 11 points. "Traitors would be hacked to teow? ne
Shaheedullah, a student of the Dacca University, as
Awami League began to get restive over ; '
date by the President for the national asoomble i a ea Ok
The main issues which the government of Yahya Khan faced
after the elections were: (1) should power be handed over to the
majority party without further delay or negotiations? (2) should
consensus on a new constitution be obtained inside or outside the *
Assembly? (3) should martial law be lifted before holding the —
national assembly session or both should be done simultaneously?
(4) should the constitution be framed at a joint session of the two
major parties or each party be allowed to put up their own drafts
and then the government steps in to merge them and achieve a
consensus? (5) should there be a power sharing between the |
Awami League and the Pakistan People’s Party or this be left to
the majority party to form its own coalition partners and (6)
should the time limit of 120 days be removed?
These factors arose because the constitution, which governs
the relationship between the federating units and the Centre and | 4,
between the rulers and the people had been violated time and in
time again at the sweet will of the individual in power. |
The December, 1970 elections were consequently held under
no ‘legal authority’. A fresh constitution had to be framed by the
newly elected representatives of the people. But as it turned out
the western wing was not prepared to accept the domination of
the Bengalis who after the elections were in a position to frame a
Constitution in accordance with the 6-Points formula, which
Would have resulted in changing the political status of Pakistan
from a federation to virtually a confederation of two or more
autonomous states.
The other factor was the aggressive and yaposeprannes ope
ede of the leader of the second largest political me
ed of conceding defeat was bent upon seizing. Pee aetitt
ieee In one part of the country. FT dha nae Lamar
as th " handing GvEr power ns) t pe calling the national |
in - case in all democracies, dilly dalliee 3 che date for the
Ratio, ly session. He took five weeks to annou
nal assembly to meet.

160
Tragedy of Errors
Post Election Parleys
The time had now come for parleys to begin between 4,
government and the two major political parties, the AL and ppp
| The first such meeting took place at 10.30 am at the presidenp,
house at Dacca on January 13, 1971 between the Awami Leagy,
and martial law authorities. The Awami League was representeg
by Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, Tajuddin Ahmad, Khondka
Mushtaq, Qamar-uz-Zaman and two others. The President wags
assisted by Vice Admiral S. M. Ahsan, Lieutenant Gen. Sahibzada
Yaqub Khan and Lieutenant General S. G. M. M. Peerzada.
General Yahya conceded the technical ability of the Awami
league to go it alone. He, however, did express a desire for the
Awami League to include the West Pakistani elements in the
future government. “If you want you can make a government
without any other party since you have 162 members out of a total
of 300 national assembly seats, but I hope that you will have a
national government by including some West Pakistanis also in
your cabinet” remarked Yahya to Mujib. He did clarify further
that he was not referring to any particular person in West |
Pakistan who should be taken in.
Mujib, according to Peerzada, appeared to be slightly
concerned after hearing the President’s remarks. He did, however,
confirm to General Yahya that he would take persons from both
the wings in his cabinet™*.
Most of the West Pakistani politicians also accepted the fact
that Awami League was competent to frame the constitution
including Sardar Shaukat Hayat Khan (CML) Maulana Shah
Ahmad Noorani (JUP), Air Marshal Asghar Khan (TIP), G. M.
Syed (Jiye Sindh) and Akber Bugti. Even Bhutto agreed that
legally Awami League could frame a constitution as it was the
majority party but “without a consensus it would be a barre?
exercise"®” said the chairman of the People’s Party. :
As regard the date of the first session of the national assembly
Mujib indicated that it should be held as soon as possible. The
ee aupeat dish it should be soon but since there were “re
corner jhe said that h mei = ep tobe paren! at
date ie He reit ‘ ad sat ama <n seer aie
2 wrest eich Le need for using this period for a a
the points of differen - iicians. for holding discussions to 0
Cae ence, including those of the 6 Points, before t
) onal assembly session at Daeca/

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 161 .
‘ib agreed to meet the West Paki Kiccuiere:
i pinta "Hum Bhutto ko bhi tile" de including
uttered Mujib in his Bengali accented Urdu to Y : meet Bhutto)
made it quite clear to the President that his mins le But Mujib
majority,and that it could, if it wanted to ad won a clear
constitution without the support of any oth » Produce the new
form the government relying on its own st er party. It could also |
His comments on 6 Points formula w rength in the assembly.
Points achah hai". (In my opinion a Slee ee Khyal men 6
formula). It is, however, not the Bible and it j ormula Is a good
reasonable limits explained Mujib to th 1s negotiable within
| would like to: make clear” - oA tk ene "but one thing |
that is that there should be A totic ck avr sagas ‘chief “and |
other politicians should also be reasonable Beale ae . |
Ds cedbct macailts rs between himself and Bhutto
ee esults. . lave received information that Bhutto
thin! s that just as Iam her eshe too has a similar position in West
vottennt ea Aidt : have no rival in East Pakistan. |
deat hinactn West P = ag Bhutto cannot say the same
in the West Wing wh h istan. There are other political parties
could be includ : Ww os ave a substantial number of seats who
Seared evan ‘ te e future cabinet”. This is what Bhutto
Siding iu ost as then he would have been left high and dry. '
tried :. < € opposition benches was not his cup of tea. Bhutto
stigport fae 0 the Awami League leaders that he had the
eantanme en al my don’t forget I got the highest votes from the
flaws hie? reminded Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto to barrister Amir-ur-
dtivin bi whip of the Awami League when the latter was
g him to the government house in Dacca”.
ig fone confirmed that during their visit to the second capital
between _ were also discussed, though not in great detail,
aie Owing and the Awami League. The martial law
financial tn id point out that since points 3, 4, and 5 involved
examine th an eS the economic and financial advisers should
e implications more carefully.
Ps the political structure of the next government the
bicameral ague were in favour of a unicameral legislature a5 4 /,
The real : one tended to delay matters and was more a
Wiliament-iiee was that the Bengalis feared that in @ “_ ats
between th they might be forced to concede some kind of pa
€ two wings.

4
162
Tragedy of Errors
The meeting ended with the President hinting that |
tyranny of the majority should not be attempted as it wip \*
work,and that cooperation with others would be helpfuy
achieving the aim of producing a constitution acceptable jn beg
the wings?!.
The scene then shifted from Dacca to Larkana (not Islamaba
as it should have been). General Yahya decided to accept Bhutty
invitation to visit Larkana, the home town of the Bhutto’s, op hi
way back from Dacca.
_, .» On the sprawling gardens of Shahnawaz House, Bhutto
2’ ancestral home, Yahya exchanged views with the next mog
~  jmportant actor on the Pakistan stage. ZAB was in his elements
<*> His party had captured 87 seats out of 137 in West Pakistan. Hy
Was the colossus amongst all the ‘pygmies’ in West Pakistan. %
_—,, he thought! He did have the clout to put pressure on Yahya not ty
5“ yield to all of Mujib’s wishes. In this he was assisted by the self
styled ‘lion of Punjab’ Ghulam Mustafa Khar and his ‘talented
cousin’, Mumtaz Ali Bhutto. General Abdul Hamid Khan, chief of
staff of the Pakistan army and General Peerzada accompanied
General Yahya to Larkana.
According to Peerzada "it was by no means a good meeting as
compared to the one recently held between Mujib and the national
authorities at Dacca. "In fact it was quite a hostile affair’ -
remarked Peerzada. He categorically denied the view expressed by
many authors that the anti-East Pakistan conspiracy was hatched
at Larkana between Yahya and Bhutto and that the knives wert
, sharpened there.
The morning session was confined to pleasantries and 4!
informal exchange of views. (Not enough drinks had bee!
consumed just yet to let oneself go). the second meeting #
Larkana took place indoors in the evening. The opening statemet!
sai by the President who, after remarking that e
ie : were conducted smoothly, congratulated Bhutto on
weak eee in Ls Pakistan. Bhutto then asked permission
gathering Was aor to put across his views forcefully .
facksontae ts not to be questioned. His wadera (andl
knowledge of 26 een 4 the English language _an¢ {0
brow beat thos whee history gave him the nem
Mint dtc se whom he considered to be lesser mortals th
mseu. Is masterly review: of the historical perspective 0
r|

163
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End)
Pakistan he spelt out the options available to deal with a lopsided
election result. These according to Bhutto were: (1) Mujib goes it
alone with some elements from the smaller parties in West
Pakistan; (2) Mujib joins hands with him (Bhutto) and they both
together form the government; (3) Mujib and Bhutto with the
support of the army run the country. Bhutto called the last option
‘the three legged stool position’.
General Yahya reacted sharply to this anomaly. He told Bhutto /
rather curtly. "It is not going to be three legged... I am out of it. -~
From here on it is my hope, that you people take it on. The army
will not have any role except that of the maintenance of law and
order". Yahya went on to acknowledge that the army will remain
subservient to civil control. However, I am still the President. If
any help is required I shall provide it" added the general.
Zulfigar Ali Bhutto then came forward with a direct proposal
which he had been hinting at since the morning. "Please tell Mujib
that the West Pakistani leadership is in my (Bhutto’s) hand and it
will be good for the country if he (Mujib), for the sake of the :
nation, took Bhutto in the governmentand that if he does not do
so we (army) will use military force" said Bhutto. Peerzada
recalled that Yahya was taken aback. He (Yahya) retorted "Zulfi,
Zulfi mind your words - The army is not going to threaten anyone,
hor is it going to plead any one’s case. It is for you to talk to Mujib
on all such matters and for Mujib to take anyone he likes".
Bhutto, recoiled "I did not mean that", lowering his tone he
continued "would it not be better if Pakistan was to have a co-
alition government", Yahya made no comments. General Peerzada
picked up the conversation from then on and explained to Bhutto
that his position was not the same as that of Mujib. "The Awami
League has swept the board in entire East Pakistan whereas you
have secured only a simple majority in two of the four provinces in
West Pakistan" said Peerzada to Bhutto. The PPP chief conceded
this fact but went on to say "That may be so but we are talking in
regional terms, general”.
The President sensing a confrontation between the PSO and
Bhutto intervened and told Bhutto. ‘I will advise you to meet
Mujib"? He also assured ZAB that in his (President’s) meeting
With the Awami League leader he too would impress upon him

164 Tragedy of Errors
that before taking any positive steps regarding 6 Points he Woy
consult the West Pakistani leadership. "Amongst whoty y,,
certainly an important leader" remarked Yahya to Bhutto, ‘
President pacified Bhutto further_by_commenting, "he can, :
ignore you". He also told Bhutto that Mujib had agreed to ti
him and that it was essential for the majority parties of the bp
wings to cooperate with each other put much depends on how th
majority party (AL) feels about this.
The meeting ended with.Yahya summing it up by say;
"Bhutto’ you should sort it out with Mujib or else sit in th
opposition benches. It will be a strong opposition indeed". Bhutty,
closing remarks to Peerzada on the quiet were ‘whatever gave yo
all the idea that I am Banderanaike" (meaning I shall not accent
‘+ the role of the opposition).
The Larkana meeting, which has been mentioned by mog
scholars as a sell out to Bhutto was, according to Peerzada, ;
meeting of differences. It ended with a note that Bhutto shoul
meet Mujib and come to some understanding and that the army
was not going to take any sides in shaping the future shape of the
government. Unfortunately neither Ghulam Mustafa Khar nor}
Mumtaz Ali Bhutto, who were also present at Larkana, confirmed
the details of the conversation between the chairman of the PP?
and the president of Pakistan. Khar did not reply to the author's
letter. Mumtaz Bhutto showed total ignorance as according to hin,
though he was pee there he did not participate or overheat
the conversation®?,
Bhutto subsequently went to Dacca on January 27. During his
meeting with Mujib he discussed the 6 Points which were proving
to be the main hurdle. On the first point viz that the character a
the government should be federal and parliamentary there was "™
cic between the two. Bhutto also agreed that the cent?
. ou have minimum exclusive subjects as suggested by Mult
linked he ingisted horde trade and foreign affairs were clos¢ ,
subject. Th mee - at foreign trade should also remain a cont
given up by Muith ™ ue relating to two separate currencies yer
the flight obca = poids constitutional safeguards to abt
fourth, fifth and sixth none ost Pakistan were made. OF
foreign exchange name regarding me Haeal pousy, CP
no disagreement. He had — an East Pakistan militia thet ints
of Sheikh Mujib-ur Raheny pene 5-1/2 out of the 6 Pe |
Un as eatly as January.

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 165
Awami League’s demand that .
ux of Pakistan’s international ian Pre bear the
mai f Rs. 40 bill - 38 billion out of
a total external debt of Rs ition), however, ‘Was a major factor
which worried Bhutto and the other West Pakistani leaders
The same day the Awami League a roved —
of their own which inter alia stated der fo ast Pek tution |
be re-named Bangladesh; (2) there would be two seats for th
national assembly sessions - In winter Dacca and in eetitiaey
Islamabad; (3) either air headquarters or the naval headquarters
to be shifted to Bangladesh; (4) foreign affairs, defence and
Atrrency be central subjects; (5) there should be two reserve
banks; (6) foreign loan to be paid according to ‘utilisation by the
two wings; (7) Centre to have no taxation power but they could
levy a tax on provinces at the rate of: Bangladesh 27%; Punjab
37%; Sindh 21%; NWFP 7%,
Bhutto in addition to discussing Awami League’s 6 Points
programme during his meeting with Mujib, talked of ‘power
sharing and allocation of portfolios to the PPP”3. He was wanting
to be made the vice president or the foreign minister. If this was
promised to Bhutto he would probably have given in on the
remaining half point as well. Mujib had all the cards stacked in his
favour. He was in no mood to placate his biter rival. Bhutto came
back, his wishes unfulfilled.
Postponement of the National Assembly Session
The date of the inaugural session was initially not a major
Point raised by either Mujib or Bhutto. The Sheikh did mention
February 15, 1971 as his choice. Bhutto, on the other hand was in |
favour of March 23, as that was the day when the Pakistan
resolution was adopted at the Muslim League session at Lahore.
He, Was however, not very stringent on the date and just said
‘March 23, would be good, Sir’.
Yahya, wanted to give some time more to the political eo
to discuss the major issues of the proposed constitution ou 7 4°
the assembly. He, therefore, chose the middle of the two a the
xed March 3, as the date for the inaugural session. In had
Legal Framework Order had not specified the date and he had,
; ria t important
= vet due consideration to the wishes of the two mos uld be
Political leaders he was in no doubt that March 3, wou'
ac 13, the President
“eptable to both of them. And so on February 13,

166
Tragedy of Errors
was pleased to summon the national assembly of Pakistan to m
on Wednesday, March 3, 1971 at 9 a.m. In the provincial assem},
building at Dacca for the purpose of framing a constitutio, ’
Pakistan". This was a date in-between the dates propogeg ,
Mujib and Bhutto. ’
This delay of 40 days between the announcement of th
election results and the summoning of the national assembly Wis
seen with suspicion in East Pakistan. It was, however, in keeping
with the President’s earlier statement of 3 December, 1970, f,,,
days before the election, in which he had "suggested to the electaj
representatives and in particular the leaders of the politicy
parties that they should usefully employ the period between th,
election and the first session of the national assembly in getting
_together and arriving at a consensus on the main provision of the
” new constitution‘. Towards this aim Yahya tried to strive for ,
Mujib - Bhutto coalition. He had invited Mujib to come t
Rawalpindi on February 9, 1971 and later again on February 1),
1971 but he had declined to do so.
But little did he know that a storm in a tea cup was brewing
and that Bhutto was only looking for an excuse to put pressure on
Yahya and Mujib to listen to his voice as well. Bhutto was in
Peshawar on February 15. He was to address a public rally at
Jinnah stadium. At 9 pm on the same day Bhutto rang w
Peerzada. Colonel Hasan, the legal adviser to the CMLA at
Rawalpindi, picked up the phone>He quietly handed over the
receiver to the PSO He overheard-a very irrate voice at the other
end. "We are elected leader's. The least you could have done was to
have consulted us before announcing the date". Peerzada, in the
strong position that he was, was not a person to be cowed down by
politicians whatever their status amongst the people. "You al
very exited we were not bound to consult you. Since you have
taken it so Seriously I will surely mention this to the president:
ere But before he could put the telephone down he
| jaoonga. we os threatening words "Pata chalega jab mein re
Pakistan s “ party nahin Jaegi. Mein dekhta hoon ki maghr
do not go M a (You will know the consequences —
Pakistan wiley, not go. I will see how anyone from Wé
as eo ra Bhutto had met the president, The fact .
3, Was annownced € national assembly session at Dacca on Mat
unced on February 13, indicates that the PPP lead@ |

Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 167
not raised any objection to the da
a Bhutto had made an about ny at that =e. peur Gage /
la a , en he decided not to/
attend the national assembly session,
Peerzada duly reported the conversation
calmly said 2 "date what is he getting exited ahint Poona
defence of ‘the selection of the date without consulting the tw
leaders told Yahya "He had only mentioned a date eamtalhy Sir in |
any case the date we announced was between the dates stated b
the two of them". Yahya, who had full trust in his PSO, said I
agree that bastard is only trying to create a crisis". But on being //
told that Bhutto had decided not to attend the national assembly |
session on March 3, Yahya was, according to Peerzada, shocked
and angry at the total lack of cooperation by Bhutto.
Bhutto, true to his word, threw the bomb shell the same night
which rocked the boat already in troubled waters. Addressing a
public gathering in Peshawar he said "PPP will not attend the
national assembly session "”®. He went to explain his reasons for
not going to Dacca “we cannot go there only to endorse the .
constitution already prepared by a party and to return -
humiliated"
Bhutto had not challenged the 6-points during his election
campaign. He had not contested even a single seat in East
Pakistan. Neither he nor any PPP leader had visited East Bengal. |
during the year long electioneering saga. He was fully aware that
the Awami League had made their 6-points formula the corner
stone of their manifesto. He still had the right to disagree with the
Proposed constitution prepared by the Awami League inside the
national assembly. He could have even staged a walk out if the
majority party was seen to be bulldozing their way and were
indifferent to the interests of the constituency which he was re-
Presenting. In any case the president had still the authority not to
authenticate the constitution if it violated the ideology of Pakistan
and affected the solidarity and territorial integrity of the country.
Bhutto muddied the waters further, by his misplaced
atrogance when he declared at Karachi that he would break the
legs of any of his party member who dared to attend the national
‘ssembly session ahd those who went without his consent would
hot be allowed to return. He threatened “a_revolution from
Karachi to Khyber". He further angered the Awaml League

168 Tragedy of Errors
i ke with even greater venom “Anybog
will do so at his own cost". The assembly he said would be
|) Slaughter house®", (Such bellicose statements do not suit Mat,
politicians).
Yahya, in his sober moments, did reflect on the conseque,,
of the PPP not attending the | ae ad was als ay
ility of Bhutto to ask people Te
and crests ew and order problem in West Pakistan. He
therefore, decided to speak to Mujih and to try and persuade hi,
to accept a new date. He told his PSO "Peeroo - ask Sheikh ty
come and see me" Peerzada rang up Mujib from the President,
House and spoke to the Sheikh. In an attempt to play it cool he
used a few words of Bengali. In reply to Mujib’s enquiry "Xj
Hochay" (whats happened). General Peerzada told him please
come to Rawalpindi straight away. The president would like tp
meet you regarding the inaugural session’. "Abhi aaney ko nahin
sakta, party meeting hai". (I cannot come just yet there is a party
meeting) replied Mujib in his broken Urdu. On being told about
the possibility of a change in she fie Awami League chief said" |
cannot accept a change in the date, I cannot come now. I will come
later”.
When Yahya was told of the reaction by Mujib, he made
another attempt to persuade him to come to Rawalpindi. He hada
flash signal sent to Ahsan, saying "ask Mujib and others to come
to Rawalpindi and discuss the issue of fresh dates for the nationd
assembly session". Ahsan contacted Mujib and tried to persuade
him to go to Rawalpindi and meet the president. Mujib was even
vi a stronger wicket than Bhutto. He was as much a believer in
od [Pressure tactics as his rival in West Pakistan. Mujib declined the
invitation. Although the Awami League admired the soft spokel
Admiral because of his gentlemanly behaviour and his impartial
attitude they were not prepared to give in to the tantrums 0
Bhutto, If the chairman of the PPP could not come to East
Pakistan therithe president of the Awami League should not go”
the western wing was their argument. A reply was sent the —
afternoon "Mujib says I cannot come now I will come later," S#
the message from the government house to the president.
A. a a was Visibly angry with both the nel Th are . |
mie non printable . Punjabi abuse). Anothe attempt va
| persuading Mujib to come to Rawalpindi. This time

