Impact of the Break up of Paki
istan Stan,
: on Paki ’ Bangladesh and India
The sudden realisation on 16 Decemb
the Quaid-e-Azam had carved out, was Sine sae which
been dismembered cast a Pall of gloo ‘olen had |
| . : S'oom throughout the entire
nation. A major general commanding a division in Chamb wept
openly. Others suppressed their tears but were equally mae
with the tragedy that had befallen, the country. The shame and
humiliation brought upon the armed forces due to the ineptness of
the military commanders ) forced some junior officers to rebel
against their seniors in West Pakistan. At a conference in GHQ
the ‘young Turks’ called for the resignation and trial of the
President and those who were close to him. |
| There was despondency, and disappointment all around as
_ Pakistan plumetted to the depths of despair.
The new occupant of the President’s house responded to the
__ Mood of the people by dismissing eleven senior generals by a TV |
announcement. The entire command of the Navy was sacked.
Army officers were disgraced. They were referred to as "Bhoosa
bharey general" (generals bloated like bags of straw) by the new
| Political leaders. Troops were hesitant to move out in uniform.
_ ) Inquires were initiated and commissions were set up, not without
_ ulterior motives. Political mileage was derived from the military
debacle.
But gradually the wounds began to heal. The nin
relations soon got back to an even keel as better sense preva _
_ Thethew Pakistayy not only remained on its feet but rail 2
| like a phoenix from the ashes. It regained its place aki me in the
_ hations. The Islamic Summit in Lahore put Pakis
limelight again.
=

484 Tragedy of Errors
k fl ilita al
ramanyam, the internationally nea ry analyst of
Indie retinas in early 1972 that Pakistan issdown and out; that «
it can no longer maintain such large armed forces and that the
threat to India from across its western border will be reduced),
The contrary, however, happened. The Leadership in Pakistan
vowed to eat grass if that became necessary to produce a nuclear
weapon. Mr Zulfigar Ali Bhutto was prepared to fight for a
* thousand years against India, The size of Pakistan’s mnilitary
~ establishment increased after the break up, and more sophisticated
weapons were acquired. The threat to India in absolute terms
grew rather than diminishing.
Subramanyam’s contentions after the Indo-Pakistan War of
1971 that Pakistan can“no longer function as a counter-wailing
. power to India within the subcontinent? proved wrong as India
"remains concerned about Pakistan’s growing military strength.
Contrary to what the president of the IDSA believed, Pakistan,
even after the loss of its eastern wing, could afford to spend a
fairly high percentage of its income,on defence.
On the nuclear issue Subramanyam was confident that
Pakistan having been reduced to half its earlier size,will no longer
pose any nuclear threat to its neighbour*. But the Indian
leadership and its defence analyst (Subramanyam included)
continued to talk of being threatened by an Islamic Bomb anda
bomb in the basement at Kahuta (Pakistan). |
Pakistan’s economy, inspite of having been cut to size )
1979 ee Stow and expand from a GDP of $ 19.7 billion in
tte ge 181/90 eg ean
$ 1,262 million to over $ 6 billion in sonnet Went up from
India and not one sixth as Ss _ Samer ae "
Its per capita income incre od Pies pore had predicted “a eed
Its foreign exchange soe ased from $ 90 in 1972 to $ 409 in 1990. |
Same year. The ae of Rant P Prion the $ 1 billion mark that
did not materially affect the wa though cannot be forgiven,
Pakistan well being of the people of West
nrningy star a Patna's polis woul
moved towards adopting oy  everse happened as Pakistan
8 greater measures for Islamisation.

Impact of the Break up of Pakistan, Bangladesh and India “8
Effect on Bangladesh
The Bangladeshis achieved their independence after a great
deal of sacrifices. More than a million People lost their lives to
enable their compatriots to breathe the air of freedom. Who would
not be proud to salute one’s flag ang sing one’s own national
‘ anthem. The Two-nation theory helped them to create their own
independent country. If there had been no Pakistan there would “
have been no Bangladesh.
Twenty years after the emergence of Bangladesh, the
exploitation theme which was being flashed around in 1970
proved to be shallow. Mujib had predicted that after independence”
rice would sell at half the cost than Pakistan. It was selling at a
price ten times higher in 1975® (foviy years after the creation of
Bangladesh). Bangladesh continued to remain one of the poorest
countries of the world. Its per capita income rose no doubt from $
47 in 1971 to $ 202 in 1992, but it stil] was far below Pakistan. The
ratio between the two per capita incomes remained 2:1 as it was in
1971 - Was it then’ é¥ploitation or several ather factors which did
not reduce the economic disparity between the two wings? About
500,000 Bangladeshis are working in Pakistan sending their
earnings back to their country. Commercial enquiries for the
import of cement, blankets and even military hardware from
Pakistan still comes in, though these can be purchased from India.
Subramanyam’s expectations of Bangladesh adopting the path
of secularism? also proved to be wrong as Bangladesh retained its
Islamic identity and proclaimed Islam as its state religion. It took
its place proudly in the organisation of Islamic conference as the
40th Muslim country. India was now faced not with two but with
three Muslim states in SAARC.
Effect on India
As regards India, Subramanyam believed that there — oe
“n improvement in the communal situation in the coun y
(India), The reverse has happened. The BJP under L.K. Advani
has peor ddess of destruction. He is
re-created Kali the Hindu go tou al of worship
determined to destroy all mosques and religious p pe to the
If they, according to his research, stand on groun nt du Rashtr
Hindus, His followers want to establish a qi
. n has increased in
‘Kingdom) in India. Thus the communal tensio

486 Tragedy of Errors
India after the lightening campaign against East Pakistan.
He also gave the credit to Mrs Gandhi for solving, in the
process, India’s security problems ip the eastern region. He was
happy that the Mizos and Nagas cannot now get/to East Bengal
for training and receiving arms®. India, twenty years after the
liberation war, blames Bangladesh for harbouring Mizo and Naga °
rebels. Indian troops are busy pushing ,bpgysands of so-called
Bangladeshi refugees into Bangladesh which’ according to them
are security hazards. India’s security problems have increased as
instead of a potential threat of one division in East Pakistan (in
1969) Bangladesh has a fully equipped army of five divisions and
an air force which would require more than 11 Indian Air Force
squadrons to subdue in three days.
Subramanyam was dreaming of operating Indian steamers on
the Bangladesh rivers to reduce the costly transportation to
Assam, Nagaland and Tripura!9, Unfortunately for him
Bangladesh is an independent and sovereign Muslim country
which will only extend such a facility to a foreign nationJafter a
mutually beneficial oe On the contrary the Bangladeshis can
move across Indian territory to reach their enclave of Tin Bigha.
The sharing of the waters of the Padma still remains a
contentuous issue between the two neighbours. _
The mutually acceptable pricing policy for the jute of India and
Bangladesh!! has not materialised. The trade between India and
Bangladesh has indeed multiplied but so has’ trade between
Islamabad and Dhaka. ‘A
"Bangladesh, constitutes now an extension of the anti-
militarist, anti-authoritarian democratic movement" wrote
Subramanyam. It did not happen so, Though democracy had been
restored jn Bangladesh but after a quarter of a century. Most of
the time it was*under military rule.
India had to pay a heavy price for the liberation of Bangladesh.
It added to the animosity against India in Pakistan who cannot
now be blamed for paying back India in the same coiri when an
opportunity comes its way; VW spent its resources on a project
which did not yield the ieturns /expected.’ Very soon after
independence jBangladesh did emphasise its economic ties with
India, Its gratitude lasting only a few months. "We hate the West

Impact of the Break up of Pakistan, Bangladesh and India -
| pakistanis but we ane the Hindus more" said some University
students’”. By 1974 "enormous popular resentment had developed
towards India because of Mujib’s identification with that
country” observed Don Moraes, a western author.
‘India’s relations with Bangladesh got strained because its
troops remained in the country longer than the Bengalis desired.
The Indian armed forces took away all the weapons and
equipment, and their civil agencies removed a large number of
industrial units. Thousands of Mukti Bahini were also killed by
the Indian army to prevent them from getting out of hand. In spite
of the garlands put around the necks of Indian soldiers on
December 16, Time Magazine’s prediction that the Indian army of
liberation would become the Hindu army of occupation! proved
correct.
| The Indian soothsayer predicted that the influence of China
and the USA would reduce in the region!®. But America still calls
the shots more so in his country than in its erstwhile ally. Joint
naval exercises, promises of transferring technology is
accompanied with sanctions and warnings to India.
| Another achievement of India, according to Subramanyam and
_ Ayub was that it had harmonised its sub-national aspirations. But
' Sikhs are adamant to establish an independent Khalistan.
Kashmir for the Kashmiri, is a slogan reverberating in the \).
_ Srinagar valley,and sounds of sub-nationalism has not died down
_ inthe north-east of-India. The cancer which Mrs. Gandhi injected
into East Pakistan spread into her own country’s vitals.
The only statement, made by Subramanyam which proved
correct and is so even in the 90s is‘that India has built up an
image of an activist nation which is willing and capable of bringing
_ about change in the status quo in the teeth of opposition of major
powers like USA and China,as well as the general disapproval of
the international governméntal establishments'®. The smaller
_ countries of South Asia have to take note of such ambitions of a
powerful neighbour.
So much money was spent on dismembering Pakistan that
Mrs Gandhi could not fulfil her slogan of ‘Gharibi Hatao cramer’
Poverty), writes Don Moraes in his biography of Mrs —
Twenty/ one years after the break up of Palastan a sce for
leadership needs to re-assess their actions 1m 1971 an

baal Tragedy of Errors
themselves as to who gained and who lost, after India’s war in the
East. According to a western writer “Two years after the event
Mrs Gandhi’s diplomatic military finesse appears as an almost
hollow gesture at the expense of real Indian priorities'®.
It could be a coincidence or nature’s retribution that all those
who were directly involved in the break up of a ee not die
_ a natural death. Mujib was gunned down. Tajuddin was
~«\bayonetted, Bhutto was hanged, Zia-ur-Rahman was assassinated,
Yahya Khan was Saved this ignomity, but he remained a prisoner
in his house till. his demise, Khondkar still lives but he was
imprisoned for five years by the government of the country he
helped to found.
, 2| io| {6%

Impact of the Break up of Pakistan, Bangladesh and India ae
Notes
1 Ayub eau oe pon K, The Liberation war, S. Chand and Co (Pvt) Ltd,
9, Ibid.
3. Ibid, p. 291.
4. Ibid, p. 270.
5. Ibid
6. ng ee ee Bangladesh, The Unfinished Resolution, Zed press, |
7. Subramanyam, p. 266.
g. Ibid, p. 274. |
9, Ibid, p. 275. |
10. Ibid. |
11. Ibid. |
12. Moraes Don, Mrs Gandhi, Vikas publication, New Delhi 1990, p. 184. |
13. Ibid, p. 7. |
14. Time magazine, 6 December, 1971, p. 11. |
15. Subramanyam, 276. |
16. Ibid, p. 279. |
17. Moraes, p. 190.
‘18. Wilcox, W, The Emergence of Bangladesh, American Enterprises, Institute |
of publicy Research, Washington, DC., 1973, p. 57.

conclusion
_ Itwas not the first time that a country had been rent asunder, “
Political boundaries have been altered Several times hefors |
armies have surrendered in much larger numbers in other parts _
of the globe. Interventionist policies by powerful neighbours have
often exacerbated the instability across the border. But none of ~
these indisputable facts of history can condone the errors and
omissions committed by the civil and military leadership in
Pakistan since independence which led to the eventual tragedy.
The pain and anguish of December, 1971 would gradually fade
away. But what should always he remembered is that history has \,.”
acruel habit of repeating itself if past mistakes are made over and!”
over again. What then are the lessons we must learn-from failing
_ to maintain the territorial integrity of Pakistan which we had
_ jointly struggled to establish. A
, First - A delicate fabric woven from a single strand cannot
sustain the pulls and pressures inherent in a multi-ethnic and
poly-lingual society, more so when one of its constituent units
happens to be located in a different geographic zone. Such a
_ parchment needs to be strengthened by weaving into it other core
_ values which ‘respective interest groups within a nation consider
essential. = * |
» Second - Ethno-centric sub-nationalism is not an unusual
phenomena. It is an instrinc component of multi-ethnic societies.
It need not become a hinderance to national integration. But to
keep it within bounds. a great» deal of tolerance and
accommodation has to be shown by, other dominant groups within
the country. Cultural pluralism has to be accepted. Any attempt to
_ force a uniform way of life on those who cherish their own identity.»
will be counter-productive. The dominant-subordinate syndrome
» Must be avoided. |
| Third - The legitimacy of a regime in power is an essential
~ factor in making it acceptable to the majority of county S
Population. Coup d’ etats, martial laws, prolonged military : ‘
_ 4nd undemocratic methods to remain in power always lea ‘
| frustration and bitterness. Attempts are then made to ben stree
_ Power to remove a government which lacks the popular wil.
i"

492 ;
4) Fourth - Distortions in economic development exacerbate
y flict. Though no government can ensure a Uniform
initethel cone ions of a state, butthe ]
ace of development in all regions oias e butt € least that Can
“a done,is to let the people utilise to a large extent, the wealth
generated from their respective areas. In other words greater
devolution of power and avoidance of centralisation and more
regional autonomy ,would remove much of the grievances which
self interested politicians capitalise on.
‘/ Fifth - Extensive, indiscriminate, and excessive use ofthe army |
+o suppress a popular movement provides a spark to an already
volatile situation. |
. Sixth - Use of force to solve a political problem or achieve a
political objective. is never durable. It is at best, a temporary
solution. The root cause of an insurgency has to be removed for
peace and tranquility to be sustained.
' Seventh - Internal disharmony provides golden opportunities
to powerful neighbours to achieve their aims and objectives. A
correct reading of the domestic scene and its frank and forthright
presentation by pened agencies to the policy makers,.can
prevent a situation wheré‘titizens of a state begin seeking outside
assistance. k
¢) Eighth - It is naive to except all out Support from allies when
the domestic policy leads to a civil war within the country unless
national interests of a particular ally is being harmed.
Ninth - The Integrity of a nation does not depend on the
! rength and size of the military forces alone. Economic st¥ength
and political stability are as important if not more so, for the”
security of a country. ,
While pointing out some of the lessons that the younger
ae of Pakistanis should draw from the East Pakistan
e meeps mind continues to be haunted with the basic question
| Who was to blamejfor this national tragedy? :
/ _ Was it Mujib wh ‘ai it Ya |
/ a ~0.Was a traitor to his country? Was it Yahya
er r Wee ucks and drakes in order to retnain at the helm
. — ae It Bhutto, Whose lust for power made political |
7 Was se Wan. with ne leaders of the majority party impossible: —
coming eral Yaqub and Admiral Aksar: bi ‘their weakness in
command during the electioneering campaign?. Was it General
risks Khan for his narrow vision of seeking a military solution to
@ complex political problem? Was: it Lieutenant General Amit

OM} 493
abdullah Khan N — (Sher, a) for his Military incompetence or was
it India’s grand design which seized an Pportunity provided to it
by all the personalities mentioned above,
No one person, event or happening can be m
for the dismemberment of Pakistan, ]t was a on ge
mistakes made by several people at different Stages of its history
which resulted in the secession of the eastern wing. 4
The inability of the Muslim League to fulfil the aspirations of
the Bengalis, the delay in arriving at a constitution acceptable to
them, the Bengali language movement and its inept handling, the
derailing of the democratic process by a civilian head of state the
frequent military take over which deprived the Bengalis their due
share in ruling the country, the half heartéd attempts at reducing
economic disparity, the demeaning attitude of the East Pakistan ’° “>
towards their co-citizens in the east, the exploitation of the
grievences by the Awami League, the decision of the People’s
Party not to attend the National Assembly session.and the
ee debacle in East Pakistan were all part of the tragedy of
_ errors which culminated in the dismemberment of Pakistan.
Me gg

