230 Tragedy of Errors
militants had virtually fizzled out Ee tool thn Jagdey
° ~) t e ea e was th
h, an Indian commander, on wo then
ms the Indian armed forces were given the full responsibility to
turn the Mukti Bahini into some shape whereby they could asgig
the Indian army during their invasion of East Pakistan. According
to Jagdev, they "put life back into the struggle’. He goes on ty
admit that a control headquarters was established under the
overall supervision of Indian Eastern Command. Three seeto,
headquarters were formed. One each at Agartala, Coochbehar and
Balurghat. Their task was to raise Mukti Bahini companies and to
plan and coordinate the activities of the guerrillas’. Brigadier
Shah Beg and Brigadier Sant Singh, both of the Indian army,
were directed to organise the Mukti Bahini. The former operated
from Agartala while the latter established contact with “Tiger
Siddiqui a Befgali rebel officer at Tura, Mymensingh!!, Later
other senior Indian army officers were each allotted different
sectors.
Training
"The resistance needed planning, weapons training and
leadership,and only India could provide them" accepted Brigadier
Jagdev Singh'?, While the organisation of the rebels and
volunteers had commenced in April, their proper training by the
Indian army began in May.
A total strength of 70,000 Bengali dissidents excluding the
police was available to the Indians. Out of this force it did not take
eee = to organise eight equipped and fully trained Mukti
ahini battalions.
Six training centres were established in India. Each
ee by an Indian brigadier. The six sectors, as they wer |
’ eK
Designation Location Commander
Alpha S .
eae Moorti Camp Brig Joshi
West Bengal |
Bravo Sect a
or Raiganj, Brig Prem Singh “
West Bengal

1
Mukti Bahini -
Charlie Sector Chakulia, Bihar Brig N.A. Naik
Delta Sector Decta Mura, Brig Shah Beg Singh
Tripura
Echo Sector Masirpur, Assam Brig M.B. Wadia
Foxtrot Sector Tura, Brig Sant Si
Meghalaya 5 ingh
These training Sectors provided all the weapons and military
equipment needed for training and equipping the Mukti Bahini.
' Each sector had a number of training camps under it!3, Over 83
training camps were established (according to some, there were
_ 150 training camps) on Indian soil all along East Pakistan barely a
few kilometres from the border', First two days were spent in
, documentation followed by three weeks of intense training!5,
An Indian major general was put incharge of the training of
the Mukti Bahini. The rebels were reformed into sub units, units
and formations. Betwen 600 to 800 officers of the Mukti Bahini
' were trained at regular Indian army institutions including the
prestigious Indian Military Academy at Dehra Dun. Indian army
engineers trained them in the handling of mines and explosives!6,
_ They were also given training in the use of mortars, machine guns
and PRC 25 wireless sets supplied to them by the Indian army.
Every 6 weeks 2,000 trained guerrillas were turned out for
_ Operational purposes!’?, Over 5,000 men were trained at these
camps in three months. About 600 rebels received under water
training at Cochin and Plassey (West Bengal).
Weapons
Arms and am nunition came from the Indian ordnance
factories (IOF) with wo attempt to hide even the IOF markings.
The chief minister of Bihar admitted that he was fem evans
of supply of arms and ammunition to Bangladesh”. arms were
also obtained from Poland, Yugoslavia and even America. : on :
Tecoilless rifles and Limpet mines from Russia, a
Israel formed part of the contribution from Pakistan's adve -
T ” ; lies from several outside
Sou eee Muiib ees ee lomats the bulk of the supply
"es but according to several diploma sracalea Sbidined
“f Weapons came from Indian arsenals. Some w

232 Tragedy of Errors
» ot . Many were
by raiding armouries in East Pakistan. Many taken away by
y raiding - deserted. Some crude weapong
the Bengali units which desert US Were
he Mukti Bahinis themselves. These includeg
repared by the locall
p d enades, locally manufact
Jotov cocktails, home-made gt Ured
mee ‘tank mines. The Bengalis had oye,
anti-personnel and antitank Mm lati "er the
months, before the military action, been accumulating Unlicensed
arms Some 200,000 of them were located after the surrender.
Distribution of Forces
Colonel Osmany (who by now had become a general) divided
East Pakistan into 10 operational areas. Each of which was placeg
under the supervision of one or more officers of the East Bengal
Regiment.
The strength of the Mukti Bahini in the different sectors
were:-
Sector Location Strength Commander
1. Chittagong 7,000 Maj Zia-ur-Rahman
2. Feni ~ Lt. Col. S.M.A. Rab/Wg Cdr Bashir
3. Comilla 4,000 Maj Khalid Musharraf
4. Bharaib Bazar
5. Sylhet , 9,000 Maj Q.N. Zaman
6. Rangpur 5,000 Capt Nawazish
4 Dinajpur 5,000 Capt Nawazish
8. Rajshahi/ 15,000 Capt Najmul Haq
Pabna
9. Jessore 20,000 . Abu Osman Choudhry
10. Barisal 5,000 Capt Jalil
11. Tangail 5,000 Tiger Siddiqui
| 12. Mymensingh 5,000 Maj Safiullah
Sou s . 5
= ee K.M. Maj. Gen. Bangladesh at War, Academ
blishers, Dhaka, 1989, p.149,
Osmani ; ;
shal trains was himself responsible for the selection, recruitmen!
hing of the ‘Bangladesh ei oup
those recruited was army’ in exile. The age gt
generally between 16 and 25 years.

Mukti Bahinj 233
Types of other Resistance Forces
it-Pakistan resistance force _ ;
Anit .. (1) The traditi 1 Bets could be divided into three
categories:- ( e traditional British style army unj for
nts of the East Bengal Reg; Y units formed out
of the remna gal Negiments, The
d of Major G . Se Were under
the comman a] eneral MV.A.G. Osmany. Lawr
Lifshultz, a well known American journalist, describes their oa
style as “carpeted tents, flowing whisky and Helin a
". This group was based insid Indi ae BE
batmen € India and felt no alms i
ing the Indian military int Teng 20
accepting the In ty Intervention (2) The second categor
was more nationalist minded. Majors Taher and Zia-u rice
wanted to fight a ‘peoples war’ and liberate Bangladesh b
: 7 : Me Raanainis y an
indigenous uprising without India’s military involvement. They
preferred to have all sector headquarters inside East Pakistan
They did not want to be indebted to India. In this they were
supported by Major Zia-ur-Rahman who wanted minimal
assistance from India: (3) The third group consisted of ‘private’
armies of armed civilians operating from within Bangladesh.
In addition to the Mukti Bahini a number of other resistance
forces were formed by zealous ‘patriots’. The largest of which was
the Mujib Bahini which was an elite force and according to Major
General K.M. Safiullah, Mujib Bahini was "drunk with political
indoctrination’. It consisted of 20,000 devoted ‘Mujibites’ |
committed to carrying out his instructions to the hilt, |
The force was split into the eastern sector (Sheikh Moin and
Sheikh Kamal, both sons of Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman) northern
sector (Rafiq) northwestern sector (Sirajul Islam) and the western
sector (Tofail Ahmad)". The entire force was trained at the Indian
Military Academy, Dehra Dun. The idea of raising such a force
Which the Indians hoped would be pro-India in its ideological
Concepts was the brain child of Major General Oben ‘a veteran
guerrilla expert of the Indian army”!.
_ The other resistance forces were the Z force named esa
Zia-ur-Rahman. K force which took its letter K from a ted -
Musharraff, This was raised by him in June 1971 an aw by
elements of 4, 9 and 10 East Bengal Regiments, com
Gaffar Ainuddin and Jaffer respectively.
; ; e Major
me Safiullah and the first chief © "4 re Fast Bengal
angladesh army). It consisted of 1, 2 an

234 Tragedy of Errors
Regiments, a total strength of 11,200 men. Safiullah who, by
is - 1971. had promoted himself to the rank of a brigadie
Se a <a brigade. Both of his staff officers Werg
sort His Indian army. His brigade major ae Major Gulati a
fficer from the Indian artillery and the deputy quartey
= veneral (DQ) was major D.R.. Nijrawan. It is interesting t,
note that the Indians were openly Janes ther “a to
operate within East Pakistan even before November 2122,
The most colourful, arrogant and defiant amongst the
resistance leaders was Abdul Kader Siddiqui. He raised his own
force and name it Kader Bahini. It operated independently around
Mymensingh close to Dacca. He crossed into India in June, 197]
and contacted the Indian authorities who assisted him jp
organising, equipping and training his force to act as informers,
saboteurs and fifth columnists for the Indian army in their
planned invasion of East Pakistan.
Kader Siddiqui the self styled ‘tiger’ of Tangail was a 28 year
old student from that city and controlled the area between Tangail
and Dacca. He claimed to have 5,000 men under arms, later he
increased it to about 20,000**. He was a ‘devotee’ of Sheikh Mujib
and is reported to have crossed into India from Bangladesh after
Mujib’s assassination in 1974 with 2,000 rebels in order to revive
pro-India Myjibism™4. The Indian government is reported to have
agreed to meet his demand because his group was expected to
prevent the harbouring of Mizo rebels in independent
Bangladesh?5, |
Gona Bahini consisted of the pro-communists elements. The
Bengali air force rebels formed the Beeman Bahini and Toofan
Bahini.
A naval wing of the Mukti Bahini was also put in place. They
were trained in underwater operations and by August, 1971 three
hundred rebels were sent to Cochin for under water training.
sakiother 300 frogmen were trained at Plassey in the river
Bhagirathi (West Bengal). They sank ships, destroyed coasters
See Makati, tate over barges, boats and launches. The
strength of the Mukti Bahini and its sister organisations
continued to rise. By the end of June the rebels were estimated to
number 30,000. By November the fi ; d when
the all out war started i ae eee 8: TOOGE anew
it had reached around 100,000.

235
Mukti Bahini
Tactics
Initially, between March and April, the Mukti Bahini was used
to support the Indian Border Security Forces in keeping the
.. Pakistan army away from the international frontier to enable the
Indian army to gain as much information about the trans-border
terrain as possible.
j In the second phase, from May to July, the Muktis dressed in
civilian clothes were required to penetrate deep inside their own
country and carry out subversive activities. Blowing up of bridges,
blocking roads, ambushing convoys and assassinating isolated
army personnel. (700 trained guerrillas were inducted into
Faridpur district alone by the middle of May)®5, The so-called
miscreants, undistinguishable from the rest, were everywhere in
East Pakistan, present even in government offices. By day they
/were ordinary citizens by night they were guerrillas. An Indian’
writer accepts that many of them were Hindus wearing dhotis
(lion cloth around the waist worn by Hindus)??. Workers
instigated by the Muktis, damaged 38 Jute mills in Khulna and
Mymensingh”*. In the battle of Feni (June 1971) the Mukti Bahini
claimed to have killed 500. A.K. Kamaraz-Zaman reported to his
Indian mentor that 13,000 Pakistani soldiers have been killed
between March 25 and June 12, 197179. Mukti Bahini supported
by regular Indian troops attacked and captured Bariab Bazaar on
the Indo-East Pakistan border on June 20, 1971. A commando
element of two companies led by Lieutenant Colonel Shakurjan
had to be dropped by helicopters across the river to recapture the
area. In this action the Mukti Bahini suffered 500 casualties.
Shakurjan lost one of his men.
} In the third Phase which began in August, 1971 the Mukti
Bahini, supported by Indian artillery fire from across the border,
were directed to attack Pakistani border posts and ‘liberate’
vulnerable enclaves which could later be used as jumping off
points by the Indian army.
A need was felt to provide some political guidance to the so-
called freedom fighters. The Indian government, therefore, formed
a political committee of eight activists on September 9, from
members of the self-styled Bangladesh goverment in exile, to
ensure a greater control over the Mukti Bahini®.

_ Tragedy of Errors
i Bahini had carried oyt
By October, 197 1 the woke tates, ‘They aitacked gover tive .
explosions in private and public p d railway} rmen}
offices and godowns, damaged bridges and r me ied ines, disrupt, ‘
electric supply lines, robbed banks and killed innocent men,
women and children whom they suspected of collaborating With
the government.
As the date for the Indian attack came near the rebellious Units
of the EBR, along with Indian army per sonnel, tried to capture
areas of strategic importance. In this they were supported Not only
by tanks and artillery but they received the support of the Indian
air force as well. Belonia salient in the east was attacked on g /9
November. Bhurigram in the north on night 13/14 November.
These were preliminary operations carried out at the battalion
level, even before the all out attack by the Indian armed forces on
Kast Pakistan which began on November 21. The casualties were
evacuated to Indian medical centres where they were given
medical treatment and the sick and wounded were looked after.
By mid-November highly exaggerated reports, for the
consumption of the international media, of the achievement of the
Mukti Bahini, started coming in. Over 25,000 regular soldiers of
Pakistan were reported killed*!, They claimed that out of five
divisions atleast three had been put out of commission by
November 21. Not even ten percent of what was being put across
was, however, true. The effectiveness of the Mukti Bahini was
grossly inflated to build up their own morale, lower that of the
Pakistan army and gain more international support.
India’s Denial
Mrs. Indira Gandhi, however kept on insisting that her
government was only providing humanitarian assistance to the
refugees, She did not allow western observers to go and study the
situation along the Indo-East Pakistan border for fear of their
coming to know about the presence of the training camps
established by the Indians to train the Mukti Bahini. When
questioned by the students of the Colombia University, where she
was delivering an address on November 6, 1971, she replied
apologetically ‘If UN observers do go what do they hope to
achieve. They would only come back to say what is happening in
East Bengal and that it is an internal matter of Pakistan". The rea!
reason, of-course was that She did not want independent

Mukti Bahini an
observers to see the Mukti Bahini operat;
of Indian brigadiers with an entire infin ene mn =
Desai, a former prime minister of India, did admit har t an
did the Indian army train the Mukti Bahini the Indian = Idie :
disguised as Mukti Bahini had been fighting the Pakista . ar
East Pakistan from April to December 7133, manna a
Effectiveness of Mukti Bahini
The Mukti Bahini were not al] trained to fight side by side with
the Indians. In fact they were never considered to be a force which
could withstand a concerted battle. They were Mostly trained for
insurgency operations and to work behind enemy lines to cut off
their routes of withdrawal. Though some were trained for regular
warfare as well.
The Mukti Bahini were not as effective as it was expected as
they had not been able to absorb the training imparted to them in
the few months between April and November. There were a large
number of civilians who had been recruited into the Mukti Bahini
who needed more time, to handle mortars and to direct artillery
fire accurately. The command and control element was also not
upto the standard of a well trained fighting force. Since they had
no operational experience they would not have been able to evict a
well entrenched force or to stay firm under sustained artillery fire. |
An interesting aspect of the Mukti Bahini’s fighting qualities
Was depicted by an Indian writer. He mentions that the rebels
Were mortally afraid of the Pathans. Indian army officers were
often asked by some of the chicken-hearted mutineers, Pathan
margya hai ya nahin" (Has the Pathan been killed or is he still
alive)". Agar mara nahin to agay nahin jaaoon ga" (If he has not
been killed we will not move forward)", General Lupova ‘while
commenting on the performance of the Mukti Bahini said that phe
Bengalis had a paranoia from the Punjabi Musalman. ey
Would not get anywhere close enough to them. ced only sent
small ‘Chokras’ (boys) to gain information” said Aurora.
General Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi, however, admitted afte
his surrender that the Mukti Bahini made ae aco “Te t,
nut by itself the Mukti Bahini would slaim that "If the Indian
liberate’ Bangladesh in spite of Can " have driven out the
army had kept out the Mukti Bahini wou
Pakistanis in another 10 months”.

ane Tragedy of Errors |
_ The main contribution of the Mukti Bahini was jn giving t
latest information about Pakistan army locations and Stren,
finding out about gaps in the minefields and the current State
communications. It was the Mukti Bahini who informed i
Indians that the Pakistani troops had retreated towards Ky.) °
and had not fallen back into the fortress of J essore. This allowe)
the Indians to advance into Jessore with impunity. Of-courg, the
rural Bengali population were also willing informers of the Indian
army. "We had the Mukti Bahini on our side. It was due to them
that the Pakistan army got disorganised and isolated" said Genery
Aurora”,
The Mukti Bahini like other ideologically motivated guerilla
organisations went berserk after the surrender. "Two weeks afte,
capitulation the non-Bengalis were in the throes of a Slaughter’
The Mukti Bahini were taking their revenge by lynching anyone
who appeared to be an enemy" writes Oriana Fallachi ang
Grianfranco Moroldo, the well known Italian interviewers**. They
had gone so out of control that even the Indian army had to kill
thousands of Muktis after the surrender to put the fear of Allah in
them*”,

239
Mukti Bahini
Notes:
1, Interview, Lieutenant General Khwaja Wasiuddin.
9, Adjutant General’s Branch, GHQ, Pakistan.
3, Ys ver ia lili EBR/EPR units and Pakistan army see
a eal Paki, Ino Poitan Wa, 29
5, Interview, Colonel Farooq Rahman.
6. li Nur-ulQader, Deputy Commissioner Pabna, East Pakistan in
7. Interview, Lt. Gen. Jagjit Singh Aurora.
8. Garg, S.K. Capt (Retd), Freedom Fighters of Bangladesh Allied Publications
Private, Ltd., New Delhi, 198 1. ;
9, Singh, Jagdev, p. 69.
10. Ibid.
1]. Interview, Lt. Gen. Aurora.
12. Ibid.
13. Interview, Lt. Gen. Aurora; Safiullah, K.M., Maj. Gen. Bangladesh at War,
Academic Publishers, Dhaka, 1989, p. 118.
4. Interview, Brig Baqir Siddiqui, Chief of Staff, Eastern Command.
15. Safiullah, p. 1148.
16. Singh, Jagdev, p. 9.
17. Palit, D.K., Maj. Gen. The Lightening Campaign, Compton Press, Salisbury,
1972, p. 57.
18 Mahmood, Safdar, Pakistan Divided, Ferozsons Ltd., Lahore. 1984, p. 13.
19. Safilullah, p. 150.
20. Singh Jagdev, p. 64.
21. Safiullah, p. 150.
22. Ibid, p. 191.
23. Singh, Jagdey, p. G4.
24. Garg, p. 128.
25. Ibid, p. 136.
6. Garg, p. 119,
27. Thid.
28, Economic Times, May 7, 1971.
“9. Garg, p. 146.
e

