India’s Role in the break up of Pakistan 291
“fighting a war agai
re aoe humane solution the pra Would be a cheaper
ang a ’ Problem being faced h
le of India and Bangladesh. Ge § faced by the
pe. 7 etal B.N. Sarkar roduced
operational plan JACKPOT, Published jn the London Ti
the occupation of East Bengal because of which he imes, for
West Bengal to train the Mukti Bahini?® Was Gent to
Teg Roe’ nner titi: that the Indian army was prepared
neither for direct intervention in East Pakistan nor for th
inevitable counter thrust from West Pakistan’? jg therefor "
based on facts. Although Subramanyam felt that Mrs Gandhi; Was
a vascilating woman she could Strike back when driven to a
corner. It was as early as 28 April, 1971, that she conveyed her
intention of attacking East Pakistan as her hopes of a client state °
on her eastern border, had been frustrated by Yahya.
At a cabinet méeting to which the chief of army staff of the
Indian army General S.F.H.J. (SAM) Maneckshaw was invited .
she told him \Be prepared to go into East Pakistan" Maneckshaw”
is reported to have replied "that would mean going to war with
Pakistan”. "We do not mind it" was her response®*®, Her military
leadership asked her to be patient and wanted more time. India’s
|military machine had to be ‘oiled’. Spares had to be obtained,
| deficiencies were to be made up. Time was also needed to gain as
much information about enemy’s strength, location, gap and
* reinforcement possibilities, They also required breathing space to
move and concentrate their own forces against East Pakistan. It
was harvest time and troops on leave were engaged in harvesting
their family crops. An infra structure for the launching of a large
scale offensive in an area cris-crossed by rivers and streams pad
to be developed. Monsoons in Bengal “slow down military
‘Perations Considerably. For quick results the dry period in winter
Would be more suitable. They had yet to convert the Mukti Bahini
into an effective guerrilla organisation which had to be equipped,
armed and trained to act in support of the Indian army. Some sort
of guarantee was needed to ensure that Ch{na would not teach
‘nother lesson to India on the Himalayan border. ae ae
therefore, advised Indira to await and suggested November as oe
Most suitable dates for the. invasion when the Himalayan em
Would be closed due to they-hecoming snow bound. = ashen
“riticised by General D.K. Palit for not attacking eas a os
farlier ag according to him,it would have prevented the g
millions of Hindus, ;

292 Tragedy of Errors
It is true that India wanted to soften the ground first, and make
it appear that India came to the assistance of a provision aj
government and that they were rescuers rather than aggressors
But all this was in keeping with a deliberate plan to dismember
Pakistan. Khushwant Singh, the celebrated editor-in-chief of the
Illustrated Weekly of India, opined that Mrs. Gandhi planned and
orchestrated the invasion of East Pakistan®!.
Brigadier Jagdev Singh, who joined the IVth Indian Corps at
Tezpur (Assam) on 1 September, 1971, writes that the task of the
corps engineers was to develop the infrastructure for launching a
major offensive from Tripura into East Pakistan. The plan,
according to, him, visualised an attack by three divisions with
Sylhet as the objective. Offensive plans, are no doubt made by
neighbouring countries, as part of operational planning against
potential hostile countries! but to develop the infrastructure to
achieve an objective indicates the determination to implement the
intended objective. Jagdev reveals that IV Corps had been directed
as early as September to be ready to launch the offensive into East
Pakistan by the middle of November, 1971**. It would be more
correct to assume that the plan to invade Hast Pakistan was made
soon after the military action which made the Mukti Bahini
ineffective. /
Swaran Singh, the Indian Foreign Minister is reported to have
said "If no political solution, acceptable to the Awami League, was
forthcoming, India will be compelled to take action on its own™.
Thakur Prashad of the Hindu Militant Organisation, Jan Sangh,
was more vocal. "We should not rest content till Pakistan is
destroyed and merged with Bahrat", said the fiery leader™*.
Mr. Morarji Desai former Prime Minister of India told Qriana
»Fallaci, the well known Italian journalist, that Mrs. Gandhi
‘| dispatched to East Pakistan thousands and thousands of Indian
soldiers disguised as Mukti Bahini,and that 5,000 Indian soldiers
died in the process (before the main battle began). Fallaci writes
that when the Indian commander-in-chief asked Mrs. Gandh
whether Indian soldiers should be sent back to the barracks or
allowed to BRACE phe gave the orders to attack Pakistan”.
UL. K. Jha, India’s ambassador to the United States, told Hen)
Kissinger, that India would act by the end of the year if it’s pane
were not met. India acknowledged that Indian troops had cross

India’s Role in the break up of faliiseas 293
the border = at Npvember. Mrs. Gandhi admitted in the Lok
Sabha that the lo ndian military commander to ;
Pakistani attack agai . ok action to
repulse @ Se pe ost the Mukti Bahini at B
miles inside Pakistani territory on that day®5. "Future deci ogra, 5
enter into Pakistan would be left to the a on ms ecisions to VA
Indira. This was followed by regular stack € spot", said
international frontier. India’s Defence Minister Ja ries Pi
announced in a Calcutta rally "Indian forces had heen ante = e
to advance into Pakistan to silence Pakistan artillery a tn
»” will break up Pakistan into pieces"’”. A colonel of the Fedjian rmy
admitted that his troops went in because the Mukti Bahini oxtien
for help” When US ambassador to India, Kenneth Keeting told
Mrs. Gandhi that such provocations could lead to an Indo-
Pakistan Wat, Mrs. Gandhi replied : "We cannot afford to listen to
advice which weakens us"®®, The war had already begun, started
by India on 21 November and not as Indian and some western! ,
authors would like their readers to believe that it was Pakistan/
that began the conflict on 3 December. .
Mrs. Indira Gandhi tried-to convince President Richard Nixon
that Pakistan was an unnatural state which would crumble
_.»janyway. All that India would be doing is to straighten out the
‘| (wrong committed earlier. "Pakistan was a jerry - built structure — -
held together by a hatred for India. Neither Balochistan nor
Northwest Frontier properly belong to Pakistan", surmised Indira.
She was supported in this description by her leading political
adviser P.N. Haksar®®. She told Nixon that confining it to
demanding secession of East Pakistan was amounting to
restraining India. "It really should be working towards complete
disintegration of Pakistan" said the iron lady.
Lieutenant General Thapan’s II Corps was moved to the
Western theatre after the capitulation of Dacca to assume the
offensive in the west (and take the war to its final conclusion)
writes Lieutenant General K.P. Candeth” (emphasis added).
Kissinger was of the view that the Indian attack on East oer
was planned well in advance and that Mrs. Gandhi’s trip ‘ h
Was not a means to seek a solution but as a smokescreen for her
actions"9!
After the commencement of an all out war irae me
Unilateral withdrawal of Pakistani troops from Bang

294 Tragedy of Errors
would not settle for anything less then its liberation", Write
Kissinger”. The international jurists at Geneva while
commenting on the Indian role in the East Pakistan Crisis,foung
it difficult to accept that the scale of India’s armed action y,
motivated by military considerations based on the need to Dita
her national frontiers. In their opinion "this was a dangerous
doctrine and would set at nought all the principles of international
“Jaw enjoining neutrality on third parties in a civil war situation"®3.
Indo-Soviet Treaty
India was worried that they may lose the opportunity of
breaking up Pakistan because of an intervention by China or USA
when an Indian intervention became too obvious. They were
concerned that the Awami League may disintegrate if military
intervention is delayed. The Indians had also begun to realise th
the Mukti Bahini would not be able to defeat the Pakistan army :
East Pakistan by itself. "It would take such a movement years to
unloosen the military stranglehold on Bangladesh" said the Indian
Deputy Director of Military Operations (DDMO). "Under the
_circumstances restive public opinion forced the government to
contemplate the extreme step of military intervention™ claimed
the DDMO. According to him the service chiefs were given the go
ahead signal,to plan and carry out preparati 8°,
emergency. There was also a f h e ihin dhe kee mye ee
the pro-Indian leaders trav] ear that within the Awami league
ay lose control of the struggle.
An jor i : » 4.
West Pecans a oe te epatiesta Weapons either in East or
subcontinent. According to the In ‘ee Strategic oa ture a. EP
Watched closely and counter a ca psnnes Sie eas bo ie |
direction took place. Then th ‘ any move by Pakistan in this
being applied, by the great ere was the question of sanctions —
international norms. a leg on India for violation of”
a quick surgical action Indi orries Were that the war may not be |
long drawn out war in the avers nw Bet bogged down in,”
Indira Gandhi took a Stunke Swamps. To overcome these feats
the signing of a treaty with ussR sthe most significant being
A treaty of peac . .
between Roose New Dae and cooperation was signed
para of which said "In the eve on 7 August, 1971. The operative
I nt-of either party being subjected

India’s Role in the break up of Pakistan 295
attack or threat there-of the high contract;
vamediatelY enter into mutrfal consultations in gies _—
guch threats and to take effective measures to ensur aaanove
security of their countries”. Moraji Desai, said of i if > after ti
» signed the treaty, "she would ally herself with the devil if she
“thought it would serve her purpose", v
Talks about a treaty between India and the Soviet Union had
begun in 1959, a few years after Pakistan entered into an anti-
communist alliance with USA. Such an agreement suited the
Soviets as it helped them towards their objective of drawing up an
Asian Collective Security System which would have placed a ring
around their communist rival. Moscow had been persuading New
Delhi to sign a treaty of friendship and cooperation since the last
two years but India at that time showed little interest. So when
Indira Gandhi showed her keen desire to enter into a military
Eee i Brezhnev readily agreed as it would counter the
US-Pakistan-China linkage. As this was the first.such treaty that
India had signed with a superpower the bogey“of a threat from
Pakistan supported by USA and China, was built up.
Immediately after signing the treaty a host of Soviet leaders
descended on New Delhi to oversee the plans for the invasion of
East Pakistan — Air Marshal P.S. Kutakov being the most
prominent among them. To pacify Washington’s fear, about India
getting too closely involved with USSR, Rasgotra stated that he
told Secretary Rogers of USA ."I have the authority to sign an
identical treaty with you” His offer was not taken up nor was it
seriously offered.
India had confided to the USSR in August, during the signing
of the Indo-Soviet Treaty, that it intended to use force against
Pakistan. It was not only a piece of secret information which New |
\ Delhi was conveying to Moscow but it was/a prelude to asking the ,
' Soviets to give India further military assistance to help i
achieving its stated goal. After the visit of President = olal
Podgorny and Deputy Foreign Minister, Nikolai Firyubin =
October, 1971 a coordination of policies towards oe bine
arrived at, Later Kutakov went to New Delhi to finalise the de
for additional arms shipment to India®.

296
Tragedy of Errors
While the Soviets continued to talk about finding a politica)
solution of the East Pakistan Crisis, they supported their strongest
ally in Asia to dismember a recaleitrant Muslim neighbour. India
~ was no-doubt the midwife which, brought Bangladesh into being .
‘but the operation was made easy by the policies of her major~
. partners in this ignominious deal.
After signing the Indo-Soviet Treaty, Mrs. Gandhi sent a letter
to Nixon She made no mention of the treaty but blamed USA for
increasing the tension in the subcontinent by supplying arms to
Pakistan from 1954 to 1965. "Signing of the Treaty was a carefully
considered Indian strategy that had been in preparation for over a
year" wrote Kissinger®®. During her visit to Moscow in late
September, she and Kosygin placed the entire blame on Yahya.
India’s Policy
Whenever there is turmoil, agitation and a breakdown of law
_and order on a massive scale,a powerful neighbour tends to fish in
‘troubled waters. so it was’\ with India. Indira handled the East
Pakistan Crisis with extreme finesse. The first objective was to cut
off East Pakistan from it’s home base. This she achieved by
engineering the Ganga; incident and subsequently the banning of
overflights in February, 1971. |
b The second objective was to isolate Pakistan from it’s western
allies. When Yahya postponed the national assembly session y
Indira used her diplomatic skill to win over the international
community to her side. In her characteristic outspoken and
outrageous manner she exploited the fact that temo not
| allowed to flourish’ once again in Pakista ‘and that Pakistan was
being run by a military junta who wer nal peparel to hand over
power to their elected representative! A theme that went down
very well in western democracies.
To the Muslim countries;) which did not have elected
governments, she used the so-€alled genocide card. She used her
electronic and newsprint media to give exaggerated stories of mas°
killing of men, women and children in East, Pakistan by the
‘ Pakistan army. Many Muslim leaders batiored fl propaganda 80
cleverly put across by the Indians. She was able to convince them
that the people of East Pakistan were no longer willing to be part
of Pakistan.

India’s Role in the break Up of Pakistan si
To prepare the ground for military intervention she used the
refugee problem which was blown out of proportion to highlight
fe predicament in which India had been placed. While
conducting a diplomatic a Provided military support to
the Mukti Bahini. The details-of how the Indian army organised
equipped, trained and launched the Bengalis who had crossed into
Indian territory have been given in chapter 4.
Her real fear bi from Ching which was Pakistan closest ally.
Somehow China had to be neutralised. By signing the accord with
the Soviet Union,she sealed her frontiers with China. A masterly 4
stroke indeed and an excellent model of crisis management. Soon
after the treaty Indira issued orders to General Manekshaw to
finalise the plans for a military action against East Pakistan.
To draw the attention of world leaders to the undemocratic
policies being followed by the military ‘dictators’ in Pakistan,she
addressed a letter to all heads of government on 10 August To71 bp
~ urging them to. prevent General Yahya from putting Sheikh
Mujib-ur-Rahman the leader of the majority party on trial for
high treason.
_ Indira Gandhi’s visit to the USA and twelve other Western
countries in October and November, 1971 was to portray the
government of Pakistan as a colonial power and isolate it from its
erstwhile supporters. She was preparing the justification for an
_ Indian invasion of East Pakistan.
India implemented it’s policy, of seizing every opportunity to
weaken Pakistan, in six phases.
Phase 1 (January, 1970 to February, 1971)
Supported Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman’s 6-points formula which
had the seeds of weakening the hold of the Centre on East
Bengal. The Awami League was expected to be friendly to
India and would not be an obstacle to India’s national interest
in South Asia. In this phase India succeeded in isolating East
Bengal from West Pakistan by banning of overflights due to
the Ganga incident. '
Phase 2 (March, 1 C
Intense propagan a condemning Pakistan’s military junta for
not handing over power to the elected representative.
Internationalising the issue by galvanising world opinion

298 :
Tragedy of Errors
sas
‘ : t+ of the Awami L
against Pakistan and in suppor eagu
Organising subversive activities 1n East Pakistan. Engaging (¢
psychological warfare by propagating exaggerated stories of the
success of the Mukti Bahini.
Phase 3 (April-October)
Equipping, arming and Training of Mukti Bahini ip
sanctuaries on Indian soil and. Jaunching them under their
control inside East Pakistan. Psychological war continued
| aimed at lowering the morale and fighting spirit of the
Pakistan army in East Pakistan.
Phase 4 (November 1971)
Active Indian participation providing artillery and air support
to the Mukti Bahini and in capturing Pakistani border security
posts and areas which could serve as launching pads for a
planned invasion of East Pakistan.
Phase 5 (21 November 1971 - 2 December 1971
Open war against East Pakistan with limited air and artillery
support using brigade size forces along several approaches.
Phase 6 (3 December - 16 December)
All out war against Pakistan with the primary objective of
dismembering Pakistan, and with the secondary aim of
destroying the capability” and image of the Pakistan army in
West Pakistan as well.

India’s Role in the break up of Pakistan 299
Notes
sh, Sucheta, Role of India in the Em
lh. rome Ltd, Calcutta, 1983, p. 9. ergence of Bangladesh, Minneora
‘ Corbel, Joseph Danger in Kashmir, Pp. 137.
. ive India, Indian Council F ‘
‘ as of °r Cultural Relations, New Delhi, 1983,
™ d Leo E. Rose, War and § : :
4, Sisson, R., an we: WU ecession, Pakistan Indi
. Bangladesh, Univer: iforn; » india and the
“— of Bang ersity of California Press, Berkeley, LA, 1990,
3, Transfer of Power in India .......... p. 384.
6, Nehru-Political Biography ......... p. 378.
7. Mahmood, Safdar, Pakistan Divided, Ferozesons Ltd, Lahore, 1984, p. 138,
3 Ambedkar, B.R. (ed) Pakistan or the Partition of India Book Traders Lahore
1945 (reproduced) p. 13.4.
9, Ahmad, Rafique, (ed) Pakistan India Relations, Prospects For a Durable
Peace, Centre for South Asian Studies, University of Punjab, Lahore, 1989,
p. 34.
10. Thid,
11. Thid.
12. Mahmood, Safdar, p. 139.
13. Ghosh, p. 9.
1. Bhutto, Zulfiqar Ali, The Great Tragedy, Pakistan People’s Party Publication
~ Vision Publications, Karachi, 1971, p. 4.
15 Interview, K. Subramanyam; Indian Council of World Affairs, Symposium 31
March, 1971.
J& “Ahmad, Rafique, p. 35.
17, Maswani, A.M.K. Subversion in East Pakistan, Amir Publications, Lahore,
1979, pp. 118, 119.
48. Mahmood, Safdar, p. 21.
8. Interview, Kuldip Nayar,
0 Interview, K. Subramanyam.
j j P SS,
21. Bhutto, Zulfiqar Ali, The Myth of Independence, Oxford University Pre
Lahore, 1969, p. 173,
2 F
. Interview, Colonel Amir Khan.
3, gi. ;
Sisson R and Leo E. Rose, p. 42.
24 wy.
: White Paper, Government of Pakistan, p. 45. 1 Book
5 tional Boo
~ pltti-ur-Rahman, (ed) Second Thoughts on Bangladesh, Ne
Undation, Islamabad, 1979, p. 45.

jstan, p- Ad.
Ab. White Paper, Government of Pakis
At. Mati-ur-Rahman, P- 26.
~ Safdar, p- 49. .
omen d Tears, Din Muhammad Press, Karachi, 1974,
29. Aziz, Qutubuddin, Blood and 160°")
: ; il, 1971.
0. Dawn, Karachi, 2 Apru, .
3 chouthrn GY Last Days of United Pakistan, C. Hurst and Company,
31. ou ws oOreg
London, 1974, P- 85. .
32. Singh, Jagdev, Brig, Dismemberment of Pakistan, 1971 Indo-Pakistan War
Lanes International, New Delhi, 1988, p. 42.
33. Interview, Maj Gen Rao Farman Ali Khan.
34. Kardar, Abdul Hafeez, Pakistan’s Soldiers of Fortune, Ferozsons Ltd,
vo Lahore, 1988, p. 133.
| 35, Bangaldesh Documents Vol 1, p. 60°: Salik, Siddiq, Witness to Surrender,
| Oxford University press, Karachi, 1978, p .97.
| __36. Interview, k. Subramanyam.
37. Nayar, Kuldip, Distant Neighbours, Vikas publication House, New Delhi, |
| p. 16.
| 38. Asia vear Book, 1971, p. 186.
|
39. Lok Sabha Debates, Government of India, 31 May -4 June, 1971, p. 126.
_A0. Sisson R, and Leo E. Rose, p. 190.
| “4l. Rissioyees Henty, Dr, White House Years Little Brown and company, Bostan,
{ , 1979, p. 863.
| 42. Ibid.
| 43. Lok Sabha Debates, 7 June, 1971, p. 175.
| \ 44. Choudhary, G, W, p. 198.
| 45. Interview, K. Subramanyam; Organiser, 13 July 1974.
46. Mahmood, Safdar, p. 148.
| #1, Rashidi, M. A. Indo-Paki -cssilf
ag vag oe Pakistan Relation i Universi!)
| of Sindh, Jamshoro, Pakistan, 1988, p ene Sindy Cons,
48. Choudhry, G. W, p. 204,
49. Ibid, p .208.
50. Wilcox, W., Th
of Public Poli ¢ Emergence of Bangladesh, Amercian Enterprises, Institu!®
Olicy Research, Washin ’
51 Ch dh gton, D. oF 1973, p. 53, note 9.
yw . ou ry, G. W, p. 89.
52.
Subramanyam, K. Bangladesh and India’s Securi
53. Salik, Siddi ecurity.
» Siddiq, pp. 90, 95.
54. Maswani, p. 280,

