Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre wT
MAP 9
52, EAST PAKISTAN
JESSORE SECTOR
JO7 BRIGADE Positions
BATTLE For KHULNA
2-17 DEC.I971
: :
/ TO MAGURA
Ps
ae .
Nw”
— NARGA
=ESVEssore neat
JINGER GACHA . S
A ‘ 11 CEC
| . : NAWAPARA\ JI
: MIANIRAMP
f UR SS SCREEN POSITIONS
4 \ PHULTALA, 24)PB(~) |
‘
\ THREE fe
\ ATTACKS |
REPULSED = =6 PB
KESABPURA weave 107
YY See ~~, 15 FF 55
~ =
en 17 DE
L-- KHULNA
< 22 D,
PAKISTAN ARMY L Yo
INDIAN ARMY v

am Tragedy of Errors
Although the war had officially ended on 16 December, 107
Brigade held on to Khulna till 0800 hours 17 December. Genera]
Aurora admits that the division which was sent down to Khulna
could not capture it till the cease fire because the Pakistanis had
organised a good defensive position with a bog on one side and a
river on the other. "The fighting there could have gone on for a
long time" added the Indian army commander’.
57 Brigade (Jhenida Sub-Sector)
Brigadier Manzoor Ahmad, a soft spoken Kashmiri officer,
whose mild manners and even temperament were more suited for
.a staff appointment than the command of troops in an
unfavourable environment. A former member of the directing
staff at the prestigious Command and Staff College, Quetta he had
more than adequate knowledge for organising a proper defence
position at the brigade and divisional level.
57 Brigade, however, had only two infantry battalions as
against the standard three. He was to cover a frontage of 80
kilometres, fifteen times greater than what he had been teaching.
He not only-faced an enemy threat of one division but he had also
to protect his rear areas, routes of withdrawal and vital
installations from his own people. A major deviation from the staff
college solution had to be made, more so because of the directive
of holding every inch of territory.
Manzoor put everything he had in the shop window. 29 Baloch
was on the right covering the axis to Harding/Paksy bridge the
only vital link to 16 Division across the Ganges. 18 Punjab was
deployed on the left to guard the approach to Jhenida which was
i both, his brigade headquarters and a town which had been
prepared as a fortress for prolonged defence. A company was
detached from 18 Punjab to man an outpost at Darsana right on
the border and at the inter-brigade boundary. It was covering the
shortest approach to Jhenida. 38 FF of 107 Brigade was
immediately on its left.
Manzoor’s flanks were protected by a major river in the north
and 107 Brigade in the south. Madhumati river ran from north-
west to south-east in the eastern half of his Brigade area. The
terrain was not unduly cut up and had a reasonably good
infrastructure of a road and rail network.

Indo-Pakistan w
ee Way. 197] Eastern Theatre 393
57 Brigade was later reinfor,Ced wij
99 Cavalry for the defence of the Pah = @ Squadron of tanks from
Regiment, which reached the f, Sy bridge and with
iedly sent ormation on 9 50 Punjab
hurriedly sent southwards to Prevent a rend Ovember and was
Opposite 57 Brigade, was — Tough to Jhenida,
addition to the standard three br S 4 Mountain Divisio
. A rigades (7 hn. In
and three field regiments the Indian divie).. 41 and 62 Brigades)
of armour and a 130 millimetre, opie Was given a regiment
reach out to any target in Manzoor’s briead battery which could
redeployment. ade area with minimum
Dharmada Enclave
General Barar was in his conce i
‘ ntr "
preparation for an attack by the “_ ne by 15 November in
21 November. He took another five days te " East Pakistan on
operations. In this he was helped “s ee his area of .
brought back ; on ea te, Mukti Bahini who
rougnt all the information he needed ab
dispositions, location of their strong points about enemy
minefields, safe passage through water obstacles mun as a
tankable terrain. With everything given to Bar oo tho Weta na
with the air Ags : ; ‘arar on the plate and
i e alr observer flying overhead in relative safety it was going
. ~ walk over. The defenders were restricted to fight with their
ands tied behind their backs as their rear areas were insecure
and their security had been jeopardised.
,; To Make things easier General Barar, like other Indian
“erp commanders, was looking for areas inside East
akistan which could be occupied before launching his full scale
p
rh One such area was the Dharmada enclave in the Kushtia
ctor,
p Indian 1 Nagaland Battalion had managed to infiltrate into
ean territory in the Kushtia sector unnoticed some time
wing the first week of November 1971. This enclave probably
e ed as a base to coordinate and support operations of the
ukties into the area. Brigadier Manzoor decided to eject the
*nemy from the enclave.
|
py This action was fought on 9 November 1971 by D a re
? njab, commanded by Captain Muhammad a “A ;
oe of 8 November the company commander er i . a e
atka, eight kiloketres away, was vaguely informed tha —_

394 Tragedy of Errors
Indian troops alongwith Mukties had crossed over ie se
territory and were now entrenched east of the river athabanga.
The company was ordered to clear the Mukties from own
territory. To accomplish the task 12 rounds of 3.7 artillery were
allotted. This was probably to scare the Mukties and obviate the
need for a company attack. On 9 November the company moved
‘nto a forward concentration area by midnight. At 0530 hours D
Company debouched from its forming Up place with two platoons
up. On reaching approximately 300 yards from the objective the
troops suddenly came under intense artillery, mortar and machine
gun fire. The right forward platoon led by Lieutenant G.M. Sipra,
had suffered heavily. His platoon junior commissioned officer
Naib/Subedar Akram was seriously wounded. The gallant
company commander decided to forge ahead. By now one third of
the company’s strength had been depleted, but the battalion war
cry “Nara-i-Haidri” gave them the extra courage. They assaulted
the enemy bunkers, regardless of their exposure to enemy fire.
Approximately 22 men reached the objective forcing the enemy
to take to their heels. Naik Yaqub was seen madly charging on the
enemy with his right hand raised over his head. Lance Naik
Mehdi fell at 10 yards distance from an enemy bunker with 5
bullets in his skull through his steel helmet, Lance Naik Sher
Muhammad (driver) sat on top of one of the enemy machine gun
bunkers and ordered the inmates to surrender one by one.
Subedar Ayub faked loud messages and foiled the enemy counter
attack, by indicating the pressure of a complete battalion in the
area. A Company of 29 Baloch after having crossed the river also
appeared at 0800 hours at the rear of the fleeing enemy and
inflicted heavy losses to them.
In this operation six prisoners from 1 Nagaland Battalion
(regulars) were captured for the first time in East Pakistan. It was
then learnt that this position was held by two Companies of 1
Nagaland Battalion. The position was prepared and fortified over
the last 5 days. There were approximately 100 Mukties under
command of this force. From a monitored wireless message 12 the
divisional headquarters it was learnt that the enemy had lost two
officers in this operation. D Company had also suffered heavy
losses but the enemy was routed. Captain Imtiaz and seven other
ranks were recommended for gallantry.

Indo-Pakistan War - 197) Eastern Theatre 395
The objective of 4 Mountain Division wa :
the Madumati river just across the town of Marae te vaste
headquarters of General Ansari’s g Division. It was to reach
Maduakhali by D plus 1 (ie. by 2 December), In spite of an
overwhelming superiority in men and weapons Barar’s troops
were still entangled with the clearance of border out :
: ; posts on that
date. A far cry from a rapid advance to their objective,
Battle for Jhenida
_Barar’s initial plan of attack was to break through to Jhenida
with a frontal assault towards Kaliganj. In Phase II he planned to
overrun Jhenida from the south while simultaneously cutting of
18 Punjab’s route of withdrawal to Jhenida. From then onwards
he intended to fan out in the direction of Kushtia and Magura in
the hope of surrounding the entire brigade before it could cross
the Ganges and the Madhumati rivers. While he succeeded in
reaching his objectives finally, he could not entirely encircle the
defenders as desired.
62 Brigade of 4 (Indian) Mountain Division assaulted the
company of 18 Punjab at Darsana on 28 November and succeeded
in breaking through its defences. The next night the village of
Uthalai a few kilometres to the east of Darsana was attacked. It
was held by another company of 18 Punjab. The protective
minefield around Uthalai forced the squadron of armour
supporting the assaulting troops, to halt temporarily. After a few
Indian tanks were shot up their attack on Uthalai failed and they
Were compelled to withdraw. 62 Brigade, renewed, their attach on
80 November and this time succeeded in overrunning both
Uthalai and Andulbaria - further east.
While the Indians were advancing towards Kaliganj 18 sil 7
'e-occupied the Darsana position on 2 December. Lee oe
had to commit 42 Brigade supported by a squadron ot bce .
dislodge the new occupants of the border post. ~maran ad 4
kilometre from the border finally passed into Indian ‘thdrew to
December after six days of fighting. 18 Punjab too of tanks
Chuadanga the same night where it was joined by a troop
from 29 Cavalry,
62 Brigade had attacked along the inter-brigade store
between 57 and 107 Brigade. 38 FF of 107 Brigade also, therefore,
. talion got split, some
Bot €ngaged in the battle for Jnenida. The bat

ave Tragedy of Errors
elements falling back to their brigade area while the bulk of the
unit withdrew towards Jhenida into the neighbouring formation
area reaching there on 30 November.
Brigadier Manzoor requested permission to move 18 Punjab to
Jhenida on 4/5 December which was to be defended as a fortress,
His request was not initially granted and when it was finally given
on the night between 5 and 6 December, 1t was too late.
Kotchandpur south of Jhenida had fallen and the enemy had by
then blocked the route of withdrawal to Jhenida.
While moving towards Jhenida 18 Punjab was fired at by the
enemy from Uttar Narayanpur, a small village, a few kilometres
west of Jhenida, on the road Chuadanga-Jhenida. The
commanding officer of 18 Punjab, thinking the adversary to be
Muktis, tried to clear the way by attacking first with one company
and then by two, supported by the couple of tanks he had with
him. The attack failed as regular Indian troops were opposing
him. The battalion retreated towards Chuadanga.
Manzoor, then ordered 18 Punjab to try and reach Jhenida via
Kushtia which was connected to Chuadanga and to Jhenida by
train, But the Mukti Bahini had blown the railway bridges and
movement by train was no longer possible. The rebels had also
destroyed the bridges on the road from Mehrpur to Kushtia thus
cutting of 29 Baloch from the rest of the brigade. 57 Brigade
however, managed to concentrate 18 Punjab and 29 Baloch
around Kushtia by 8 December. In the meantime General Barar
attacked Jhenida from the south using 41 Brigade which had not
so far been committed. Jhenida, which should have been strongly
defended by 57 Brigade, if they had fallen back to the fortress in
time, was now held by the remnants of 38 FF which had
withdrawn to that city on 30 November.
9 Dogra attacked Jhenida at 1.25 p.m. on 7 December. By
evening the town had been taken but not without a struggle "The
Pakistanis fought bitterly" was the comment made by the Indians
after they occupied Jhenida. They even praised the Pakistani
intelligence agencies as according to the maps and documents
captured by them the exact identification and location of Indian
troops facing 57 Brigade were plotted.
hice resumed its advance towards Magura on the
river which they reached on 8 December. There wel
no troops at Magura as the remnants of 38 FF had withdraw? t

Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 397
Maduakhali, east of the river. 9 Divisional headquarters had also
moved out of Magura and were Now safel :
Faridpur, 22 kilometres further east. ee A
Kushtia Encounter
Brigadier Manzoor, havin lost al . ;
began to re-organise his takpuie ohn 29° Bales ee
guard the approach from Jhenida and 18 Punjab was a wae m
the enemy from reaching Harding bridge. The sstipeny aid the
recee and Support battalion was pushed ahead to establish a
screen position astride the road Jhenida-Kushtia. The company
gave a good account of itself by holding its fire for as long as
possible and then destroying most of the tanks accompanying 7
_ Infantry Brigade. "22 Rajput had walked into a cleverly laid
ambush. They suffered heavy casualties. One hundred and eleven
Rajputs soldiers were killed including six officers37, The battalion
lost five tanks in the ensuing clash against the R&S company",
acknowledged General Aurora**. General Barar had ordered his
reserve brigade to clear Kushtia but he was surprised to find that
remnants of 57 Brigade had entrenched themselves very strongly
and it would need more than a brigade to clear Kushtia. He finally
had to use all three brigades (7, 41 and 62) in an attempt to take
Kushtia and to try and force 57 Brigade to surrender.
While 7 Brigade attacked from the south, 41 Brigade tried to
roll the defences from west to east in the hope of preventing 57
Brigade in crossing over the Harding bridge. 62 Brigade was held
in reserve. The Indian divisional attack on Kushtia on 9 December
Was supported by the divisional artillery and four troops of tanks.
The enemy by now, had complete mastery of the skies, as the only
PAF Squadron in East Pakistan had been made totally ineffective.
Kushtia was overrun on night 10/11 December. with no
eplacements, no reinforcements, no rest and a feeling of i ."
isolation 57 brigade had lost its will to continue the ch a
decided to make a clean break and move across the ManEpe n an
hope of getting some respite. Manzoor’s brigade was not given any
: : there-after.
| ‘lask by 16 Division and remained out of the wat Wh
. . ition. en
Harding bridge had also been prepat a . on ee by his
the Kushtia battle was raging Brigadier — re-confirmed the
COC to blow up the bridge. Eastern oe bridge as they feared
Orders for the destruction. of the Harding |

398
Tragedy of Errors
EAST PAKISTAN
—
SOUTH @ WEST SECTOR
57 BRIGADE OPERATIONS
28-NOV- 17 DEC 1971
c G4 J
. + ee oe | A
r4 M
4 ‘ — fe at 8
INDIA Cx or ioe (2vss 29 BAL :
u.
tad 2 50 PB
| J ee
one” a wae aw 16
f 129 BAL 4, \ ‘
; c 57 BDE conc )) KUSHTIA &s €
yy "es (0/8 DEC: R
ee AQT Sdec
© sister x
¢ ‘ I9PB YS A ay = wd
| . ii) CHANDPUR 7 L ot
4 ~e _. ~*~ +4 DEC } e AR 3
} wr 7 DEC JHENIDA ‘ \
“\.COY,_ EX is PB ee Ss 1S DEC __FARIDPUR 6
| ae SHANA?) 2O1NOV,4 DEX 57 i ae gers SDiz vec |
. (bsiie 0 at * Esa
Oe ee Lice BTOEC SYN. B DEC
| veege2 ‘ <2 BONO || 6 foe 3
in NNAGAR CULBARIA. * *- ---="MAGURA
_ KRISHAN NAGAR ee 8 DEC
rd C 38 FF KALIGANY 38 FF
| INDIA §¢ ~ M
| . & Jessore
| i \
| ‘ .
i ; ¥
|

Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 399
that the Indians would capture it intact and roll up 16 Division
from the south. Ashraf, however, was Conscious of the fact that 57
Brigade was facing a life and death Struggle just south of
idge. If he obeyed the orders of }; Oe the ge wee
pridge. e | Se) his Superiors they would be all
lost. He decided to disregard the 'nstruction, which allowed a
whole brigade to get across into a relatively safe haven. 41 Indian
Brigade attacked the bridge at 12.30 pm on 11 December and
captured its western portion before nightfall as it was only light]
held by then. nied
General Barar was still west of the river Madhumati. It took |
him another four days before he could re-group his forces and |
move them south for the capture of his final objective the |
Madhumati river. By the time he came back to his original,
direction of advance the birds had flown, of course to be entrapped :
after the war was over. 7 and 62 Brigade crossed the river north of |
Mugura on 15 December using country boats and succeeded in |
establishing a bridge- head east of the river. "Tubby Raina had
retrieved his honour by crossing the river"?9, said Aurora. By the
time they reached Faridpur two days later, the game was up.
Northeastern Sector
The north-eastern sector of East Pakistan was being defended
by 14 Infantry Division. Its area of responsibility stretched from
Sylhet in the north to excluding Comilla - a frontage of more than
320 kilometres. It was sandwiched between the Meghna/ Surma
‘ers in the west and the international border in the east.
To cover this vast area of interlocking water obstacles It had
two regular and one adhoc brigade, a total of five infantry
battalions against the standard nine. The deficiency We “op |
in para military forces and mujahid companies. di to the
Was given one depleted independent squadron. nai ph 7
Goc only four tanks were available, two regiments o fal short |
_ ‘Mstead of three and a mortar battery”. It was thus ‘~ i The skies
of fire power - only one half of what it should es to the Indian
ver the whole of East Pakistan were freely availa
ar force.
; d burly frontier
for Major General Qazi Abdul Majeed, , a had a mellow and
ts e officer, from the princely state 0 eprmad member of the
dings 4sslonate temperament. Majeod, * d to do a great deal of
“ting staff, at the Staff College, ha :

400
Tragedy of Errors
adhocery to produce a proper defensive plan in a totally different
setting. It was all the more difficult as the political objective
overruled military considerations.
His task was to deny Sylhet and Bhairab Bazar at all costs, To
accomplish this mission he deployed the whole of his two and half
brigades in a forward posture with all the five battalions placeq
side by side along the border. He could not afford to have any
depth in his division, although the shortest route to Dacca lay
through his formation.
Lieutenant General Sagat Singh commanding IV Corps, on the
other hand, was placed very comfortably. His was the strongest of
the three corps detailed to annex East Pakistan. It had three
infantry divisions (8, 23 and 57), one armoured brigade, three
divisional artilleries, medium guns of the corps artillery, adequate
helicopters to lift two companies at a time across the Meghna, air
to-greund sorties at will, all against four depleted infantry
brigades (two of 14 Division and two of 39 Division).
In addition to this formidable array of men and weaponry
Sagat Singh had the advantage of a Trojan House which would
subvert the fortress from within and open its doors from inside for
his troops to rush in.
27 Brigade (BRAHMANBARIA Sub Sector)
27 Brigade, consisting only of two battalions, was commanded
by Brigadier Saadullah. His task was to defend the area from
Madhabpur to the Salda Nadi just north of Comilla. On his left
was 313 Brigade and to the right 39 (Adhoc) Division. 12 Frontier
Force Regiment was covering the area from Akhaura to
Gangasagar while his second battalion, 33 Baloch, was looking
after the southern sector of the divisional defensive area. He had
the support of seven light tanks and a battery of guns including
two mortars. A recee and support platoon provided his screen to
cover a frontage of approximately 64 kilometres.
The Brigade headquarters was at Brahmanbaria about 16
kilometres north-west of the left forward battalion along the
railway line leading to the only road, rail bridge over the mighty
Meghna. There was no road between the brigade headquarters
and 12 FF.
Due to extended frontages 31 Field Regiment had to split ate
batteries between the two battalions. Concentrated fire of eve?

