Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 411
gi (Adhoo) feke “t en sadier Mian Taskeenuddin)
The brigade ea quarter was at Dum
vor and Hie ‘beige ‘wos bromine south of the Feni
ri th - Karer Hat and the whole of or an area around
(a vast complex of hills and forests, idea] for Song hill tracts
put a major obstacle to vehicular movement) It has Ssenens
units. It consisted of a mixed bag of rangers aati no regular |
armed ae espe of 24 FF ang ; se ol |
ose rovide s ; ;
—_ supp Pp ome steel in their otherwise supine |
|
97 (Adhoc) Brigade (Brig Ata Muhammad Malik)
_ The brigade headquarters was at Chitta |
: ‘ gong. It al
look after the Chittagong hill tracts, The ae oy Be one vow ter |
battalion (48 Baloch) and two companies of 24 FF, Some }
commandos, a wing of CAF, a marine battalion and a troop of
mortars.
39 (Adhoc) Division had no armour to speak off and only two
field batteries and one mortar battery. The fire power was less
than what is even allotted to a brigade.
Indian Plan in the South-east Sector
Indian 23 Mountain Division was given the task to close up to
the River Meghna as soon as possible and simultaneously cut the
road and rail network at Feni thus preventing the two brigades in
the Chittagong hill tracts from reinforcing the main defences
around Laksham. Comilla was to be by-passed and the road to
Chandpur from Laksham blocked before the units on the front
line could fall back.
23 Division had been given four brigades for this task. One
brigade was to operate in the Chittagong hill tracts. =. singe |
soup with armour support was to pass through Baas an |
make for the rail/road bridge over river Fen. Two brigades were
lo attack along axes Comilla - Laksham and Chuadagra
Laksham.
, . -, Border posts
Ww Enemy's probing attacks began on 2) ae vated io ee out
fre attacked and Mukti Bahini was 1% rat Stade oly ‘I
peversive activities behind enemy ar _ broken up by
Kee against a company of 23 PunjabD W
alt, the artillery observer.
=
oe
ee

412 |
Tragedy of Errors
Comilla Sub Sector
The major thrust against Comilla started on 4 December. An
enemy brigade pushed through a gap between 30 Punjab and 23
Punjab of 117 Brigade south of Comilla and established blocking
positions behind the two forward battalions on the track leading
to Laksham. Another brigade group supported by an armoured
squadron attacked the main defensive positions of 23 Punjab. On
5 December a preliminary artillery bombardment had softened up
the defences. 23 Punjab managed to exfiltrate to Laksham and
were settled in their next delaying position by 6 December,
Though the city was evacuated and captured by the Indians on 8
December, 30 Punjab in Maynamati cantonment held out and
defied capture till ceasefire on 16 December.
15 Baloch strung along the Belonia salient could not put up
| any resistance as they were very thin on the ground. The enemy
succeeded in infiltrating through the battalion on 24/25
, November in an attempt to encircle it, but by lastQlight 26
November the unit withdrew to Feni before the enemy could close
the gap. Though Major General R.D. Hira took almost the whole
of November to clear Belonia‘*®, his plan to outflank the so-called
fortresses and strong points and get to the rear of the various
defensive positions assured him a quick and easy victory. Of
| ae such ee manoeuvres are only possible when a fifth
| column is active.
| Since the main thrust of the enemy was towards Laksham and
Chandpur in order to pose a threat to Dacca, General Rahim
decided to abandon the Feni defences and concentrate his troops
| for the defence of Laksham and Comilla5. 53 Brigade first
| withdrew to Begumganj, about 32 kilometres west of Feni, on 28
| November and by 5 December it joined 117 Brigade at Laksham.
| 117 Brigade had been spli ; ;
| boats br-sesced and one as 30 Punjab holding Comilla had
| Chandpur Sub Sector
Once again the enemy avoided getting j ; “+ ched
g involved in a pitc
SE sec frit
; untain Drigade under the command of Brigadie!
Harinder Singh Sodhi was headi dkundi
by-passing pockets of res} ing for Chandpur and Dau
stance enroute. Chandpur was virtually

Indo-Pakis
ndo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 413
d as all troops were ah
yndefende ahead of j
of, A company of infantry alongwith bs an had now been cut
mpany and some maintenance eopl nts of q commando
comp People could not h
Chandpur. ave defended
The enemy was having a field day picki
Division deployed on a wide front to i 68 Cae remnants of 39
they were without any artillery support, Th ee moves as
operating in the rear helped the Indians i sf ukti Bahini
isolated troops. Pping up the
By 6 December Hajiganj was secured the Tua
remnants of the division still at Lalhaor Change with the
directly threatened. Genera] Rahim decided to pata
Chandpur. The evacuation started on 6/7 December but it was a
slow process as the rearward movement had to be done across the |
_ mighty Meghna. No bridge existed to enable a quick withdrawal. ,
| General Rahim had to wait till sufficient naval craft and ferries
_ were assembled. All moves had to be done by night as enemy air
would not permit any day light traffic on the river!
39 (Adhoc) Divisional headquarters and all the 700 personnel
including the Razakars and West Pakistan police left Chandpur on
8/9 December and reached Narayanganj on the west bank of the
Meghna, a few kilometres southeast of Dacca. General Rahim and
those with him in the gunboat and landing craft, were the last to
leave Chandpur. By the time they neared Narayanganj ne sun
was shining brightly. The two boats got a direct hit apie
‘hemy aircraft. General Rahim was wounded and evacuate L
hospital. All other members of his divisional cnet y excep
forthe ADC and one staff officer were killed or wounde h 4 b
‘ j a een
89 (Adhoc) Divisional Headquarters, er Foveuiber.
Pocished on 20 November, ceased to exis + cll beaistins
lements of 53 and 117 Brigades were stil! a of them tried to
Nien enemy’s ground and air attacks. and Lal Mai, others
‘nk up with the battalion in Comilla a d in breaking out of
attempted - A few succeeded In Mai
th Pted to reach Chandpur. Laksham and Lal Mal
© €hemy cordon. Some troops at the time elements of 23
otinued to hold on till 16 December. OY ae jast water obstacle
er Division succeeded in rane Dacca. The war in East
patkha river) and reach within ts at Singh the privilege of
wantan Was over denying General 5a8
8g Niazi to give up the fight.

414 Tragedy of Errors
MAP 13
Bh oaces wot 7 EAST PAKISTAN
CE pe K son . SOUTH EAST SECTOR “aN
$ 30S! zo ovisionztares | 3 |"),
aN ie CRN novspecien |} ‘i
{ 25FF Wen i% sa 5 |
) ~ Sf, ¢ j
UDKUNDI : “A 4 pec
: ? y) TOMIELA INDIA Ar
Cay, DEC, Lacuay Sp (oa) 23 | ey
& y\ Ya A ‘te LO oy pe
39 )biy\eg AS ee 1 Dec
woe goes YE ca, en AF is. SP ity,
8/9 0D C4 ae Pe 7BAL © SCHAUDAGR i "e . y EERE:
ia aE eT A
S Re a DE Use” Nov @| in ;
2 | ges ek Ay] TRACTS
= 1 s3 2
. \j! 4 SS ! | I] |
\ Y ots woe : FEN jal sttheabe 7 F
\\ DEGUNGANS * Ae | F | ll,
a) sae ne ‘ caeen AT | | |
= ae hr S | | ,
=" ae CHITTAGONG
paren EX 3, MATIA S v C= 7 , hi | |
sinouay, \t) - - ~ «§ ™ TRACTS | | |
isLawon\ ) > Lin 5 Nxt || ni
S a = - & iil!
Oe ee ‘ fit]
a wt Nea, |S | nL
=x ~ ~~ BAY OF BENGAL =e s \ | |
meee ARMY — i oe BAY OF BENGAL — em — ; ByRMA
INDIAN ARMY => | r0,cows aan | |

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 415
d 97 Brigade at Dumghat ; .
9 - eeapecHively ede Loe, a Hat) and Chittagong
pill tra ce’ out of battle), The enemy
disregarded their presence as they were fay removed from the
strategic direction towards Dacca. An abortive naval landing near
Cox’s Bazaar was an exercise in futility by the Indian Navy.
Central Sector
36 (Adhoc) Division was a hoax. It was a misnomer. A patch-
work of a formation put on crutches two weeks before the
shooting war started in real earnest. Major General Muhammad
Jamshed Khan was in the martial law headquarters when he was
asked to raise and take over the command of 36 (Adhoc) Division.
A tall, handsome, well built Punjabi, Stalwart from the martial
belt of Jhelum. Soldering was his families occupation for decades
but physique and family background are not the only criteria for
success in the battlefield. He only had one brigade and that too of
two battalions. A two-star general was commanding a couple of
infantry units and that’s all. His artillery support no more than a
bow and arrow. Twelve 120 mm mortars is all that he got.
His area of responsibility stretched from the northern borders
of East Pakistan between the Jamuna and the Surma rivers to its
very heart - The capital city of Dacca. The central approach was
not given any importance as the enemy threat in this area was
listed as a beefed up brigade. However, there was no major water
obstacle in between the commander of the Indian L of C troops
and his vital objective.
Ironically, it was the weakest enemy force which pushed
through the lightest held territory to reach the outskirts of Dacca
and demand a surrender from a theatre commander.
Jamalpur Sub Sector
Brigadier Fazal Qadir, commanding 93 (Adhoc) Brigade
leployed Lieutenant Colonel Sultan’s 31 Baloch between ae ae
towns of Jamalpur and Kamalpur a few kilometres south if t ‘
international frontier. His second battalion, 33 Punjab, he vee "
around Haluaghat. Major Ghaffar Shah, distributed is
Mortars equally between the two infantry units.
0 The left flank of 93 Brigade was protected a soicomullah’s 202
an Night flank across the Surma river was
hoe) brigade part of 14 Infantry Division.

416 Tragedy of Errors
Qadir, could never for-see that it will be through his brigade
that the final blow would be struck and the fate of entire Eastern
Command would be sealed if he let the enemy slip by or, as it
happened, fly over.
Major General Gurbaksh Singh Gill, was commanding 101
Communication Zone with his headquarters at Gauhati. He had
the normal compliments of an infantry division. Three brigades
and the full support of other arms. Although he was not given a
major role in the invasion plans it was destined that his successor
Major General G. S. Nagra should get the credit for reaching
nearest to Dacca first.
101 Communication Zone opened their account on 18
November, three days before the Indian army brazenly invaded
East Pakistan. A battalion of Indian infantry attacked Kamalpur. |
Captain Siddiqui moved his mortars further forward to reach out
to the enemy. Unfortunately he ran into an ambush and most of
his mortars were destroyed. No move forward by the Indians was
made for a week.
On 27 November 31 Baloch put in a counter attack and
reoccupied Kamalpur. Captain Quddus kept a watchful eye on his
front. General Gill did not seem to be in a hurry or was he trying
to avoid casualties for his troops did not proceed any further. On 4
December 31 Baloch launched another counter attack. major
Ayub was leading the assault when he was struck down by enemy
fire. It was the thirteenth day of the war and the battle was still
confined to the clearing of border observation posts (BOPs).
Buxiganj outpost was evacuated on 4/5 December and a
on mires n was occupied at Jaggar Ghar - Karn - Sherpur.
wsaurhet its sais valle at bay for another three days 31 Baloch
Indian commander t races at Jamalpur on 7 December. an
launch on attack aon ree more days to assemble his forces to
J. , gainst a fairly well entrenched battalion at
amalpur.
The dhsck, failek, wot attacked Jamalpur on 9/10 December
afternoon of 10 Davciaber ene peycaclogiea! wartare. 0 I
Sultan. The letter w a liv wed settee to Lieutenant Colonie
letter is reproduced = eee by a civilian messenger. —
"The Indo-Pakistan W eee General Shaukat Riza’s boo
ar of 1971", which is gratefully
_ acknowledged.

Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre “ty
irom Brigadier Hardat Singh Kler)
fo,
the Commander Jamalpur Garrison
irected to inform you that ss
Jam direc Jes and you ‘ your garrison has been cut off
from all sides and y ave No escape route available to you
One brigade with full compliment of artillery has al isis
‘it up and another will be striki ready been
puilt up 4 ‘ € striking by the morning. In
addition you have been given a foretaste of a small element of
our air force with a lot more to come. The Situation as far as
you are concerned is hopeless. Your higher commanders have |
already ditched you. |
expect your reply before 6-30 pm today failing which I will be |
constrained to deliver the final blow for which purpose 40
sorties of MiGs have been allotted to me. |
In this morning’s action the prisoners, captured by us have |
given your strength and dispositions, and are well looked after. |
The treatment I expect to be given to this civil messenger |
should be according to a gentlemanly code of honour and no
harm should come to him.
An immediate reply is solicited.
BRIG H. S. KLER
10DEC 1971 COMD
REPLY FROM COMMANDING OFFICER 31 BALOCH
Dear Brig.
Hope this finds you in high spirits. Your letter ome -
Surrender has been received. I want to tell you that the a
you have seen so far is very little, in fact the chr i. sno
even started. So let us stop negotiating and start the fight.
40 Sorties, | may point out, are inadequate. Ask for many more.
a , . & * well was
You point about treating youl rae ; boys. I hope
jDerfluous. It shows how you under-estimate my
liked his tea, Sten 3
‘ ; with a Sten in
Give my love to the Mukties. Let me see tl ee to have so
a hand next time instead of the pen y°
Uch master over,

418 Tragedy of Errors
Now get on and fight”.
Your Sincerely
(COMMANDER JAMALPUR)
10 Dec 71. Fortress
(General Shaukat Riza’s manuscript), Pp. 236, 237, 238).
Sultan would haye shown Kler what the troops under his
command are made of but he was ordered by commander Eastern
Command to withdraw to Dacca immediately as there were no
regular forces to defend the capital.
Kler was not very boastful either. He had virtually surrounded
31 Baloch and wanted to achieve his objective without any further
loss of life to his own men. Sultan, however, broke through the
Marathas on the night between 10 and 11 December and reached
Madhupur to join 33 Baloch. Sultan lost over 200 of his brave men
that night.
Brigadier Qadir decided to concentrate his force in and around
Tangail to give another battle to Nagra’s forces moving
southwards towards Dacca. By the afternoon both the battalions
were in Tangail when they saw some paratroopers dropping from
the skies, between Kalyan Kar and Tangail. Before the Indian
para battalion could organise themselves Sultan forced his way
through enemy held territory again and by 12 December the
remnants of 31 Baloch were in Kalyan Kar. On 13 December he
was ordered to fall back to Tangi just outside Dacca where he
remained till the war ended.
The Trump Card
General Jagjit Singh Aurora, had over 300,000 men under his
command. He had at his disposal tremendous fire power and
se aioe mastery of the skies. The 100,000 Mukti Bahini were
giving es real time intelligence and were operating behind
enemy yee to his entire satisfaction. The Indian Navy had
Pakista y established a naval blockade of the war zone in Bast
cr at fe a> 24 days had passed without a major breakthrough:
menpe Tae Jessore no major city had fallen. Indira Gandhi wee
oe impatient. Army Headquarters at New Delhi was telling
im to get on with it. They were unsatisfied at his slow rate °
progress against a numerically weak and beleaguered enemy:

Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 419
Aurora was being asked to r
pefore it is reinforced by the toope b eae 4S soon as possible
. Ing back
force of even three regular brigades, in D "A concentrated
, considerable period of time. One Was ian could delay him for
was at Ashuganj and a third bould Beane there. The other
Rangpur sector. eakthrough from the
Aurora decided to use hi
reinforcements reaching Dacca. The arene to prevent the
for the airdrop as it was sufficiently dicaes * Tangail was chosen
to the capital. Besides, Tangail an its a acca to pose a threat
was invested with Mukti Bahini forces Matti. countryside |
‘shera’ Tiger Siddiqui. Their presence in arid g another self-styled |
zone would facilitate the operations of the anki dropping |
on.
With safety from the air and
para troopers floated down in broad oe the Indian |
to ‘friendly’ territory. Their immediate task was t hemp “ |
with Siddiqui and to block all routes leading southward to ies |
so that Qadir’s brigade is unable to reach the capital “Thi = |
accomplished because of the assistance and co-operation of ‘the )
wou hing aes rpnel ace e |
cks by 93 Brigade. Qadir kept |
the para battalion occupied around Tangail for 3 days.
General Nagra’s brigade which was moving southwards linked |
up with the para battalion on 14 December. With no further |
Tesistance in sight Nagra pushed his brigades towards Dacca, by-
passing wherever light opposition was met by making limited
cenit manoeuvres. The leading elements of the para
attalion reached the outskirts of Dacca on 16 December.
Defence of Dacea
The initial plan for the defence of Dacca was sound and if
reeented would have kept the enemy out of Dacca for several
Jam . if not months. The capital was located between the
kilomer” Ganges and the Brahmaputra. Each of chesriiey i
trangp, tie is eit sie hours 0 vyhe icors ais
ee and that too at designated places oath witoait
tame, eable even without opposition. The only ye and the
Br Jor obstacle was from the north between the Jamuna
tahmaputra, .

420 Tragedy of Errors
MAP 14
EAST PAKISTAN
. CENTRAL SECTOR
Sew, 36(ADHOC) DIVISIONAL AREA
93 BRIGADE OPERATIONS
o~ = 18 NOY- 16 DEC
© am [wis NOV-4DEC i
oN OLA | a
31 BAL hell | teaeal
Qa" we
| - 33 PB .
“4 1s osc* ~
| RHERPUR
P =
q dh sanaceor
eT a
MADHUPUR JUNGL
7, MYMENSINGH
dWaonurun ~ Bios *
: [ahioy/, *
ett ad ¢
4g “= °COMMN ZONE e
14 DEC i.
VW ’
(onelaod
ogc (| 93 5
TAN a4
[i PARA ono i}
u-13 DEC Vrrigore’y
(4 pec uta KALIAKAIR
we rane ere
a 13 DEC
1 ey a Viuns Vie
MANIKGANS “ wa onc 4
PAKISTAN mn DACCA fp ]
INDIAN ARMY SS AQ aN |

