2 i
Tragedy of Errors
a university in East Bengal® where the Muslims were in a
majority. The Hindus headed by Babu Ananda Chander Roy,
leading pleader of Dacca, vehemently protested against the
establishment of a university at Dacca. On the other hand Nawab
Khwaja Salimullah’ and Syed Nawab Ali Choudhry realized then
that English education for the Bengali Muslims was necessary,
Maulvi Abul Kasem Fazlul Haq, a prominent leader of the
Muslims of Bengal during the British Raj, drafted the
representation for a separate university in Dacca which was
placed before Lord Hardinge, the then viceroy of India. It was due
mainly to his efforts that on July 1, 1921 an act was enacted
. establishing the Makkah University later to be known as the
“Dacca University’.
The Dacca University had the trappings of a Muslim
educational institution. It had a strong department of Arabic and
Islamic Studies. There was a Pesh-e-Imam (Prayer leader) in each
hall. Azan (the five times-a-day call for prayer) was regularly
given. With such Islamic credentials it is no wonder that the
Dacca University played a very significant role in the Pakistan
“Movement. Supported by the oratory skill of Fazlul Haq, who had
become the president of the Bengal Muslim League in 1914, the
students of the Dacca University became actively involved in
national politics. They gave the Quaid-e-Azam a very warm
reception when he visited the university in 1936. During the 1937
provincial elections the students worked for the Muslim League.
The All India Muslim Students Federation (AIMSF) held its
first session in Calcutta in 1937. This was organized by the All
Bengal Muslim Students Federation supported by Fazlul Haq.
Unfortunately it soon split into different factions and was
disaffiliated with the AIMSF.
Abul Kasem Fazlul Haq
Fazlul Haq, was born at Barisal, in East Bengal, on October 26,
1873 in an educated and well-to-do family. He was a linguist being
ent in Arabic, Persian, Urdu and English besides his own
rari sie Fazlul Haq, who began his political career as 4 j
it ee i ambitious and a maverick. He had no
him into ee ERE Tovallbies or reversing policies if it would bring
Ha ioe teat os category of other well known Indian leaders.
tt uslim League in 1936 and formed his own Krishak

27
Geographical Characteristics
Proja Party (KPP). An experienced hand in galvanizing the
masses he, in just one year, gained 35 seats in the 1937 provincial
elections, only five less than the Muslim League. His status in
Bengal politics was So great that Mr. Jinnah asked the League to
offer the premiership to Fazlul Haq, who would form a
League/KPP ministry in Bengal, in spite of him being the leader
of the minority party.
Although Quaid-i-Azam had earlier removed Fazlul Haq from
the membership of the Muslim League Central Parliamentar
Board, the students of the Dacca University per .
; persuaded the Sher-e-
Bengal, along with 37 of his followers, to leave the KPP and once
again join the Muslim League. Consequently he signed the League .
pledge at the Lucknow session in 1937. From then on he Worked
to enlarge the membership of the League in Bengal, Assam, Bihar
and Orissa.
Fazlul Haq continued working for the Muslim League and
denounced the All India Congress calling it "satan incarnate" as
according to him it was creating divisions among the Muslim
ranks*. He was, however, not quite happy with the kind of
discipline Jinnah had imposed on the members of the Muslim
League. Fazlul Haq was not willing to give up his style of taking
independent decisions concerning his own future and that of the
Bengalis. To him Bengal came first for he was primarily a Bengali
at heart and placed his countrymen of all castes and creeds above
all else. He met and talked to Abul Kalam Azad knowing full well
that Mr. Jinnah did not like Azad being accepted as a leader of the
Muslims of India. Though Fazlul Haq met Azad occasionally he
was unhappy with the actions of the Congress dominated
governments.
Although the Muslims remained the majority community in .
Bengal they were heavily outnumbered in every sphere of socio- |
economic activity as well as in government service. While
numbering over 50% they held only 30% of the posts. At a special
Session of the All India Muslim League held at Calcutta on April
17, 1988, Fazlul Haq pointed out the plight of the Muslims of
Bengal and blamed the Hindus for dominating over the culture
and traditions of Muslim Bengal. "Muslims in Bengal number four
million one would have thought that in a land within which one
Single community had such numerical superiority, that
community would hold sway and its culture and traditions would

28
Tragedy of Errors
prevail. But it is a thousand pities that due to certain
circumstances the actual conditions are entirely different” said the
Bengal Tiger!®, Those were the days when he even resented the
change of the ‘court’ language from Persian into English and felt
that the change deprived Muslims of their language of culture and
sustenance”!!,
It was, however, during his ministry in Bengal that some
desertions from the Muslim League took place in his province,
That was so because the Muslim League had not yet captured the
hearts of the masses as it had done so in the Muslim minority
provinces!?, Fazlul Haq, at that time, had contempt for those
Muslims who had deserted the Muslim League and joined the
Congress. He is reported to have said in 1938 "I sometimes
wonder if a community which can still produce so many foolish or
treacherous men is worth fighting for"!
It is an irony of fate that the mover of the Lahore Resolution,
who in 1940 was considered to be a strong supporter of the
Muslim League, was expelled from its fold only a year later. The
Viceroy had asked the chief ministers of all the provinces to join
the Viceroy’s National Defence Council so as to help the
government of India in obtaining their support for the war which
Britain, along with their allies, was waging against Hitler. The
three Muslim chief ministers, Sir Sikander Hayat Khan from the
Punjab, Sir Saadullah from Assam and Maulvi Fazlul Haq from
Bengal joined the Defence Council without consulting the Muslim
League. Quaid-i-Azam was against the Muslim leaders joining the
Defence Council and asked them to resign. Sikander and
Saadullah, left the Council but Fazlul Haq continued to dilly dally.
He later did resign but also resigned from the Muslim League.
Fazlul Haq was expelled from the Muslim League for disobeying
Mr. Jinnah. He was blamed for "repeated betrayal of the cause of
the Muslims generally in India and particularly in Bengal"!*.
The Quaid-i-Azam, during his presidential address at the 29th
Session of the All India Muslim League held at Allahabad in April
1942, used some very harsh words against Fazlul Haq. His action
oe Jasin Mim Wiser Tanda Maas We Teal
"machinations and mena on ae i ape were astinee T,
together when h said néthe the uae wrote off Fazlul Hei
A e said at the same session “Today Fazlul Haq
»/no more and I hope for the rest of his life he will be no more. He

Geographical Characteristics
was not only a hinderance but a curse to the politics of Bengal......
He has met his Waterloo'®" (After the death of the Qudid and
fifteen years later Fazlul Haq was made the governor of East
Pakistan). | , |
A Bengali politician, who throughout appeared in a Sherwani
and a blood red Turkish cap, as against the local Bengali attire,
broke away from All India Muslim politics to those of Bengal
alone. Little did he realize that it would be he who would suffer by
leaving the Muslim League and not the popularity of the League
amongst the Muslims of Bengal. The young Bengali Muslims |
turned against the Lion of Bengal when he defied the Quaid.
Fazlul Haq’s ministry in the meantime, ran into difficulty
when Hussein Shaheed Suharwardy and Khwaja Nazimuddin,
both Muslim Leaguers resigned as Fazlul Haq had refused to obey
the directives of the Quaid. Because of this Haq had to forge a new
ministry which he did with the support of the Congress. This
ministry, however, lasted only 16 months and it fell in 1943 after
the Bengal famine.
In the 1946 elections out of 200 Muslim seats in Bengal the
Muslim League won 194 seats and Fazlul Haq’s Krishak Proja_ .
Party could capture only 6 seats. This was due to thesemerging
realization that in an undivided India the Hindus would dominate
all spheres of economic, political and administrative activity which
would deprive the Muslims of their rightful share.
Hussain Shaheed Suharwardy
The resounding success of the Muslim League in the Bengal
provincial assembly elections was also due to the support the
League received from Suharwardy, an opponent of Fazlul Haq.
and a renowned Bengali leader from West Bengal.
Hussain Shaheed Suharwardy, was born at Midnapur, West
Bengal, in 1892. He was the younger son of Justice Sir Zahid ;
Suharwardy. Unlike Fazlul Haq he was not a rabble rouser. He ~
was flamboyant, rich and extravagant. The death of his wife and
_, $0n, soon after marriage, left him a lonely man who drowned his
'’ sorrows in “drinking, dancing and partying"!®. Highly intelligent
and fluent in English, it was only at the age of 38 that he began to
learn to speak Bengali. But like Fazlul Haq he dreamt of a Bengal
for the Bengalis. Although he was aware that under the Hindus

30
Tragedy of Errors
the Muslims would remain downtrodden yet he secretly hoped to
achieve an independent sovereign state comprising of Bengal and
Assam!7, He is quoted as saying "I was not an All India leader, |
was the leader of the Muslims of Bengal. They alone Were ny
concern". Suharwardy had worked for an independent “united
Bengal right upto Partition. General Khalil, however, maintains
that he attended meetings of Fazlul Haq and Suharwardy and
heard them saying that "Muslim League will be the architect of
Pakistan and that we (Bengal) will become part of Pakistan. He
affirmed that neither Fazlul Haq nor Suharwardy talked about a
separate Bengal state then. "If, however they were thinking of a
united independent Bengal they never openly admitted it" said
Khalil.
Suharwardy was the leader of the Bengal Muslim League
Parliamentary Party in 1946 but he had joined hands with Sarat
Chander Bose for the demand of a united sovereign Bengal".
However, it fell to Abul-Hashim to raise the demand of a separate
Bengal state in the Council Session of the All India Muslim
League in 1946 on the plea that the Lahore Resolution could be
interpreted as an endorsement of two separate states"!’.
Suharwardy continued to try and obtain an independent
United Bengal which he believed could be a strong, rich and
- prosperous country. Brigadier Jagdev Singh mentions in his book
that "Suharwardy was confident of evolving a plan for a separate
Bengali nation’’, Having failed in his attempt to convince the
British and the Congress to listen to his suggestion he tried to
keep Calcutta as a combined port for both East and West Bengal
after Partition. In this also his dreams remained unfulfilled.
Suharwardy, created further doubts about the intentions of the
Bengali Muslims when he queried "Is Pakistan our last demand? !
will not attempt to give an answer: But that is our latest
demand"!. This was in April, 1946. Though he did, in the next
breath, also say "Muslims of Bengal are prepared to make every
sacrifice for the great glory of Pakistan"22,
tar lees camer Rtas with an
East Pakistan till he could t ahi cs ah mantle of leadership 10
~ new state. Because of this ‘ie a maned f on oe ies
Pakistan after Independence. panes Senin, eokering tes
-

31
Geographical Characteristics
The Muslim Bengali leadership before Partition was divided
between those who were Bengalis first and Muslims afterwards .
and those who adhered to the common Muslim cause more than
their provincial identity, Fazlul Haq and Suharwardy belonged to
the former category while Khwaja Nazimuddin and his family
belonged to the latter. Fazlul Haq, whose roots lay in the rural
masses was an advocate of Bengali nationalism. Suharwardy, was
on the contrary Calcutta-based. He had a national outlook and
progressive ideas but was at the same time a strong supporter of
the Bengali cause. He was more popular amongst the student
community. Nazimuddin came from the landed aristocracy of
Dacca. He derived his Support from the sophisticated elite and
remained cut off from the people in the countryside. His
interpretation of the Lahore Resolution was one Pakistan and the
question of a separate Bengali nationhood never crossed his mind.
After Partition
During the Pakistan Movement, the Bengali Muslims did not
expect Bengal to be partitioned. The division of Bengal came to
them as a shock. It divided their families, it prevented them from
visiting Calcutta which was their cultural ‘capital’. The drawing of
an arbitrary line by Sir Cyril Radcliffe, the British chairman of the
Boundary Commission, to demarcate the boundary between West
and East Bengal created a mental agitation even amongst many
Bengali Muslims.
» "The Bengalis did not feel the full impact of the Partition till
“" 1952" said General Khalil. But when passports were introduced
the Bengalis began to feel deprived of their cultural centre. The
Indians capitalized on this and began their propaganda campaign.
"Why have we (Bengalis) been divided, we speak the same
language, we use the same water of the Ganges. Tagore is our
common Bengali poet" reiterated All Indian Radio transmissions,
day-in and day-out, beamed towards East Bengal. Literature from
Calcutta focussed on the same theme. "No effort was made to
counter this propaganda" acknowledged Khalil.
Suharwardy, was not to be influenced by this kind of
Psychological onslaught. His views after Partition changed. He no
longer believed in the extreme form of Bengali nationalism shown
by some other Bengali leaders. He did, however, quit the Muslim
League, blaming Liagat Ali Khan for not fully working for the
objectives set out by the party that achieved Pakistan.

32
Tragedy of Errors
On March 6, 1948 Suharwardy made his first speech in the
Constituent Assembly of Pakistan, while still being a citizen of
India. In his speech he advocated compassion for the minorities...
"Take within your fold the non-Muslim minority _ Said
Suharwardy. Since he had not yet become a resident of Pakistan,
his name was not included in the central cabinet from East
- Bengal: Fazlur Rahman’s name was sent instead. A resolution
was passed saying that no one, who would not take up residence
in Pakistan within six months of the passing of this resolution,
would continue to be a member of the Constituent Assembly‘, As
he had not taken up permanent residence in Pakistan till March
1949, much after the expiry of the six months period allowed to
change one’s nationality his seat was officially declared vacant. He
eventually came to Pakistan in 1950 and started practising law.
Even then the courts in Lahore and Karachi were told not to
register him as a lawyer”.
The Awami League
As the partition of India approached a reality, differences
began to emerge amongst the old Muslim Leaguers of Bengal. The
Suharwardy-Hashim.Group did not see eye to eye with the
Hassan Manzil Group of Khwaja Nazimuddin. To obtain a
platform to air their views the former had formed the Gana Azadi
League in Dacca in July, 1947. Two years after independence the
split had widened with each going its own way. On June 23, 1949
a number of Muslim League members of the provincial legislature
held a convention at Dacca and founded the East Pakistan Awami
Muslim League”, under the chairmanship of Maulana Abdul
_, Hameed Bhashani. It had a 42 point manifesto which included
"among other things: Bengali to be the state language and
maximum regional autonomy for the provinces with only three
subjects with the Centre viz:- defence, foreign affairs and
currency?’,
Nine months later Suharwardy laid the foundation of his own
political party which he called the Pakistan Awami League. It
became the first ppposition party in Pakistan. The first meeting of
the Pakistan Awami League was held in Lahore on March 19 and
20, 1950 at Mochi Gate. At this meeting Maulana Bhashani was
elected as the president of the party. Ata-ur-Rahman, Abdul
Mansoor Ahmad and Abdus Salam were chosen to be its vice
presidents. Shams-ul-Haq (a student leader) was appointed

33
Geographical Characteristics
secretary and Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman became its joint
secretary. Almost all the top leadership of the Awami League in
East Bengal were lawyers or students.
Thirty six resolutions were passed including fresh elections in
the country on the basis of adult franchise: framing of a
constitution; settling of disputes with India; following of an
independent foreign policy and laying down of land ceilings,
¥ Maulana Abdus Sattar Khan Niazi was appointed general
secretary of the Pakistan Awami League in Punjab and in the
North West Frontier Province the president of the party was Pir
of Manki Sharif.
Nawab Mamdot, who had formed the Jinnah Muslim League,
merged his party with the Pakistan Awami League. The Union
gave birth to the All Pakistan Jinnah Awami League which
became a motely crowd of disgruntled politicians with various
shades of political opinion. Later it dropped the names of Pakistan
and Jinnah and in J uly, 1953 it did away with the epithet Muslim »
and became only the Awami League (AL). Out of 55 members — .
almost half of them (27) had opposed the proposal of dropping the ~
word Muslim.
The Awami League was a liberal and secular party. It’s
manifesto included: (1) improvement in the food situation in East
Bengal; (2) nationalization of the jute industry; (3) release of
political prisoners; (4) recognition of Bengali as one of the state
languages; (5) general elections and (6) complete provincial
autonomy,
By 1954 the five political parties in East Bengal, in addition to
the Muslim League, were the Awami League (Bhashani): Krishak
Sramik Party (Fazlul Haq), Ganatantra Dal (Mahmood Ali), the
‘ Nizam-e-Islam Party (Nur-ul-Amin) and the East Bengal
Communist Party. The latter five were united on wanting more
autonomy for East Bengal, Bengali as the national language and
Opposition to mutual defence pacts. They grouped themselves
together to form the United Front (UF) also known as the Jugto
Front. _
The Jugto Front translated their manifesto into 21 concrete
demands known also as 21 Points. Some of the more significant
demands were: Bengali to be the national language; East Bengal
Should get complete autonomy as per the Lahore Resolution;

34
Tragedy of Errors
defence, currency and foreign affairs to be joint subjects with the
Centre; naval headquarters to be moved to Chittagong; snsan S (a
voluntary para - military force) to be equipped with is Ms;
nationalization of the jute industry; securing a fair price for jute,
construction of irrigation facilities; flood control measures;
avoidance of famine conditions; abolition of . the Dacca and
Rajshahi University reactionary acts; reduction of RCRRORE
disparity between the two wings; repeal of security acts, freeing of
political prisoners; separation of judiciary from the executive; 21
February (language riots) to be observed as martyr’s day, and
holding of regular and free elections.
The 21 points laid emphasis on economic issues initially and
later added political demands as well.
In the 1954 provincial elections the United Front secured 223
seats, in a house of 309 with the Muslim League getting only 9
seats. The House elected Fazlul Haq as the chief minister of East
Bengal. The defeat of the Muslim League was blamed on Indian
agitators, trained communists and negative compaigning against
the Muslim League for its omissions and commissions but the
~ fault lay elsewhere.
Causes of the Decline of the
Muslim League in East Bengal ,
The Muslim League, which was founded in Dacca in 1906
became an orphan in its own birth place after independence. The
poor showing of the Muslim League in the 1954 provincial
elections was due to the fact that the East Bengal Muslim League
had lost its roots in the masses. It had deviated from its original
path and had been unable to fulfil the aspirations of the Muslims
rile ig were expecting to replace the Hindus in all
The Bengali Muslims had supported the Muslim League’s
demand for Pakistan in the hope that their material conditions
would improve after they got rid of the Hindu domination. But in
reality they found that their lot had worsened, The Hindu money
lenders had left, Credit to buy their daily necessities or farming
inputs was not available. The basic economic system had got
disrupted. Many shops closed down as their owners had departed.
The Hindu teachers had gone away. The sudden vacuum thus
created was not immediately filled in and when it was, they were

35
Geographical Characteristics
not the ones who benefitted. Social conditions deteriorated after
1947. The ideal for which they had Supported the Muslim League
had evaporated. Since business concerns and government offices
remained out of their hands they became an easy prey to false
promises by a crop of new leaders, Factions in the Muslim League
developed as prominent Personalities like Fazly] Haq, Bhashani,
Suharwardy, Mahmood Ali, Shibli, Mujib-ur-Rahman, Khondkar
Mushtag left the party that created Pakistan.
There was disappointment amongst the Muslim League
leaders in East Bengal when Maulana Akram, an old Muslim
Leaguer from Bengal, was not made the president of the Muslim
League and the presidentship was given instead to Choudhry
Khaliq-uz-Zaman from the United Provinces.
Stalwarts of the Muslim League namely Khwaja Nazimuddin,
Khwaja Khairuddin, Monem Khan, Sabur Khan and Nur-ul-
Amin were no longer considered as representing Bengali interests.
Muslim League was taken to be a party belonging to the upper
classes and Urdu speaking landlords from Hasan Manzil. The
Bengal famine of 1953 further discredited the old Muslim guards
of East Bengal, for their ineptitude to be able to feed their own
people.
After independence there was a phenomenal growth of the
lower and middle class in East Bengal. Their attitude and
orientation was totally different to the old Muslim League leaders
most of whom came from the upper strata of society. Since no
elections were held within the East Bengal Muslim League party,
the new aspirants to leadership did not get an opportunity to
| project their ideas.
The major reason, however, for the decline of the Muslim
League in East Bengal was their indifference to the language issue
Which was an extremely emotional matter for the Bengalis. It is
not difficult to understand why the Bengalis soon after attaining
their common objective of Pakistan continued to fight for their
Perceived rights in spite of their former allegiance to the Muslim
League. They were not willing to continue supporting a political
Party with whom they had combined to struggle against the
British and the Hindus, if their. aspirations were not being
fulfilled.

