452 Tragedy of Errors
Bangladeshes all over the world pee aan prot
Union" shouted Pakistan's acting foreign e
microphone. He was not far wrong. Twenty years later USSR had
broken up into eleven independent states. But his words fell on
deaf ears.
Another draft resolution by Italy and Japan CON Document
$/10451) dated 13 December was tabled in which India and
Pakistan were asked to bring about an end to the confrontation. It
also asked the President of the Security Council to appoint with
the consent of India and Pakistan, a committee of three members
of the Security Council to assist them in their efforts to bring
about normalcy in the area of conflict. Nothing was heard of this
draft resolution again.
The US resolution was put to vote on 13 December. Eleven
countries voted in favour of the resolution, Britain and France
abstained and the Soviet Union and Poland voted against it.
Polish Resolution
The next day, 14 December, Poland circulated another draft
resolution (UN Document S/10453). The Polish draft resolution
stated that (a) In the eastern theatre of conflict the power will be
peacefully transferred to the lawfully elected representatives of
the people (b) Immediately after the beginning of the process of
power transfer, the military actions in all the areas will be ceased
and an initial period of ceasefire will start for a period for 72 hours
(c) after the immediate commencement of the initial period of
ceasefire, the Pakistan armed forces will start withdrawal to the
pre-set locations in the eastern theatre of conflict with a view to
evacuation from the eastern theatre of conflict (d) similarly the
entire West Pakistan civilian personnel and other persons willing
| to return to West Pakistan will be given an opportunity to do s0
under the supervision of the United Nations. Agha Shahi cabled
the text of the draft Polish resolution to Islamabad. President
' Yahya tried to get in touch with his foreign minister and wanted
to direct him to accept the Polish resolution, Bhutto was not
available for quite a while on 14 December. When he was finally
contacted on the telephone he allegedly avoided listening t the
| at 'S voice asking him to agree to the Polish resolution
| y saying "| cannot hear you". One valuable day was wasted.
When the Security Council met agai ember, news
dad coming in to the United Nations that arenas of the
Pakistamarmed foree on 16(Deécenibe? was being arranged. Bhutto

At the UN 453
ow had lost his cool. He ac
aed the UN “a fraud and a farce a Council of dilatory tactics
of Britain and France, tore up pig nounced the neutral attitud
:; : ‘ : Own not we
resolution as 1S generally believeg)12 and €s, (not the Polish
Security Council meeting saying "l wil ne walked out of the
_ jgnominious surrender of part of fy meee a party to the
York on 16 December for — where b ty ™. Bhutto left New
he would be arrested on arrival ip Pakista, Waited to see whether
minister of what was left of his country "or be made the prime
In his absence two more dr
the Security Council on 15 Desalttions Were submitted to
resolution called for a cessation of hostilities ae Anglo-French
;a comprehensive politica] settlement The gue conclusion of
Pakistan to release all political prisoners The o mh: wanted
amendment to their earlie; resolution which tiielided € as
for the withdrawal of Indian forces from East Pakis ne me
hours of the ceasefire (UN Document $/ 10453/REVD i i
day (16 December) Mr Swaran Singh informed the Comelitiane
ceasefire had come into force in East Pakistan and that the
government of India had ordered a unilateral ceasefire by the
Indian forces on the western front. The Soviet Union welcomed
the announcement and hoped that power would be transferred to
the elected representatives immediately.
. Mahmood Suleman Maghribi, permanent representative of
Libya sent a letter to the Secretary General of the UN on 16
December Saying that while Pakistan acknowledged its mistakes
In East Pakistan, these mistakes and a flow of refugees to India
Could not constitute a justification for a pre-meditated full scale
invasion by the forces of a neighbouring state into Pakistan. This
Practice if allowed to succeed with impunity would constitute an
Pen invitation to every state to interfere in the internal affairs of
others (UN Document $/10460).
When President Yahya accepted the Indian offer of a ceasefire
I Security Council suspended its meeting dn v
ember. It, however, met again on 21 Decem  %
A “prehensive resolution No. 307 (1971) was put forwar alia
it eentina, Burundi, Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone and ae
Called for strict observance of the ceasefire and thie ar :
of all armed forces as soon as practicable to their respective
letritor; concerned to observe the
1€s. It also called on all those

454 Tragedy of Errors
onvention of 1949 on the protection of wounded and Sick
Seats of war. The resolution was adopted by 183 votes to none
against, with two abstentions (Poland, USSR).
Analysis
The time to take the issue to the Security Council was on 99
November when it had become quite clear that India had violated
the integrity of Pakistan on a large scale by sending its troops deep
inside Pakistan territory. It was no longer a situation where the
Indian artillery was supporting the Mukti Bahini in carrying out
forays just across the border. The Indian regular army, whose
units had been identified, were not only occupying several salients
but were advancing menacingly towards population centres.
Independent correspondents could have verified Indian
aggression against Pakistan. The electronic media could have
vividly portrayed the fact as it existed on the ground, giving the
United States and China an opportunity to demand the
withdrawal of Indian forces from East Pakistan as early as 22
November. The Soviet Union, of-course, would have vetoed any
such resolution as they did on 5 December but it would have given
more time to friendly countries to increase the pressure on India.
Taking up the matter at the Security Council after 3 December
was not correctly timed as soon thereafter ‘resistance began to
crumble in East Pakistan. Members of the Security Council who
had been supporting Pakistan’s belated efforts to arrive at a
peaceful political settlement became lukewarm as the military
situation in East Pakistan began to turn in India’s favour.
Pakistan also lost an Opportunity to extricate its troops from
East Pakistan honourably when it did not accept the Russian
resolution of 5 December. The Soviet resolution, as mentioned
earlier, called for a political settlement and an end to all acts of
Violence by the Pakistan armed forces in East Pakistan. A
ceasefire in situ could perhaps have been worked out as the Soviet
Union was the only country at that stage which could have
stopped India continuing its advance into East Pakistan. Of
course, the only political solution acceptable to India and the
Awami League would have been total independence. There was 0
way that could be stopped. It could have been achieved, however;
without the humiliation of having 93,000 prisoners in Indian
camps for three years.

At the UN 455
The much talked off Polish r : . |
14 December and which was ieee ea was circulated on
Bhutto on 15 December could not bases haa been torn up by
results of the conflict. Negotiations for a stinet impact on the |
victor and the vanquished had already ¢o efire between the |
Manekshaw had received the message from pe General
had laid down his terms for the surrender 1 Farman and
hours 15 December as the deadline for the . ad given 0930
terms. With such a military situation in Bast ree of his |
resolution, however supportive it may have been s Oatie |
position, would have achieved anything differ of Pakistan’s |
i : ent to what
eventually it turned out to be. Indian armed forces were knocki
at the gates of Dacca. They were just waiting for the at Ie
amount of pressure from the members of the Security C :
would have stopped them from entering the capital and deliverin,
the coup de grace. The Indian delegation in any case could Have
prolonged the meeting at the Security Council by asking time to
consult it’s government. By the time the reply would have been
received Dacca would have been in their hands.
Besides the Polish resolution had only called for a withdrawal
of foreign forces from the eastern and western fronts, as far as
East Pakistan, was concerned even Poland was quite categorical in
the evacuation of West Pakistan armed forces from the eastern
Wing and in handing over power to those who had been elected in
the December, 1970 elections. Meaning of-course Sheikh Mujib-
ur-Rahman and his followers not those who had been trumped up
by the military authorities in October, 1971.
Those critics who maintain that the Polish resolution would
have saved the humiliation which Pakistan suffered in East
Pakistan are not fully, aware of the proceeding at the UN. If
Islamabad was prepared to hand over East Pakistan to Sheikh
Mujib-ur-Rahman it could have done so on 12 December when
India sent a letter to the President of the Security Council where
It was stated that India in prepared to consider the call for a
nee provided that the basic causes of the conflict were
€moved,
Mrs. Gandhi was agreeable to withdrawing her forces from
Fast Pakistan provided Pakistan did the same. Her letter of 13
December to U Thant gave such a proposal. This was not
*cceptable to President, Yahya.

456 Tragedy of Errors
Notes
1. Interview, Agha Shahi, Pakistan’s permanent representative at the United
Nations in 1971.
2. Ibid.
3, Jakson, Robert, W, South Asia Crisis, India, Pakistan and Bangladesh - 4
Political and Historical Analysis of the 1971 War, Praeger Publications, New
York, 1975, p. 68.
4. Interview, Agha Shahi.
5. Keessings Archives, 29 January - 5 February, 1972, p. 25070.
6. UN Document S/10416.
7. UN Document S/10422, dated 5 December, 1971.
8. Keesings, 29 January - 5 February, 1972, p. 25070.
9. Interview, Agha Shahi.
10. Keesings, 29 January - 5 February, 1972, p. 25071.
11. UN Document S/10440.
12. Letter from Choudhry, PPI correspondent at the United Nations, April 9,
1992 in reply to the author’s query. Choudhry was sitting at the back of Mr.
Zulfigar Ali Bhutto during the Security Council Meeting. He actually picked
up the torn notes and went through them.
13. Keessings, 29 January - 5 February, 1972, p. 25073.

_Causes for the Military p
' (Eastern Theatre) ebacle
The result of the war, in the e
. . ’ ast .
and Pakistan, in the winter of 1971, = mek between India |
With an overwhelming superiority in ground Pll conclusion.
mastery of the skies after a few days of fightin vith. amsplete
entire local population siding with the ene amo the
international community looking the other fhe ae |
reason for Indira G i be iia es
for Indira Gandhi to be worried about the outcome. No
army in the world, placed in the situation in which Eastern
Command found itself in the closing months of the year, would
have prevented the Indian’s from achieving their goal of the break
up of Pakistan. "Even Napoleon could not have avoided a defeat"! |
remarked General Aurora.
It is also true that a better handling of the situation both at the |
political and military level could have avoided the tragedy which
the nation had to undergo on December, 16.
What were then the major factors for the military debacle in
East Pakistan so soon after the Indian invasion?
Operational Environment
.While India had made very thorough plans for achieving its
objective and used all the elements of national power to create
uditions for total victory, Pakistan isolated itself auip he —
mmunity by sabotaging the democratic process and ahenating
the army totally en its own people in East Pakistan ae
military crackdown.
_ The Indian army obtained a further consignment of aera
‘lrcraft and spares from the Soviet Union after the paces
rreaty?, It increased its own indigenous rca elma oes
ie military balance which was already tilted i —* oreanised
ecame even more so towards the end of 19/1. - the
traj : Mukti Bahini to wear out the
’ Ned, equipped and launched the Mu aged in preparing
fenders. While the political leadership was engag

458 Tragedy of Errors
the nation for a war against Pakistan and winning friends ang
sympathizers abroad the armed forces were gearing up foy ‘
campaign against East Pakistan in winter when the passes would
be snow bound. Mrs. Gandhi planned and orchestrated the whole
operation to its highest pitch by November. Through skillfy]
propaganda she obtained the willing support of her entire nation
as well as that of the members of the United Nations barring
China and the White House (The Congress and the US media
-were on her side). Her psychological warfare damaged the morale
of the Pakistan army in the east.
Pakistan, on the other contrary, due to its faulty foreign and
domestic policy, stood isolated. It was faced with a suspension of
western arms. A lingering insurgency coupled with numerous
cases of licentious living and indiscipline had sapped the energies
and the morale of the troops in East Pakistan. The so-called
genocide against the Bengalis by the Pakistan army had been
widely accepted by the international community. Mutiny by the
East Bengal Regiments and the East Bengal Rifles and other law
enforcing agencies had weakened their strength. The formations,
which were flown into East Bengal, were without their heavy
weapons. Some arrived only a few weeks before the
commencement of hostilities. Commanders took charge of their
depleted formations only a few days before the Indian invasion.
Grouping and re-grouping of units left quite a few unprepared
when the war started. The troops were uncertain of thé cause for
which they were fighting as the very people they were supposed to
protect had joined the enemy and wanted to get rid of them. From
a national army they had turned into an ‘occupation force’
overnight.
The strength of the armed forces in East Pakistan in 1971 was
woefully inadequate to defend a vast area surrounded on all ‘four’
sides by India. A large force was needed to protect a 2,000
kilometres border with humerous salients against a powerful
enemy, many times the size of the defenders. Formations, units
and subunits were defending areas twenty times their laid dow?
frontages. The enemy had only to pierce through the crust behind
| which lay undefended terrain. Five major approaches, from three »
widely different directions al] leading to the vital ground were t
be covered by the equivalent of three infantry divisions. The
minimum required was one Standard infantry division along each
|

Causes for the Military Debacle (Eastern Theatre) ~
... approach to cater for reserve
— and an additional uncommitter te Some depth in
the theatre commander. The last minute Wvision in the hands
jsional headquarters which were iinesing oe of two adhoc
y milking the existing formations jn no Some fighting units
jefensive strength of Eastern Command, Jy aie, added to the
having no reserves left and by creating a false conse ened it by
The infantry divisions were short of fire 0 of security.
pave their full complement of field and me dign as they did not
regiment of tanks was sent to East Pakistan eaery. Only one
were needed. Air support was practically non-exi a atleast three |
pot even one Pakistan navy ship in the Be = There was |
‘challenge’ the Indian flotilla. Mobility was considerably ross a
ok of all-weather roads and insufficient inland water
National Strategy
mittary humiliation, Not enach dereAt en ee and
ah ation. ot enough thought was given by President
ya and his close advisers to the major factor of the
geographical separation of East Pakistan from its western wing.
Nor was the Indian intention of getting directly involved militarily
seriously analysed. The attitude of friendly countries was wrongly
assessed or deliberately misinterpreted.
The military hierarchy gave no significance to the ‘hidden’
sd treating them like a bunch of miscreants till it was too late.
~ ws potential of sustaining a conflict in East Pakistan against
Con ds was greatly exaggerated by es Eastern
mo mand, GHQ and the CMLA Headquarters alike. oe eae
Pak Was willing to stretch his neck out to tell the a uth t “ hn
tte army in 1971 was not ‘ten feet tall’ but h © omen to
ful needed the correct domestic and external . aomeity of
the o-'® National obligation of ensuring the territoria’ It
P entry when all other elements of national power N@
litical Directive “ea uiven:
Rajat of these weaknesses the, polities! “i government
of Ranol Farge not to allow the ses ‘vas, in the prevailing
Ro-strate esh on the soil of East Pakis attainable and based on
Wrong a gic environment, unsound, un
Ssumption.

460 Tragedy of Errors
It was unsound because the military em bras had to be
adopted to fulfil this political objective playe rig t into the hands
,of the enemy. The Indians wanted the Pakistan army to be
frittered away by moving upto the border and forcing it to respond
to each pinprick engineered by the BSF and the Mukti Bahinj.
The attrition so caused suited the Indian chief of army staff. The
dispersion of troops left vital areas undefended. Implementation of
the political directive forced Niazi to expose his flanks and rear - A
weakness General Aurora fully exploited.
The military regime remained under the misconception that
India would confine itself to helping the Muktis to capture small
areas across the border from where they could declare the
establishment of a sovereign state. General Yahya testified before
the Hamood-ur-Rahman Commission that he and his colleagues
never visualised that the Indians would attack East Pakistan’.
This was in spite of the fact that the military intelligence had,
during August, 1971, procured the Indian army’s operational plan
to invade East Pakistan.
The incorrect assessment of the enemy’s intention led to a
political directive which did not cater for the most dangerous
hypothesis.
- Military Policy
A military policy is designed to implement a political objective.
General Niazi cannot, therefore, be blamed for shifting the
emphasis from the defence of East Pakistan against external
aggression to counter insurgency. The two are conflicting
lee former heeded concentration of forces along
= et es, strategic depth to absorb the initial penetration,
around vital aunch counter attacks, pre-positioning of troops
vital areas and above all the whole hearted support and
\cooperation of one’ ole hearted supp
re on One's own people. The latter forced dispersion t0
deal with bush fires wherever they occurred. It meant extended
frontages, splitti ; : urred. it me
6es, spitting of formations into units and sub-units. (In
bitter cases Into platoons and sections to man BOPs). It created
n ss '
them: oss amongst the civil population by using force against
The Himalayan blunder i n
. was to stick to the original policy ev¢
when it ;
wa oe clear that a full fledged invasion of East nit
& planned by the Indian leadership. Statements ™4 e

Causes for the Military Debacle (Eastern Theatre) 461
ore oie deas eeenman Commission do ina
d given clear indications (not ‘cate that
“HQ ha g1 . 3 0 Clear Orders) that territ
ad become less important’, According to the Commice:,. se
; tions) was given by th mumission "advice
not instruc gi Y the chief of the Seneral staff and
e vice chief of the general staff during their last Visit to ns
eastern theatre for the re-deployment of troops"4. a
| Whatever be the truth Genera] Niazi Should h :
‘ ‘ ave al
niltary pobey radically and pulled in his troops 1. meet an
impending Indian offensive in the last week of November.
Operational Strategy
_ In order to fulfil the given political requirement a forward
posture was the correct strategy to follow but totally in violation of
military consideration. To ensure a viable defence the major
‘portion of the force should have been retained for the protection of
ythe linch pin viz the Dacca triangle. Troops ahead of it and in front
of other important political centres Should have been used for
causing attrition on the enemy only. Retrograde manoeuvre
(organised withdrawal) should have been permitted to a ground of
own choosing i.e. the designated fortresses and strong points.
By sticking to an exaggerated forward posture far too long
‘Niazi lost his strategic balance only a few days after the battle was
joined. The enemy succeeded in by-passing the forward defences ;
and by penetrating behind the defensive position forced the
defenders to fight on reverse fronts. This hastened their
| capitulation,
| Concept of Operations
The concept of operations sent by HQ Eastern ae Ge
GHQ in July, 1971 contemplating a forward posture ere How
_ accepted by them but certain offensive tasks vt were Rona
| "emoved the brass hats in General SEE chan at that time
Security environment in and around East Pakis
“an be judged from this fact alone. ——
: as not a fa
The holding of fortresses and ip nocadaty for’ a
| Concept per se. However, the pre-con , tesy were absent. A
Successful defence based on such a par a positions
fortress defence model requires 4 os be well fortified by
Should: (1) be initially strongly he ,ith hardened bunkers; (3)
minefields, barbed wire and trenches W

