494
Appendix - |
Awami League’s Six-Points Formula
As announced in the Awami League election manifesto the Six Points were:
1. The character of the Government should be federal and parliamentary, jn
which elections to the Federal Legislature and to the Legislatures of the
federating units would be direct and on the basis of universal adult franchise.
Representation in the Federal Legislature would be on the basis of
population. |
2. The Federal Government would be responsible only for defence and foreign
affairs and, subject to the conditions provided in (3) below, currency.
3. There would be two separate currencies mutually or freely convertible in each
wing for each region, or in the alternative a single currency, subject to the
establishment of a federal reserve system in which there would be regional
federal reserve banks which would devise measures to prevent the transfer of
resources and flight of capital from one region to another.
4. Fiscal policy would be the responsibility of the federating units. The Federal
Government would be provided with the requisite revenue resources for
meeting the requirements of defence and foreign affairs, which revenue
resources would be automatically appropriable by the Federal Government in
the manner provided and on the basis of the ratio to be determined by the
procedure laid down in the Constitution. Such constitutional provisions
would ensure that the Federal Government’s revenue requirements were met
consistently with the objective of ensuring control over the fiscal policy by the
Governments of the federating units.
5. Constitutional provisions would be made to enable separate accounts to be
maintained of the foreign exchange earnings of each of the federating units.
The foreign exchange requirements of the Federal Government would be met
by the Governments of the federating units on the basis of a ratio to be
determined in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Constitution.
The regional Governments would have powers under the Constitution to
negotiate foreign trade and aid within the framework of the foreign policy of
the country, which would be the responsibility of the Federal Government.
6. The Government of the federating units would be empowered to maintain &
militia or paramilitary force in order to contribute effectively towards
national security.

| 495
Appendix - I
nouncement of the Independence of Bangladesh made by Major
om -ur-Rahman, Second-in-Command of 8 East Bengal Reyiment
on March 27, 1971.
_ "I Major Zia, provisional commander-in-chier of the Ban lad i i
* army, hereby proclaim, on behalf of Sheikh Mujibar ar aa
independence of Bangladesh. /
b. "Lalso declare, we have already formed a Sovereign, legal gover t
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman which Pledges to function as pee ioe aed Ge
constitution".
c The new democratic government is committed to a policy of non-ali i
international relations. It wil] seek friendship with all nations EA aed
international peace".
d. "I appeal to all governments to mobilize public opinion in their respective
countries against the brutal genocide in Bangladesh".
e. "The government under Sheikh Mujibur Rahman js Sovereign legal
government of Bangladesh and is entitled to recognition from all democratic
nations of the world".

496
Appendix - [I]
The Proclamation of Independence
ndix ‘A’ ‘cs
Appe Mujibnagar, Bangladesh
Dated 10th day of April, 197]
Whereas free elections were held in Bangladesh from 7th December, 1970 to
17th January, 1971, to elect representatives for the purpose of framing a
Constitution,
AND
Whereas at these elections the people of Bangladesh elected 167 out of 169
representatives belonging to the Awami League.
AND
Whereas General Yahya Khan summoned the elected representatives of the |
people to mect on the 3rd March, 1971, for the purpose of framing a Constitution,
AND
Whereas the Assembly so summoned was arbitrarily and illegally postponed |
for an indefinite period.
AND |
Whereas instead of fulfilling their promise and while still conferring with the
representatives of the people of Bangladesh, Pakistan authorities declared an
unjust and treacherous war.
AND
Whereas in the facts and circumstances of such treacherous conduct
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, the undisputed leader of 75 million of
people of Bangladesh, in due fulfillment of the legitimate right of self-
determination of the people of Bangladesh, duly made a declaration of
independence at Dacca on March 26, 1971, and urged the people of Bangladesh to
defend the honour and integrity of Bangladesh.
AND
Whereas in the conduct of a ruthless and savage war the Pakistani
authorities committed and are still continuously committing numerous acts of
genocide and unprecedented tortures, amongst others on the civilian and
unarmed people of Bangladesh.
AND
Whereas the Pakistan Government by levying an unjust war and committing
genocide and by other repressive measures made it impossible for the elected
representatives of the people of Bangladesh to meet and frame a Constitution,
and give to themselves a Government.
AND
Whereas the people of Bangladesh by their heroism, bravery ae
revolutionary fervour have established effective control over the territories °
Bangladesh.
We the elected representatives of the people of Bangladesh, are honour ben?
by the mandate given to us by the representatives of the people of Banglades 4
whose will is supreme duly constitute ourselves into a Constituent Assembly, id
have held mutual consultation, and in order to ensure for the peaple a
Bangladesh equality, human dignity and social justice, declare Bangladesh to ae
sovereign People’s Republic and thereby confirm the declaration of independe
already made by Bangabondu Sheikh Mujibeur-Rahman.

497
Appendix - [V
resolution 303 (1971) of December 6, 197]
The Security Council,
Having considered the item on the agenda of its 1606 ; :
jn document S/Agenda /1606, th meeting, as contained
king into account at the lack of unanimity of j
the acne: and 1607th meeting of the Security Council hos went mem “es =
exercising Its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international cram
and security,
Decides to refer the question Contained in document § Agenda/16
General Assembly as its twenty - sixth Session, as att for in pedi
resolution 377 A (V) of 3 November, 1950, ’
Adopted at the 1608th meeting by 11
votes to none, with 4 abstentions (France,
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
2793 (XXVI). Question considered by the Security Council at its 1606th,
1607th and 1608th meetings on 4,5 and 6 December 1971,
The General Assembly,
Noling the reports of the Secretary-General of 3 and 4 December 1971 and
the letter from the President of the Security Council transmitting the text of
Council resolution 303 (1971) of G December 1971,
Gravely concerned that hostilities have broken out between India and
Pakistan which constitute an immediate threat to international peace and
Security, :
Recognizing the need to deal appropriately at a subsequent Stage, within the
framework of the Charter of the United Nations, with the issues which have
&lven rise to the hostilities,
. A : he
Convinced that an early political solution would be necessary for t
restoration of conditions of normalcy in the area of conflict and for the return of
the refugees to their homes,
1 Mindful of the provisions of the Charter, in particular of Article 2, paragraph
‘ j ity,
Recalling the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security,
Particularly Paragraph 4,5 and 6, a
. i a
Recognizing further the need to take immediate aig ages — a
™mediate cessation of hostilities between India and bs sclisien borders;
"ithdrawal of their armed forces to their own side of the India- General
: f the Gene
As Mindful of the purposes and principles of the Ch mia Charter and of
Ag Oly’ S responsibilities under the relevant provisio
sembly resolution 377 A (V) of 3 November 1950, : ll
lL ¢ : d Pakistan to take forthwith a
als upon the Governments of India ' witherawal of their armed forces on
Measures for an immediate cease-fire and wi he India-Pakistan borders;
the territory of the other to their own side of the

498 s b 7 b t >
be intensified in order to bring about, speedily and in
2. Urges that Oe te prestci and principles of the Charter of the Uniteg
eet Becher necessary for the voluntary return of the East Pakistan _
=efapeds to their homes;
-operation of all States with the Secretary-Genera] f
= raat aulintaon, to and relieving the distress of those refugees; .
r
4. Urges that every effort be made to safeguard the lives and well-being of the
civilian population in the area of conflict;
General Assembly d
the Secretary-General to keep the : Y and the
5. ee Council promptly and currently informed on the implementation of
the present resolution;
6. Decides to follow the question closely and to meet again should the situation
so demand;
7. Calls upon the Security Council to take appropriate action in the light of the
present resolution. . |
2003rd plenary meeting,
The Resolution was adopted. 7 December 1971.
In favour 104 Votes; against 11; .
abstention 10.
|
Resolution 307 of 21 December, 1971 |
The Security Council,
Having discussed the grave situation in the subcontinent, which remains a
threat to international peace and security, |
Noting General Assembly resolution 2793 (XXVI) of 7 December, 1971.
Noting the reply of the Government of Pakistan on 9 December, 1971,
Noting the reply of the Government of India on 12 December, 1971,
. lle — the oo of the Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan and |
the Foreign Minister of In ia,
Noting further the statement made at the 161Gth meeting of the med
council by be Foreign ee of India containing a unilateral declaration
cease - fire in the western t eatre.
: . ith ©
mee Tone einer to the cease - fire in the western theatre wit
e rom ecember, i;
Noting that Consequently a cease - fire and cessation of hostilities prevail,
1. Demands that a durable cease - fire and cessation of all hostilities in oo
of conflict be Strictly observed and remain in effect until withdrawa' tories
Place, as Soon as practicable, of all armed forces to their respective =i ad
and to positions which fully respect the cease - fire line in or india
eat hl by the United Nations Military Observer Group |
an stan;
akistan; |

499
y Calls upon all those concerned to take all measures necessary to preserve
. human life and for the observance of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and to
apply in full their Provisions as regards the Protection of the wounded and
sick, prisoners of war and civilian Population;
3, Calls for international assistance in the relief of suffering and the
 Sehabilitation of refugees and their return in Safety and dignity to their
homes, and for full co-operation with the Secretary-General to that effect;
4, Authorizes the Secretary-General Lo appoint if necessary a special
"representative to lend his good offices for the Solution of humanitarian
| problems;
| 5. Requests the Secretary General to keep the Council informed without delay
| on developments relating to the Implementation of the present resolution;
6. Decides to remain seized of the matter and to keep it under active
consideration.
Adopted at the 1621st meeting by 13
voles Lo none, with 2 abstentions (Poland,
| Union of Soviet Socialist Republics),
|

500
Appendix . y
i kistan/GHQ
-onals exchanged between President of Pa |
sl Gevemner East Pakistan/Commander Eastern Command
17 Oct. 1971
COS Army Signal G1430 dated 17 Oct to Eastern Command.
Crushing rebels with reserves docs have direct bearing on your ops against
India (.) reserves at level including your comd reserves and other available be
used against rebels (.) meanwhile your request for addltps under
consideration.
29 Nov |
C-in-C to Eastern Command.
For Comd from C-in-C (.) I am most impressed by the wonderful job done by
you and all ranks under your command in meeting the challenge posed by the
enemy in East Pak(.) the whole nation is proud of you and vou have their full
support (.) the gallant deeds of our soldiers in thwarting the en evil designs
have earned the gratitude of all countrymen (.) keep up the noble work till the
enemy spirit is crushed and they are completely wiped out from our sacred
soil (.) may Allah be with vou
3 Dec
Eastern Command to GHQ
Since India is likely to launch an offensive against East Pakistan I should re-
deploy my force with due regard to existing op sit ......... I have issued instrs
= ee occupation of fortresses after causing max attrition to the
3 Dec |
Flash signal From C-in-C to Eastern Command.
Jago Jago Hoshiar Amritsar Pathankot struck.
5 Dec
COS Army signal No. 0233 to Eastern Command
The enemy has Stepped up pressure against you and is likely to increase to
max extent (.) He will attempt to capture East Pakis viftly as possible
and shift max forces to West Pakis a antag ie iin n
(.) Losing of s . ++ akistan (.) This must not be allowed to happe
Bo Some territory is insignificant but you must continue t |
may, ma on operational deployment in vital areas aiming at keeping the
very soak cpa ad ee akistan () puety Tepe ot Kaitiene vege |
) ; ck and keep your magnificant work against such hy od
6 Dec
Eastern Command to PAKARMY December 6
resorting t :
“ 8 to fortress/strong Pts basis (.) will fight it out last man last round

501
7 Dec
ccs Signal G 0907 dt 7 Dec 71 to Eastern Command.
approved this concept.
1 Dec
Flash
Governor A M Malik to President A- 6905 DTG 07...
it is imperative that correct situation in Fast Pak; ;
notice (.) I discussed with General Niazi who tells sa is brought to your
heroically but against hy odds w/o adequate arm roops are fighting
cutting their rear and losses in equipment and meres oa air sp (.) rebels
replaced (.) The front in Eastern and Western SBélore bee yn and cannot be
whole corridor east of Meghna river cannot be avoided (.) Ssteere her — .
fallen which will bea terrible blow to’ the morale of the pro - Paki ne simna 3
civil admin ineffective (.) food and other sups runni stan elms (.)
food in 7 d h unning out (.) Dacca city will
be w/o food m 7 cays (-) thousands of pro-Pakistan elm being butchered (.)
million of non-Bengalis await death (.) No amount of lip service except
physical intervention by world power will help (.) If any country is expected ‘0
help it should be within 48 hours (.) If no help is expected I beseech you to
negotiate so that a civilised and peaceful transfer of power takes place and
millions of lives are saved
7 Dec
President vide his signal of 7 December 71 replied:
Flash DTG.......
President to Governor East Pakistan, Eastern Command
TOPSEC (.) your flash signal A - 6905 refers. All possible steps in hand (.)
world powers are very seriously attempting to bring about ceasefire (.) a very
high powered delegation rushed to NY (.) COS being directed by me to
instruct General Niazi regarding mil strategy to be adopted (.) you should
adopt stringent measures to ration food supplies and prevent collapse (.)
Allah be with you (.) we are all praying (.)
8 Dec
Flash
From : GHQ to Comd Eastern Command DTG 08.....
TOPSEC (.) G0910 (.) Am very proud of your boys (.) hold defensive positions
where possible regardless of loss of territory (.) all possible efforts being
exerted on pol level(.)
9 Dec
Signal No. G - 1255 dated 9 December 1971, From Eastern ees. pos
: : ‘ j to enemy mastery Pp
ski One (.) regrouping readjustment is not pa ane all out help to enemy
les (.) population getting extremely hostile anc p Vnbushes (.) rebels guiding
(.) No move possible during night due intensive a. d extensively cmm No
‘emy through gaps and to rear (.) Air ae O ail jetties cmm ferries and
mission last three days and not possible in future ©) 2° hed by rebels (.) even
rive ; ir action (.) bridge demolishee ©) d
T crafts destroyed due en air action ‘) © to heavy weapons an
*xtrication most difficulty (.) two (.) extensive :
—-— ~—|

502 .
i ion (.) troops fighting extremely well but stress ang
equipment sition A OO NOT slegt for a 20 days (.) are under constant fire
ogee pa ga tanks (.) three (.) situation extremely critical cmm we go on
air art mei “ our best (.) four (.) request following (.) immediate strike al]
ty bases this theatre (.) if possible rft airborne troops for protection
“tie (because of lack of tps in Dacca).
9 Dec
DTG 09 18257
CTP GR 400
FOCEP Signal to C-in-C PN
With Indian having complete air superiority and free sky to themselves since
5th December, our land defences regrettably has collapsed sooner than expected
(.) In Eastern Sector en troops have reached Chandpur (.) In Western Sector
enemy has pushed alongside upto Faridpur. Barisal completely under Rebel
control (.) From north en has penetrated upto Bogra through Rangpur (60%
naval force rendered non operational) Eastern Command is in process of pulling
' back troops from various sectors to redeploy at Dacca as a last strong hold if
mobility so permits ..... my personal optimistically assessed situation is that .....
our heroic effort may not last more than a week
9 Dec
Governor to President DTG 092300...
FLASH TOPSEC (.) A 4660 (.) mil sit desperate (.) en approaching Faridpur
in the West and has come up to river Meghna, in the East by passing our troops
in Comilla, to Lakshan (.) Chandpur has fallen (.) En likely to be on outskirts of
Dacca any day SG UN has proposed that Dacca city be declared open city (.)
strongly recommend this be approved (.) General Niazi does not agree as he
considers his orders are to fight to last man last round these actions may result in
massacre (.) no regular troops in reserve (.) once again urge you to consider
immediate cease fire and pol settlement
9 Dec
FLASH
HQ CMLA to Governor East Pakistan Eastern Command DTG: 092300
TOPSeC (.) G-0001 (.) from President to Governor repeated to Eastern
ommand (.) your flash message A- 4660 of 9 December received and
thoroughly understood
oe (.) you have my permission to take decision of your
Paeean to me (.) I have and am continuing to take all measures
wrest mage fhe arr. of our complete isolation from each other decision
J leave entirely to your good sense and judgment (.) I
will ale . any decision you take and I am instructing General Niaz!
Simultaneously to +e ; ;
whatever efforts ne Raha decision and arrange things accordingly e
kind of civ you kh, in your decision to save senseless destruction of t
Ju may gabe and ensure he Safty of aur armed oes
i , ety of a iti m
that you will adopt with our eppotien: Ene Ree: by ll polit
10 Dec
PAK ARMY to EASTERN COMMAND DT‘ -100910

| 503
_ pLASH TOPSECRET G 0237
Comd from COS Army (.) President’s si
vou refers (.) President has left the decision io te ‘Gone a i
consultation with you (.) as no Signal can correctly conve the des ce of
seriousness of the situation I can only leave it to you to ih ts ial
decision on the spot (.) It is however apparent that it is now only : stich af
time before the enemy with its great Superiority in numbers and ‘4 ater la a
the active cooperation of rebels will dominate East Pakistan pate ect O
meanwhile a lot of damage is being done to the civil] population SF rs din
: ; : : and the army
is suffering heavy casualties (.) you will have to assess the value of fighti
if you can, and weigh it, based on this you should give your frank ad i te the .
Governor who will give his final decision as delegated to him b che wees :
(.) whenever you feel it is necessary to do so you should atten hs Sled
maximum military equipment so that it does not fall into enemy hands O
keep us informed (.) Allah bless you. =
10 Dec
Governor to President DTG 10 A 7107
Your GO01 of 092300 Dec refers.
For President of Pakistan (.) your G-0001 of 092300 Dec (.) As the
responsibility of taking the final and fateful decision has been given to me I
am handing over the following note to Assistance Secretary General Mr. Paul
Mark Henry after your approval. Note begins (.) It was never the intention of
the Armed Forces of Pakistan to involve themselves in an all out war on the
soil of East Pakistan (.) However a situation arose which compelled the
Armed Forces to take defensive action (.) The intention of the Government of
Pakistan was always to decide the issues in East Pakistan by means of a
political solution for which negotiations were a foot (.) The armed forces have
fought heroically against heavy odds and can still continue to do so but in
order to avoid further bloodshed and loss of innocent lives I am making the
following proposals (.) As the conflict arose as a result of political causes, it
must end with a political solution (.) I therefore having been authorised by
the President of Pakistan do hereby call upon the elected representatives of
East Pakistan to arrange for the peaceful formation of the Government in
Dacea (.) In making this offer I feel duty bound to say the will of the people of
East Pakistan would demand the immediate vacation of their land by the
Indian forces as well (.) I therefore call upon the United Nations to arrange
for a peaceful transfer of power and request (.) one (.) an immediate ceasefire
(.) two (.) Repatriation with honour of the Armed Forces of Pakistan to West
Pakistan (.) three (.) repatriation of all West Pakistan personnel desirous of
returning to West Pakistan (.) four (.) The safety of all persons settled in East
Pakistan since 1947 (.) five (.) Guarantee of no reprisals against any person in
East Pakistan (.) In making this offer, I want to make it clear that this is a
definite proposal for peaceful transfer of power (.) The question of surrender
of Armed Forces would not be considered and does not arise and if this
Proposal is not accepted the Armed forces will continue to fight to ma
man (.) Note ends (.) General Niazi has been consulted and submits himse
| to You command.
10 Dec
General Niazi to Pak Army G 1265 10 Dec
"One (.) alfa (.) all formations this command in every peice arene
Under extreme pressure (.) bravo (.) formations/troope fon Mi akencs aid
fortresses which initially invested by, en, cmm now under heavy
b

