291 

Bhutto systematically destroyed the ‘Establishment’ by making it subservient to 
Head of the Government i.e. the Prime Minister rather than remaining servants of 
the State of Pakistan. The Presidents during Bhutto’s and Sharif Governments 
were weak persons looking up to the Prime Ministers for survival in office. This 
has made the State of Pakistan weak and self-serving individuals of different hues 
strong. To give just one example, if Pakistan is groping in the dark for so many 
years now and its industrial and agricultural capacity destroyed due to high rates 
of electricity, it is because the ‘establishment’ was not working according to rules 
and regulations that could prevent accepting wrong terms in contracts with 
Independent Power Projects (IPP) by Benazir-Zardai duo. Sharifs surpass Zardari in 
crimes against the people of Pakistan due to absence of checks by ‘Establishment’ 
working for the State of Pakistan.  
The only element of ‘Establishment’ still left to be destroyed is the Pakistan Army 
that miraculously still survives despite consistent efforts by Bhuttos, Zardari, 
Sharifs and their foreign backers. A major effort to demonize Pakistan Army has 
been made by a strong section of Pakistan’s media in its wild and disruptive talk 
shows and poisonous writings. Staged during prime time, television programs 
have fortified public ignorance about the role of State institutions, the 
‘Establishment’ that every State needs to function. Instead the media has tried to 
reinforce wrong perception, restricting use of term ‘Establishment’ only for the 
Military in negative connotations.  
Need of Basic Reforms  
After brief review of our journey thus far, we can understand that Pakistan 
urgently needs basic reforms. Essential steps as suggested in following paragraphs 
can help the country to stabilize, removing looming dangers and threats to its 
survival as a State, resuming the path to stability, peace, progress and prosperity 
in the lives of its citizen. 
Objectives 
• 
Unbridle people’s potential by involving them in decision making 
at local level in utilization of available resources for development 
and improvement of their living conditions.

292 

• 
Restructure judicial system that can provide prompt, speedy 
justice to the society. 
• 
Remove causes of conflict by taking appropriate measures to 
address divisive issues; mainly the question of unequal size 
provinces and related problems. 
Implementation framework   
Stage One - (Time required - One year) 
Following measures need to be taken to start with: 
 Make the local governments effective according to Local Government 
Ordinance 2001 with some amendments.  
 Tasked with the job of community development, the Union Councils should 
be made hub of development with substantial annual non lapsable grant to 
be spent according to prioritization of work by the members of Union 
Council. In present i.e. 2015’s worth of currency, allocation of Rs one 
hundred million(Ten Crores) per Union Council per year should be adequate 
amount to start with. It comes to about 650 billion rupees that can put 
people of Pakistan all over the country to work with vigorous zeal in 
improving their lot.  
 Provided with resources, the Local Governments should be made 
responsible to implement sustainable livelihood programs to ensure that 
essential needs of people i.e. food, health, education, shelter, security and 
justice  are met. Poverty alleviation programmes being run by the 
Centre/Provinces and work of all kinds of Non-GovernmentOrganisations 
(NGOs) should also be integrated and merged with Union Council’s 
programmes for development. 
 Tehsils should maintain and constantly update records of all kinds of land, 
people, resources, livestock etc as ready reference for planning. District 
Gazetteers maintained during British rule could be taken as a guide. 
 The 
Districts 
toprovide 
and 
maintain 
infrastructure 
like 
school/college/university buildings,  link roads as well as technical input

293 

and support to Union Councils through the departments working at District 
level as at present. 
 Restructure the judicial system to ensure that the State takes the 
responsibility to provide justice, rather than the victims searching for 
justice. In revised system, high powered, highly paid judges are appointed 
at Union Council/equivalent level. Offices of judges remain open twenty 
four hours where incidents are reported by victims/councillors. The judges 
send investigating teams placed under them on crime scene to record 
summary of evidence based on which trial is conducted and prompt 
punishments awarded. Police, placed on call of the judge is used to 
apprehend wanted people. The decisions should be reviewed only one step 
upwards that is at the district level. Provincial governors dispose of mercy 
appeals. High Courts at the provincial level shouldonly deal with white 
collar crime and mega financial scandals. The Supreme Court review High 
Court’s decisions and take up constitutional interpretations where needed. 
The Supreme Judicial Council provides guidance for running the system. 
Out of the present lot of lawyers, some suitable get adjusted as judges, 
some as court assistants paid by the State and the rest to find other jobs for 
honest living.  
Stage Two - (Time required - Two to three years) 
Equal Provinces 
The most divisive issue is unequal size of provinces and the continuing vicious 
propaganda against Punjab, the larger province. Even when Punjab was not the 
largest province, a well-orchestrated vilification campaign against Punjabis was 
effectively used by our enemies for disintegration of Pakistan. The Bengalis abuse 
for people from West Pakistan, liberally used was   ‘Sala Punjabi’.  The theme is 
effectively being used even today. 
After the local governments are functional and start delivering services to the 
public as envisaged, the issue of provinces can then be taken up. There will be less 
chance of playing politics on this issue by politicians, agitators and disruptionists 
when the public gets their problems resolved at the local level.

294 

To remove this basic cause of conflict:  
 Replace present provinces by about thirty to thirty five almost equal size 
provinces. The provinces are named after principal cities to eliminate 
raising linguistic and ethnic concerns.  
 These new provinces should be headed by Governors assisted by small staff 
with limited, well defined role of supporting district governments in 
maintaining law and order and provision of justice.  
 There is no need of assemblies, hordes of ministers, chief ministers and 
advisors in these small provinces.  
 Integrate FATA/FR into provinces as districts. Azad Jammu and Kashmir, 
Gilgit and Baltistan retain present status till final outcome of the efforts in 
resolving this issue. 
 The President will be custodian of State institutions. Decisions taken by the 
Government bodies will be implemented by the State institutions according 
to rules and regulations without fear of being victimized due to political and 
personal interests of rulers.  
Effective Judiciary 
Judiciary has to play very important role in creating conditions for peaceful life in 
the society. To that end, the judges should be selected carefully on the basis of 
strong character, imposing personalities and learning. They should be well 
remunerated by the State to obviate need of corrupt practices in meeting their 
essential needs. The selection can be made from present cadres of judiciary and 
the lawyers’ community that has some capable people ready to work for honest 
living and respectable role in the society.  
Proficient Administrative Cadre 
A strong cadre ofable administrators is required to implement policies and 
programs decided by the Governments. While the Governments are formed by 
the elected people, the State employees wrongly referred to as government 
employees are the machinery of the State. The Governments take decisions and 
State employees, the ‘Establishment’ implements those decisions. The difference 
between the State and the Government must be clearly enunciated and

295 

understood to prevent politicisation of administrative machinery of the State. 
State employees should be well paid and their service rules should provide them 
protection from victimisation. Retaining competent government servants from 
the existing lot, the deadwood should be relieved of the services. 
Land Reforms/Land management 
The State should carry out fresh land reforms, resuming control of lands in 
possession of individuals. The East Bengal State Acquisition and Tenancy Act of 
1950 (also known as the East Pakistan Estate Acquisition Act 1950) a law passed 
by Government of East Pakistan (bill drafted on 31 March 1948 and passed on 16 
May 1951) would be a good guide. A comprehensive scheme for use of land 
should be worked out to give employment to landless peasants, the land given on 
lease by the State.The ownership of all lands and the sub soil resources like oil, 
gas and minerals will be with the State of Pakistan. No royalties will be doled out 
to individuals. 
Improving Economy 
In addition to fomenting terrorism inside the country by Zionist-Hindu combine 
and potent external threat from India, a major risk to our survival as a State has 
been posed by burdening the State with enormous loans that the criminal rulers 
have obtained during the last about eight years. There is nothing on ground to 
show as to where these loans have been spent. The loan amounts seem merely 
paper transactions. Nearly half of Pakistan’s annual budget is going into debit 
servicing leaving very little for meeting essential needs of the people and 
development projects. This needs to be checked and countered.  
As a first step Pakistan should reduce/defer payment of interest on loans. The 
money thus saved should be used for human resource development, harnessing 
the country’s water resources for agriculture and developing hydro power 
projects. Sustainable livelihood programs at gross route level by local 
governments and cheap energy for industrial use will help economic recovery.  
Possible sanctions by western powers can be countered by meeting shortage of 
energy requirements from Iran and Russia. Increasing domestic production of oil,

296 

gas and energy resources, preventing misuse and theft, rationing of critical items 
and strict controls over wastage of resources will help to counter coercive 
measure by western powers if applied. 
Expenditure on Elections 
A serious issue is politics made into a lucrative business. To eliminate this curse it 
is essential that the candidate offering themselves for elections do not spendtheir 
own money to get elected. At the level of Union Councils elections the 
communities can pick up their representative during consultative sessions held in 
mosques without getting into exercise of voting through ballot boxes. For district 
councils and National Assembly elections the Political parties should bear the 
expenses on elections of their candidates from their party funds. In the suggested 
system, the provinces as administrative units will not have an assembly thus 
making the electoral process simpler and economical. Main strength of election 
campaigns should be manifesto and programs of the parties rather than personal 
efforts of the candidates to win votes by spending money on lavish meals, favours 
and money on buying votes.  Election expenditure should be strictly over watched 
by the Election Commission. 
Summary  
The overall scenario that should emerge from these changes in ascending order is 
envisioned as follows;  
 Union Council, provided with resources and delegated responsibility, will 
serve as hub of ‘Human Resource Development’ and will ensure that 
essential needs of the people are met. 
 Effective judicial system, by placing high powered judges at Union Council 
level and revising judicial process as explained in preceding paragraphs will 
provide timely justice to ensure peace in the society. 
 Tehsils Headquarters will be made to concentrate on revenue collection, 
keeping records on lands, population and statistics of all kinds on the 
pattern of Gazetteers maintained during the British period. 
 The main coordinating headquarters will be the District. The District Nazim 
will ensure smooth function of the government. A strong team of

297 

government officials, posted at the District, Tehsil and Union Councils levels 
will implement decisions. Selected on merit and adequately remunerated, 
bureaucracy will be effective tool to run the administration, providing 
continuity in government’s functioning. The Districts will provide and 
maintain physical infrastructure for educational institutions, health facilities 
and link roads. 
 About thirty to thirty five provinces sans assemblies headed by Governors 
will be in support role of the district governments for maintaining law and 
order and provision of justice. Enrolment and training of police and 
selection of judges will be done at the provincial level. The provinces will be 
named after principal cities to eliminate chances of playing politics on the 
issue using ethnic and linguistic excuses.  
 The National Parliament (National Assembly and Senate) will take up issues 
of national concern and carry out required legislation. Allocation of 
development funds to legislators introduced by General Zia ul Haq will be 
abolished. 
 A lean Central Government, unencumbered from mundane affairs of local 
politics will pursue national policies formulated with input from the 
Parliament and national institutions. 
 The President as head of State will ensure that State’s interest is not 
compromised by Governments in their decisions. His tool to keep check and 
maintain balance will through reformed judiciary working under him. He 
will ensure that judicial system in the country works effectively at all tiers 
down to the lowest level. Appointments of provincial governors, chief 
justices of Supreme Court and provincial high courts, commanders of the 
armed forces, Chief Election Commissioner and Governor State Bank of 
Pakistan will be President’s domain. While the political leadership will form 
the Governments responsible to make decisions, the President will ensure 
that State institutions, the ‘Establishment’ functions effectively to 
implement decisions taken by the Governments according to rules and 
regulations without compromising transparency and merit.

298 

Pakistan Army – The Instrument of Change 
Present political class ruling the country is not likely to bring about essential 
reforms that disturb status quo. They are beneficiaries of corrupt system that 
keeps the masses poor, helpless and downtrodden.   
Change along the lines suggested above can come if Pakistan Army takes up the 
challenge. Army High Command should work out a comprehensive plan and 
implementing methodology. This should be presented to the Prime Minster and 
his cabinet. If the Prime Minister and his government are unwilling to carry out 
reforms, then the President of Pakistan should be asked to impose emergency, 
dissolve parliament, remove governments and initiate the process of changes 
with full backing of the Army. The people are most likely to welcome and support 
the changes to get free from the strangulating grip of corrupt mafias ruling the 
country. 
Taking bold steps to carry out basic reforms will enable our country to recover 
from downwards slide it has been put into during the last so many years.

299 


Epilogue 
So much remains unsaid, unwritten and unknown because people, the characters 
of this continuing drama of life are generally disinclined to make the effort. For 
me it was a difficult undertaking but as I stated at the outset, as victim of the 
ruler’s crimes, spending over two years in Indian Prisoners of War camps for no 
fault of mine, my aim was to expose lies about East Pakistan situation in 1971 that 
the villains of this tragic drama spread to befool our people. 
The people of my generation have lived with the falsehood propagated by our 
rulers to shield their crimes. Our young generation has a right to know the truth. I 
have made an effort to tell what I saw and experienced. My target audience is our 
younger generation and not my peers who had to bear with living in times of 
transition from hope to despair, the learned ones contributing to reinforce lies.  
Pakistan of 1947 did not survive even for its first twenty five years of emerging on 
the world map. The main characters involved in breakup of the country and the 
reasons for their diabolic schemes have been given in this account. Remaining 
Pakistan, despite being blessed with abundant natural resources, variety of 
terrain, manpower of great talents and unique geographical position to draw 
enormous benefits; remains under threat of further disintegration because of our 
corrupt and incompetent rulers work for global capitalist’s interests.  
The global capitalist elite working through US administration have deep influence 
in our country’s affairs. Our finance ministers have been mostly nominated by 
global banking sector from within their own employees. Living in the Indus River 
basin, we are being served drinking water by Nestle and Pepsi and the largest 
portion of annual national budget goes in debt servicing to the international 
financial institutions and local banks. 
A silver lining in the present dismal conditions is appearing on the horizon which 
is likely to help the country to stabilise and make progress. The global capitalist 
interests need energy and trade corridors between Russia, Central Asia, China,

300 

Indian Sub-Continent and emerging markets of the African countries. Pakistan, 
with its present boundaries serves theirneeds, facilitating movement in all 
directionsthus benefiting from transit trade. Converging interests of Russia, China, 
India and the West, driven by ‘Wall Street Establishment’ the face of Global 
Capitalists Establishmentwill strive to create conducive environments for trade in 
the region that will help Pakistan to overcome present problems.  
A burning desire for change felt by bulk of our population particularly the youth 
will force our political leadership to change policies and attitudes. A sincere, 
honest and capable leadership will find regional environments favourable to put 
Pakistan back to path of progress, stability and peace.   
Having served the country for best part of my life, I pray for survival of Pakistan as 
a peaceful, prosperous and stable country; ending with the beautiful words of an 
Urdu verse by late Mr. Ahmad Nadim Qasmipraying to the Almighty Allah that 
“life should not be a crime or a burden for even a single person of my land”. 
“Khuda Kare Kay Mere Ik Bhi Hum Watan K Liye, 
Hayat Jurm Na Ho Zindagi Wabal Na Ho” 
(Ahmad Nadim Qasmi)

