21 

teller came to the village and was accommodated in ‘Hujra’, a room within 
mosque premises. He stayed for quite a few days. At night after Isha prayers, he 
would start narrating his stories which were listened to with rapt attention 
because of their interesting content. ‘Hujra’ was part of the mosque used as a 
guest room for travelers staying for the night. At Maghrib prayers, the prayer 
leader would announce that there were so many guests that night for the food to 
be provided to them which would be done by different households. 
The children like adults were equally enthusiastic viewers and listeners to the 
entertainment programmes. Parents were not worried about the children, 
knowing that they were in a group and in the company of cousins and some elder, 
the overall environments being peaceful without any threat. If some dispute 
erupted the worst would be a fist fight or use of sticks. Firearms were 
nonexistent. There were only two licensed weapons, 12 gauge shot guns, in the 
village; one with my father and another one with Haji Noor Muhammad, the 
person I have mentioned earlier. There was no concept of keeping any unlicensed 
weapon. Police was much feared, a single Police constable appearing in the village 
would create a scare. 
‘Baithak’ a larger room in the house of some men, who had the charm to attract 
audience, was another institution that provided opportunity to communicate and 
share experiences.  My father’s ‘Baithak’ would come alive after Maghrib prayers, 
particularly during the long winter nights when men would gather to share the 
day’s proceedings and enjoy smoking tobacco, the ‘Chilam’ taking rounds,the 
smoke filled room with frequent bursts of laughter emanating from the company 
of people at peace with themselves. During summers, in the absence of 
electricity, roof tops were the venue for comparatively shorter meetings, the 
gentle breeze providing some relief after the day’s work.  
Apart from listening to singers who occasionally staged their performances in the 
area, another source of enjoying the music was through Gramophone, a novelty 
in the area.  My father enjoyed listening to music particularly in his later years 
having collected a large number of 78 rpm records. We, the children of our 
household became familiar with names like Kallan Khan, Muhhammad Ali Faridi, 
Muhammad Hussain Nagina Waley Qawwals and Ghazal singers like Zuhra Bai

22 

Ambale Wali, Shamshad Bai, Akhtari Bai, Master Madan, K L Saigol and others. 
Mian Muhammad Hussain from a nearby village ‘Chowkhandi’, who contributed a 
good number of records to my father’s stock, would travel considerable distance 
from his village to our home for enjoying listening to music in my father’s 
company. Mian Muhammad Hussain in his younger days before emergence of 
Pakistan had been travelling to Delhi carrying goods on his camels with trading 
caravans where he had listened to most of the renowned singers in their famous 
abodes. He could differentiate between subtle nuances of ‘Raaga’ and ‘Raagnis’ 
some names like ‘Kaanra Shahana’ and ‘Mian ki Todi’ coming up apart from 
familiar ‘Bhairon’ and ‘Malkaunce’ etc. 
When I started going to school, it was a lower middle school housed in a rented 
building in one corner of the village in a fairly open area. It had classes from first 
to sixth grade. Later during some reorganisation the classes were reduced to five 
which remained so for a long period till the school was shifted to a newly 
constructed building near the road and classes raised to middle and then high 
school level. My first teacher was Lal Khan Dali from a nearby hamlet known as 
Dhok Dali; an elderly well built man who had served in the Army and after 
retirement had taken up teaching. Till old age he taught first grade class and was 
expert in developing interest of small children in learning. Headmaster of the 
village primary school was Master Abdul Hadi our immediate neighbour in the 
village. He was a dedicated teacher who would organise extra classes for students 
of class five who had to appear for the examinations at the middle school of 
neighbouring village Saghar. These classes were held between the Maghrib and 
Isha prayers in a vacant house near the main Mosque. Well prepared for the 
examination when I appeared before an elderly teacher Syed Alam Shah at Saghar 
School, he asked me a question as to why Mir Anis, the poet was known as Mir 
Anis Lakhnavi. In chaste Urdu my reply was that Lakhnow was name of a city and 
the people from that city were known as Lakhnavis. My reply and the tone 
impressed the old man who asked other teachers present as to whose son I was? 
When he was told that I was son of Malik Abdul Razaq, the old man was pleased.  
My father, an agriculturist had joined education department during the period 
when World War II was attracting young men from our area into Army. He was a

23 

charismatic personality well known for his knowledge, inimitable style of dress 
and mannerism. Securing first position in Punjab Province during senior teacher’s 
course had given him the recognition he deserved. He held the degree of ‘Fazil e 
Farsi’ commonly known as ‘Munshi Faazil’, a graduation in subjects less English. 
The names of Persian writers and poets like Qa-ani, Khaaqani, Rumi, Attaar, 
Firdosi, Saadi, Hafiz and others, heard in childhood remain imprinted in the 
memory. He opted for premature retirement finding the changing environments 
in education department not to his liking. 
Coming back to Syed Alam Shah, the old man at Saghar School belonged to a 
neighbouring village Dher Mond and had been teacher of the then Headmaster of 
the School, Malik Karam Ilahi from village ‘Dhulli’. All the old teachers were 
dedicated men respected by the society who did great service in inspiring children 
of the new nation, preparing them to shoulder their responsibilities in life. It is not 
surprising that the product of those ‘Tat’ schools did great service to the nation in 
various fields. ‘Tat’ was thick matting woven in length used for small children in 
primary classes who were to sit on ground. Tables and benches were made 
available in secondary level schools. Management of the schools was done at the 
District level by the District Boards for Education. An effective inspections system 
was in place, the District Inspectors and Assistant District Inspectors at the District 
and Tehsil level respectively carrying out regular inspections to check the 
standards.  
When I joined class sixth in Saghar School, I was told by Syed Alam Shah that 
during his period of teaching Persian, I would stand by his chair instead of sitting 
on the bench at my assigned place. I would read out the text and the teacher 
would explain the meanings. If any of my class fellows was to commit a mistake 
and the teacher wanted to punish him, he would ask me to give four blows on the 
neck of that student, two on each side. He would ask me to harden my fists by 
practicing on stones on my way back home. Promoted to class seventh, I was 
given relief of not standing next to the teacher’s chair and did reading from my 
bench. My first experience of getting the blows on my neck and how one felt was 
in class seventh. While reading the text I committed a mistake and the teacher 
told Akbar sitting next to me to give me four blows. Akbar had been frequent

24 

receiver of my blows so he used his full force to do the job. For a short while there 
was complete blackout before my eyes. I took some time to recover from the 
shock. The teacher realising that Akbar had been extra efficient in obeying the 
command, got out of his chair with some difficulty and himself gave Akbar a few 
blows with his feeble hands. Akbar one day told me that the famous compendium 
of classic tales ‘Alif Laila’ in Urdu was available at their house. I showed my 
eagerness to borrow that for some days which I did and got engrossed into 
reading the fascinating tales. It took some months to recover from the images of 
fairies and princesses floating in imagination and thoughts on a raw mind. May be 
such early experiences make a person an incorrigible romantic in life. 
The distance between our village and the school at Saghar was about seven 
kilometers on a dusty track. It involved crossing of two perennial streams which 
would be flooded during rains. We the children from my village, substantial in 
number used to move in groups. Going to and coming back from school was fun, 
particularly while coming back when there was some spare time to indulge in 
pranks. Three years in Saghar School passed and after class eighth I moved to 
Talagang High School for matriculation, residing in boarding house on the edge of 
a seasonal stream on eastern end of the town. This stream with its white 
unpolluted sand was arena of a most entertaining game of ‘Kabbadi’ organised by 
the local organisation once every week. Players from other parts of the region 
would also be invited to participate in the game. Competing teams would come to 
the venue with beating of drums and lot of fanfare. It was most enjoyable to see 
the whole proceedings. Compounder Shafi was star player whose specialty was to 
jump over the opponent, putting one foot on the opponent’s shoulder. For this 
Shafi would make his opponent get into a position which facilitated his trick. Every 
player knew his technique but would get beaten by his dexterous moves. 
There were many other occasions to enjoy witnessing various kinds of sports like 
the bulls races, a pair of bulls pulling load of mud. These competitions were 
frequently held in different villages and promoted rearing of very good quality 
animals of ‘Dhani’ breed, famous for their beauty and agility. The animals reared 
by a family of Talagang, the Sabunia Maliks, known as such because of owning a 
local 'Desi Sabun' (soap) factory, continued to win first prize in the annual festival

25 

held at Lahore for a number of years. Other significant means of entertainment 
were frequent ‘Melas’, the main event being annual three days festival organised 
by the local administration at Talagang. One major attraction on this Mela was 
the game of 'Pirr Kaudi' for which famous players of area including surrounding 
districts would participate. Akbar Niazi from some village in Mianwali district was 
a famous player of that game in late fifties. The game was different from 'Kabaddi' 
which is played in a confined space and is still being played, the East Punjab 
government being its recent patron. 'Pirr Kaudi' is played no more. In this game a 
player challenges the opponents to catch him. Two players of the opponent team 
accept the challenge. The challenger then starts running away from the start point 
being pursued by the two men. The challenger, after running for a few hundred 
yards remaining in sight of the audience, turns back to reach the starting point 
avoiding being stopped by the two men pursuing him. He scores the point if he 
can reach back to starting point without being stopped. This game was played by 
tall men of ideal physique and it was a pleasure to watch them running and using 
different techniques to score their points.  The pursuers would often use a 
technique called 'Kainchi' (Scissor). This was to use one's legs in a scissor fashion 
to drop the challenger entangling his legs. The challenger would mainly use his 
better speed, pushing and slapping the pursuers when they tried to come near 
him. This whole process was most amusing for the audience. 
The overall environment was of contentment, happiness and enjoyment in 
outdoor sports and Melas. Almost every man living in the village was self-
employed. The peasants after sowing their wheat crop would go to Karachi in 
winters to work in construction industry as labourers till the time of harvesting 
their crop in April, earning some cash during the period. The animals would be 
looked after by the women and children. Women worked more than men in the 
agricultural households. Service in Army was preferred choice as agriculture could 
not provide sustainable livelihood to the communities in the arid, rain fed area. As 
a young man I started this journey of adventure spanning over three decades.  
Looking back at the life as a witness and participant of events, I feel the pain of 
distortions, misconception and lies about important events during our short 
history as some would get revealed in the subsequent chapters.



27 

Ayub Khan’s Era 
Pakistan, after independence, lost its founder Governor General, Quaid-e-Azam 
Muhammad Ali Jinnah just after one year. After another three years the Prime 
Minister, Mr. Liaqat Ali Khan, a seasoned politician,  was assassinated in October 
1951 as he was about to address public meeting in Rawalpindi. Former 
bureaucrats, Mr. Ghulam Muhammad, Mr. Iskander Ali Mirza, Mr. Muhammad Ali 
and others took over control of the country indulging in power games with the 
result that no stable government could be formed. In 1954 General Ayub Khan, 
the Commander-in-Chief Army was inducted into cabinet as Defense Minister, a 
strange decision but in keeping with mindset of rulers bent upon retaining power 
regardless of propriety. The country did not have a constitution till 1956. In our 
first constitution, East and West Pakistan were made into two equal units, having 
equal representation in the National Assembly despite the fact that East Pakistan 
had more population. After two years and frequent changes of governments, 
President of Pakistan, Mr. Iskander Ali Mirza declared Martial Law in the country 
on 07 October 1958 taking over control of the government. In an atmosphere of 
deceptions and intrigues, he was overthrown by General, later Field Marshal, 
Muhammad Ayub Khan, the first Pakistani Commander-in-Chief of our national 
army, who assumed control of Pakistan Government on 27 October 1958. Mr. 
IskandarMirza was exiled to UK where he spent rest of his life. 
Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan, a graduate of Royal Military Academy 
Sandhurst, UK, groomed in British Military tradition was a towering personality, a 
very impressive man. He took over leadership role when military men were 
heading governments in many other countries after conclusion of Second World 
War. At that time, countries like the US, France, Spain, Yugoslavia and Egypt were 
led by former military men i.e. General Dwight D Eisenhower, General Charles de 
Gaul, General Franco, Marshal Tito, and Colonel Jamal Abdul-Nassir respectively.  
The initial years of President Ayub Khan’s rule witnessed rapid progress in every 
field. Right after independence, work on developing very sound and farsighted 
plans for making overall progress had been undertaken by dedicated and inspired 
men of the nascent State institutions. As the political conditions stabilized, 
development in agriculture, education, science and technology, industry

28 

particularly in the textile sector, trading, commerce and almost every field 
became a model for other third world countries. Two major water storage dams, 
one at Mangla on river Jhelum and another at Tarbela on river Indus were 
constructed after resolving water dispute with India through World Bank in 1960, 
providing cheap source of energy. A country, predicted by Indian leaders not to 
last for long had become a model of progress, development and stability for 
developing countries that got their independence from colonial rule after the 
Second World War.  
Pakistan, during Ayub Khan’s rule was a liberal, peaceful, tolerant and relatively 
prosperous society. Unemployment was almost zero. There were lot of 
employment opportunities in the expanding industries in Karachi, Hyderabad, 
Lahore, Lyallpur (now Faisalabad) and other cities. The peasants in rain fed areas 
would get seasonal employment in construction industry in the big cities between 
the period of sowing winter crops and their harvesting time. Everyone seemed 
happy and satisfied with life, having good opportunities of entertainment through 
frequent local festivals and sports events of all kinds. The province of West 
Pakistan (present day Pakistan) was governed from Lahore, the provincial capital 
by a Governor assisted by a small team of ministers. Malik Amir Muhammad 
Khan, Nawab of Kalabagh, the Governor was a man of sterling character and 
outstanding administrative acumen. He ensured peace in the province. East 
Pakistan was governed by General Azam Khan who enjoyed enormous respect 
because of his hard work in reaching out to the common man in his own 
inimitable style, making sincere efforts to solve people’s problems. It was the 
golden period of life for a common citizen of Pakistan. 
Two incidents will give glimpses of attitude of rulers towards the proprieties and 
abiding by rules of law. In a TV programme some years back a retired senior 
bureaucrat, late Syed Hashim Raza narrated that as Commissioner Karachi he was 
approached by the President House to allot some land in Karachi to a particular 
person. Since it was against rules, he refused to make the allotment. When the 
President visited Karachi, Syed Hashim Raza apprised him of the reason for his 
inability to comply with the demand. The President’s response was that if 
something was against the rules, it should not be done. Syed Hashim Raza

29 

remained in his job and was never asked for a favour again.  In another incident 
told by Mr. Ahmad Hussain Kazi, a senior engineer, one of President Ayub Khan’s 
nephews studying at Cadet College Hasan Abdal left College without permission 
along with some other students including Mr. Kazi to see a film at Ciroz Cinema in 
Rawalpindi. Here Gohar Ayub the President’s son, who had also come to see the 
film, persuaded his cousin to stay for the night, rejoining college by early morning. 
College authorities noticed this absence and the student got rusticated. Requests 
to college authorities by Gohar Ayub and then Major General Muhammad Rafi, 
the President’s Staff Officer had no effect on college authorities to change their 
decision. No one was removed from his post in the College for their refusal. 
Comparison with attitude of President Ayub Khan and present ‘democratic’ rulers 
will give clear indication of the state of deterioration we have descended into.  
On external front relations with India had improved. Water dispute between the 
two countries had been resolved by signing Indus Water Treaty in 1960 under the 
aegis of World Bank. Punjab, the land of five rivers which extended from Indus in 
the west to Jumna on the east had been divided. Some of the head-works of 
canals irrigating Pakistani Punjab were located in Indian Punjab. This serious 
dispute adversely affected Pakistan’s economy and people’s lives when the 
waters from head-works located in India were stopped the canals became dry, 
thus causing obvious tension in relations between the two countries. Ayub Khan’s 
detractors later would accuse him of selling rivers to India, a most unjust criticism 
ignoring the fact that part of Punjab going to India had equal right on the waters 
of Punjab rivers. A peep into process of prolonged negitations over the issue 
would be educative.  
President Ayub Khan also offered India a joint defence pact against external 
aggression. This was in line with thinking of British Indian Army High Command at 
the time of partition of India as given by Lieutenant General Sir Francis Tucker, 
then serving in India in his book. He wrote1; 
‘Yet the frontiers were of as deep concern to Hindustan as to Pakistan, for 
Hindustan, once they were breached, had no natural frontier left to her. More 

1 ‘While Memory Serves’ by Lieutenant General Sir Francis Tuker, Cassell& Company Ltd – London 1950, 
Pages: 22 — 27.

30 

than that, Pakistan had kindred peoples and probable allies stretching northward 
far over her mountain borders into Asia. If she could be by any means persuaded 
to stand beside Hindustan, then the latter would have all the advantage of this 
vast cushion of Islam between herself and danger. India could then apply herself 
to her own undisturbed development with a great feeling of security, knowing that 
her own men stood far from her borders on the frontier of another State and 
shoulder to shoulder with the soldiers of that State’.  
In 1962 during the Indo - China skirmishes in the Himalayas; Pakistan remained 
neutral and did not create any threat to India. Ayub Khan’s views about relations 
with India and his abhorrence from any mention of fighting or use of force is 
reflected from his remarks which my friend and fellow unit officer late Khurshid 
Ahmad Mallal heard from the President. During an annual Commanding Officer’s 
Conference held at the Punjab Regimental Centre Mardan which was followed by 
Regimental lunch attended by senior officers of the Regiment, then Lieutenant 
Khurshid Mallal heard the President snubbing Major General Akhtar Hussian 
Malik, General Officer Commanding (GOC) at Murree when he said to the 
President that ‘if you allow me, I will get you Kashmir in matter of days’. The 
President’s response was that ‘don’t talk such nonsense again’. Soon after, the 
President was tricked by conspirators into allowing an action which started armed 
conflict with India, derailing Pakistan from path of progress. 
In 1964, Mr. JawaharLal Nehru sent Sheikh Muhammad Abdullah, the influential 
Kashmiri leader to Pakistan to meet with the Pakistani leadership to work on 
negotiated solution of Kashmir dispute. It was great misfortune for people of both 
the countries that while Sheikh Abdullah was busy in his meetings in Pakistan, the 
tragic news of sudden passing away of Mr. Nehru were received and he had to 
return to India immediately. That proved to be a lost chance when the main cause 
of conflict between the two countries could be peacefully resolved. 
Mr. Lal Bahadur Shastri took over leadership as Prime Minister of India after the 
demise of Mr. JawaharLal Nehru in 1964. Mr. Nehru was an important player on 
the world scene, a co-initiator of the Non Aligned Movement along with Mr. 
Jamal Abdul-ul-Nassir of Egypt and Marshal Joseph Bronze Tito of Yugoslavia. 
After his death, India was vulnerable to possible fragmentation into its natural

