181 

these rallies was to go to the people, listen to them, exchange views and explain 
to them that violence in the name of religion was un-Islamic and most 
undesirable. These rallies were very well attended and would last for a whole day. 
General Abbasi with his vast knowledge and patience to listen was very good at 
arguing the case and would convince the audience about his point of view. The 
people from Darel and Tangir valleys who joined the rally at Chilas were most 
difficult to convince. They were adamant in sticking to their point of view. At the 
end of these rallies, committees would be formed to counter the menace of 
sectarianism in their respective areas. This proved successful and for a number of 
years the area remained peaceful till new factors and new players emerged on 
the scene later. 
The Centre was otherwise having a very close contact with the ex-servicemen of 
the old Scouts and the NLI Regiment. They were invited to the Centre for annual 
functions and provided with expenses on these trips. They were also provided 
with financial assistance whenever someone applied for it in a dire need. Such 
applications were quite frequent and were always attended to. 
During my tenure of two and a half years at the Centre from January 1991 to July 
1993, I had a chance of serving under the command of three General Officers, as 
Commander FCNA is also the Inspector General (IG) of NLI Regiment. When I 
joined the Centre, Major General Irshadullah Tarar was the IGFC. He had very 
practical approach to deal with problems of his operational area particularly the 
Siachin Sector. He laid emphasis to hold and maintain already established posts 
on those heights and avoid establishing more posts which were difficult to 
maintain and could not provide any tactical advantage. According to him 
additional posts would serve no purpose as the Indians, already in advantageous 
positions, were adequately blocked to come down further west into our area 
from their heights. 
Some ambitious commanders at Brigade level had indulged in such fruitless, 
rather damaging exercises mainly for personal glory. One of them, when he was 
about to complete his tenure in Astore sector captured a few huts at Dalunag 
across the line of control and got his gallantry award by projecting it as a major 
operation. He left the place but the consequences of that misadventure were

182 

heavy on the unit deployed in Shaqma area because Indians sitting on the heights 
above Dalunag would not allow any supply to pass through from that area.  
Major General Zahir ul Islam Abbasi replaced General Tarar during second half of 
1991. General Abbasi, as a Brigadier had worked as our Defence Attaché at 
Pakistan Embassy in India. He was roughed up by Indian intelligence people and 
got injured when according to them he was meeting with some persons in Delhi 
city to obtain documents from them. He was prematurely reverted to Pakistan. 
Having strong Jehadi inclinations, he supported a plan worked out by Brigadier 
Masood Naveed Anwari to establish a new post in Siachin Sector. This was against 
the policy of previous Commander FCNA who was for maintaining the existing 
posts. A reconnaissance party under command an officer was sent to explore the 
route and determine location of establishing the post. The officer, a Captain, on 
return told that establishing a post in that area was not feasible because the route 
to it would be passing in front of Indian posts. He was dubbed a pessimist and the 
plan was not abandoned.  
One morning I was picked up from Bunji helipad to travel along with General 
Abbasi in connection with the ex-servicemen rally I had arranged at Skardu. The 
General had to first visit forward troops and then join the rally. I was dropped at 
Gamba helipad in Skardu and the General proceeded ahead.  About mid day he 
returned visibly shaken and dejected. It transpired that he had gone to address 
the troops of 1 Azad Kashmir (AK) Battalion before they were launched to secure 
a height for establishing the post. The route to reach the height where post was 
to be established was in effective firing range of Indian posts dominating the 
approach. As 1 AK reached within range of Indian weapons, it came under intense 
fire resulting in large scale casualties to the unit, its eight officers killed. Brigadier 
Anwari tried to find out progress in his helicopter. Although before that day the 
helicopters were considered safe because no weapon had been found effective 
due to peculiar weather conditions, Brigadier Anwari’s helicopter was hit by the 
Indians, causing his instant death besides the two pilots. In all eleven officers 
including the Brigadier lost their lives. Total casualties of the unit were over one 
hundred persons killed and wounded including their CO who was wounded. All 
this happened within just about one hour’s time; the catastrophic result of

183 

misplaced ambitions and follies of senior commanders. General Abbasi was 
removed from command and posted at GHQ, from where he reportedly planned 
to kill all the Corps Commanders during their periodic conference. He was tried 
along with some army officers and sentenced to imprisonment.  
General Abbasi was replaced by Major General Fazal e Ghafoor, known for his 
diligence and hard work. Having served in the area earlier as Brigade Commander 
at Astore, he had good understanding of problems in the area and focused to 
address those with considerable success. Basic requirement was to maintain 
troops deployed on the front in most abnormal and trying conditions. 
The debilitating struggle in Siachin area is a great tragedy for troops of both the 
countries being deployed on those heights. Troops are deployed at altitudes 
which the mountaineers consider as their life time achievement to scale, spend 
few moments to raise flags and get photographed. Long term deployment of 
troops has caused tremendous hardships and miseries resulting in loss of limbs 
and damaged health of so many people. How this conflict started is a sad 
reflection on Indian decision making process. This episode was narrated to me by 
Lieutenant Colonel Manzoor Hussain, Engineers, associated with the Alpine Club 
of Pakistan for a long time. I was told that one Indian tour operator dealing with 
trekking expeditions in the mountains in Laddakh area had his brother posted as 
commandant of the Indian Army High Altitude Training School, near Leh in 
Laddakh. The tour operator asked his brother to explore Saltoro Range, the 
western side of the Siachin Glacier, using trainees at the school to see if trekking 
expeditions could be taken to that area.  
That is how the Indians started coming in this area during summers in late 
nineteen seventies. Since this area was left un-demarcated beyond a certain point 
considered to be uninhabitable, there was no presence of Indian or Pakistani 
forces in the area. On some indications of Indians movement into the area, a 
Pakistan Army SSG team was sent to confirm reports of Indian incursions. In 1980 
while on a visit to Gilgit I met the team leader staying in the NLI Officers Mess on 
his return from the expedition. The team confirmed reports of Indians visiting the 
area, as they saw signs of their presence through litter, used tin food cans etc.

184 

The Indians in their seasonal expeditions started descending the Saltoro Range 
and came in contact with our civilian population, the local police being informed 
with proof of Indian currency. This created alarm and it was decided to place 
troops on the passes on Saltoro Range.  
In 1984, before start of summers, Director Military Operations (DMO) at the GHQ, 
Brigadier Ghulam Muhammad Malik along with Brigadier Ajmal, Commander 62 
Brigade at Skardu went up in a helicopter to have a look over Saltoro Range to 
determine places where troops could be deployed. As they reached the area, 
their helicopter was fired upon by Indians who had occupied the passes much 
before start of normal movement season in that area. This was utter surprise, a 
most unexpected happening and an indication that the Indians had access to 
information of our plan, thus pre-empting Pakistan Army in occupying the area. In 
haste, our Army totally unprepared to operate on those heights placed few units 
of the NLI Regiment and regular infantry units opposite Indians posts, obviously at 
disadvantageous positions. Since troops were not equipped for the climatic 
conditions, nor trained or acclimatized, we suffered lot of casualties because of 
frost bite and other adverse effects of high altitude, till appropriate clothing and 
equipment was provided and operating procedures streamlined which took time. 
Bunji was very hot in summers particularly for those who would approach it from 
the Astore valley; the only route to Gilgit region from the Indian sub continent till 
a route was opened through Babusar Pass and later making of the Karakoram 
Highway (KKH). The old route started from Kashmir valley passing over Kamri and 
Burzil passes to descend into Bunji Das. ‘Das’ is plain areas on banks of rivers as 
known in local parlance. British officers who wrote their accounts described this 
heat very explicitly in catchy phrases, some of these I would use in opening of my 
briefings to visitors with desired effect to create interest in what I had to say 
subsequently. 
The Centre had created lot of attraction for visitors which was fully exploited by 
FCNA to impress the Army Chiefs. In 1992, General Asif Nawaz visited. After 
seeing the training and administrative facilities, he decided to bring the Prime 
Minister for a visit. All our preparations to receive the Prime Minister on 17 
August 92 were wasted because weather remained blocked for that whole week.

185 

Next year i.e. in 1993, General Abdul Waheed, the new Army Chief visited the 
Centre with his family. When I started to brief him in my office, he interrupted me 
to call his young son for listening to interesting quotations of the British about 
Bunji upon their descent from Astor valley to the place.  
Chief Instructor, Lieutenant Colonel Riaz Mahmood Bajwa, Punjab Regt, had spent 
about seven years in the Northern Areas, first as Commandant of FCNA’s Battle 
School at Kalandarchi (KD) Fort and then a long inning at the Centre from where 
he ultimately retired. He had developed a training facility on mountain craft 
techniques for the recruits which included among other things, Australian style 
rappelling in which a man would be seen quickly descending facedown towards 
the ground. Since the rope he was using was not visible from a distance, this sight 
was most exciting, rather frightening. For visitors, the demonstration was laid on 
a side of a mountain close to firing ranges of the Centre. General Asif Nawaz 
initially did not seem interested to see the demonstration after lunch but once he 
was persuaded to witness it, he was so impressed that he wanted to bring the 
Prime Minister to visit the Centre.  
Other attraction was Centre’s Officers Mess, a small old Rest House, with well 
maintained lawns covered by a clump of old and majestic Chinar trees.  It was a 
treat to spend moments of leisure under their dense shade. The lawns were 
bordered with fruit trees including peaches, plums, apples, pomegranates, 
apricots and very fine quality almonds. I experimented with introduction of fine 
quality black cherry which was not planted earlier considering the climate 
unsuitable. The quality of cherry from village Nomal northeast of Gilgit is 
considered to be the best which we planted at the Centre and the project proved 
to be a success. Construction of the new officer’s mess on a parallel spur was 
started during my tenure. We planned wide terraces planted with fruit trees and 
Chinars for shade around the new Mess building. The building and guest rooms 
were almost complete when I left in July 1993.  
Meetings of the Mountains 
Opposite Bunji across the River Indus is Jaglot, a flat area at two different levels, 
the KKH passing through the lower plain and village located at higher elevation.

186 

Area Bunji – Jaglot forms a bowl surrounded by mountains. One day looking at 
mountains while sitting in the mess lawns, I realized that I was looking at three 
different mountain ranges, a unique phenomenon only possible to witness from 
this, Bunji – Jaglot, area. The mountain range east and south of Bunji was western 
end of the Himalayas, which culminated on the eastern bank of Indus River. The 
cliffs we were using for training on the mountain craft techniques at the NLI 
Centre were the western end of that great mountain range. Nanga Parbat, the 
“killer mountain” in western Himalayas rose to its majestic peak south of Bunji. 
Looking towards north one could see the southern end of Karakorum Range 
confined between the confluence of Indus and Gilgit Rivers just north of lower 
Jaglot. Looking towards west across the Indus River one could see the eastern end 
of Hindu Kush range that rising from the western bank of Indus River, crossed 
parts of northern Pakistan before entering Afghanistan. The thought of witnessing 
such a unique geographical phenomenon was very exciting. I formed a team of 
officers comprising Lieutenant Colonel Riaz Mahmood Bajwa, Captain Tariq, our

187 

Medical officer who belonged to Bunji village and Captain Aurangzeb, our 
Education Officer to select a suitable site on the KKH from where this unique 
geographical phenomenon could be conveniently witnessed by travellers. Colonel 
Bajwa’s team selected a site where a properly worded plaque was erected. One 
consideration for selecting the present site was to enable travellers to physically 
see waters of both rivers, Indus and Gilgit at their confluence, separating the 
three mountain ranges. This spot does not have very large space for parking 
vehicles but the waters of both rivers cannot be seen from any other point where 
the plaque could be fixed. It attracts the attention of tourists en route to Gilgit 
and discerning travellers find it a compelling stop.  

This team also erected a monument at the site of a battle about midway between 
Jaglot and Gilgit titled Ambush Site. This place, known as ‘Bhup Singh Ki Parri’ was

188 

a narrow path between the mountain and Gilgit River where an invading Sikh 
force of about twelve hundred men under Bhup Singh was ambushed by the Ruler 
of Gilgit in mid nineteenth century. According to local lore only two persons 
escaped by jumping into the Gilgit River and reached Bunji, the last post of the 
State of Kashmir. 
The team of officers at the Centre, about twenty two in all from different infantry 
regimental groups jelled well as a team. Luckily I was assisted by Lieutenant 
Colonel Bajwa, living in the Mess without family, who out of twenty four hours 
would hardly spend about six hours in his room. He was always up and available 
to everyone. We could organize big functions smoothly; our main strength in this 
was the ingenuity and resourcefulness of Captain Ghulam Muhammad Awan. He 
had exceptional abilities in administrative planning, attention to detail and ability 
to motivate people to work long hours cheerfully, producing admirable results. I 
have mentioned about the visits of the two Army Chiefs that went very well due 
to meticulous work by such officers.  
The annual Commanding Officers (COs) conferences were major events when the 
ex-servicemen would also be invited to join the gathering. Another event which 
evokes pleasant memories was Installation Ceremony of Colonel of the Battalion 
of 27 Punjab at Gilgit. This unit which I had commanded earlier was located at 
Gilgit, then being commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Waqar Ahmad Raja. The unit 
decided to hold installation ceremony of their new Colonel of the Battalion, 
Lieutenant General (retired) Muhammad Aslam Shah at Gilgit. I being an ex CO 
sought permission from FCNA to invite unit’s guests to the Centre for an evening. 
The programme included a game of Golf, dinner and a cultural show displaying 
folk dances of different valleys of Northern Areas. The permission was granted 
with some reservations about move of the VIPs during night. Lieutenant General 
Naseer Akhtar, Comd 5 Corps was also amongst the guests, being Colonel of the 
Punjab Regiment at that time. It was one of the most pleasant evenings where all 
participants enjoyed every moment of their short stay. The graceful regional 
dances performed by handsome men, attired in traditional dresses, moving to the 
exquisite local tunes were a treat to see. Folk dance practice among soldiers of 
NLI was a daily routine. After having completed the day’s work, men would be

189 

free to enjoy their leisure time, the musicians playing their instruments, a morale 
booster for the troops relaxing after day’s work. 
Polo is played in Northern Area with its own rules which are different from the 
rules applied elsewhere. This game of kings and king of games is a passion in 
those areas. The game lasts for one hour divided into two equal halves with a 
short break. There are six players on each side who cannot be replaced. Gilgit had 
a polo ground, known as Shahi Polo Ground on western end of the main bazaar. 
At that time three departments were patronizing this expensive game in Gilgit. 
They were NLI Centre which had two teams, the seniors and the juniors, the 
Police and the Northern Areas Public Works Department (NAPWD). Every year 
two tournaments were organized by the local administration. During my stay at 
Gilgit the NLI senior team remained unbeaten. Our players like Bulbul Jan were 
heroes in the areas. Polo tournament at Shandhur between Gilgit and Chitral 
teams started during that period. In this tournament Gilgit Team remained winner 
during the initial years. Playing polo at that high altitude would sometime result in 
death of horses during play. 
In early 1991, when my family was lodged in Gilgit Mess upon arrival there, my 
sons decided to do some horse riding. They went to stables and asked for the 
ride. The attendants, without realizing that the boys could be novices, allowed the 
eldest, Ahmed Yaman to ride a horse called Lahori, the naughtiest of all. As soon 
as Yaman took the seat, the horse went into gallop jumping over the wall. Yaman 
hit a tree and fell down with bruises on his face and arms. However this did not 
deter the boys and they later enjoyed the facility learning to control horses.  
In 1991, the Centre had only few barracks in the training wing to accommodate 
about four hundred recruits against the authorization of twelve hundred. These 
barracks were also constructed on self help basis. Due to procedural impediments 
the budget allocation for construction would lapse because the paper work like 
project estimates etc by concerned offices at HQ FCNA Gilgit would not be 
completed and approved in time. For two years I had to send an officer to 
Defence Ministry in the last week of June to save lapse of funds, getting special 
permission to carry forward the allocations. These efforts initiated the process of 
construction which continued after I left. Mechanical transport was also a

190 

problem and we did not get any vehicles against the deficiency. Considering that 
lot of senior officers had started visiting the Centre for whom arranging suitable 
vehicles was difficult, I relocated the Helipads near the monument/offices and 
planned events in such a way that the need to use vehicles was minimized.  
Another feature added was laying out a Golf Course, the first in Northern Areas. 
Before my arrival at the Centre, Lieutenant Colonel Bajwa, a keen golfer, had laid 
out a mini course of three holes to remain in practice. With experience of 
maintaining  Lahore Garrison Golf Course as its Secretary while commanding 27 
Punjab in 1985 -87, I developed a nine hole course, a massive work done by 
recruits of the Centre over a period of about six months. According to Bajwa, 
when Lord Curzon visited Gilgit as a member of the British Parliament much 
before becoming the famous Viceroy of India, he carried his golf kit to enjoy a few 
shots in exquisite surroundings of Gilgit area, the first man to do so.  
The Centre was sharing irrigation water from the nullah coming from mountain on 
our east with the villagers of Bunji. As water channel passed through the village, 
water theft by villagers was a continuous complaint. The problem was minimized 
by effective monitoring arrangements and constructing few large size reservoirs/ 
ponds through manual labour on self help basis for storing water for use 
according to needs.  
I had to undertake lot of travelling during these two and a half years. Whenever 
there was a need to come to Rawalpindi in connection with official duties, I never 
had the luxury of availing air travel facility because invariably the weather would 
not permit that. I had to take road journey a number of times on the KKH which at 
that time was not in a bad shape as it deteriorated later. The time taken from 
Bunji to Rawalpindi would be about twelve hours. I was told by the drivers that 
my predecessor, Colonel Ashraf once took about nine hours from Bunji to 
Rawalpindi when the road had just been completed and road conditions were at 
their best.  
I had started a project of converting some NLI properties in the area into tourist 
resorts. A few places were identified and some work started before I was posted 
out. The places were Naltar, where two barracks were made usable for living by 
the visiting families. At Passu a few existing rooms were converted into guest

