231 

Mr. Saddam was now instigated to invade Kuwait. His action provided the US, 
then ruled by elder Bush to bring in US forces to occupy Arabian Peninsula. He 
however could not win his second term in office. After a gap of eight years of Bill 
Clinton’s presidency, George W Bush became president of the US resuming the 
programme that his father had left unfinished. 
Af-Pak Theatre 
After 9/11, the US occupation of Afghanistan supported by contingents from the 
NATO forces caused tremendous hardships for Pakistan. General Musharraf, who 
had usurped power by removing Prime Minister Mr. Nawaz Sharif, easily gave in 
to US demands. The US got all the support in using Pakistan’s territory, its roads, 
air bases and air corridors for their occupation of land locked Afghanistan. The so 
called US war against terrorism, which actually has different objectives took 
Pakistan into its fold.  
Although no one from Pakistan was accused of involvement in the 9/11 incident, 
Pakistan came under attack by the US using drones and organisations like Tehrik - 
e - Taliban Pakistan (TTP) supported from US occupied Afghanistan. Using the 
derogatory term Af-Pak, Pakistan was bracketed with Afghanistan as a theatre of 
war. Pakistan had earlier supported the US against USSR occupation of 
Afghanistan suffering considerable losses in the process. The general public in 
Pakistan did not nurture any anti US feelings till Pakistan came under attack from 
the US drones and terrorist organisations mushrooming after the US occupied 
Afghanistan. 
Pakistan has so far suffered nearly sixty thousand civilian persons killed in bomb 
blasts and over six thousands soldiers killed by the terrorists operating from their 
bases in our tribal areas, Balochistan and from Afghanistan. The numbers of 
injured persons with permanent disabilities is much more. The economic losses to 
our nation are incalculable. 
The terrorists, called Tehrik e Taliban Pakistan (TTP) actually ‘Terrorists Targeting 
Pakistan’ are being provided organizational, logistic and financial support mostly 
by the Indians who established numerous consulates for this purpose in 
Afghanistan near our borders after US occupation of the country. At one stage

232 

theterrorists established parallel government in vast areas of Malakand region 
with threats to reach Islamabad. The Pakistan Army dislodged them from the vast 
mountainous areas in 2009 in a swift operation carried out with great skill, 
audacity and sacrifices to remove the threat. This feat, which no Army of the 
present day world can match surprised our enemies and overturned the whole 
game the US was playing with Pakistan. Their aim to take out Pakistan’s nuclear 
assets on the pretext of Islamabad going into the hands of Taliban was effectively 
checked. The US was reported to have kept their force ready in the Gulf area to 
act in such eventuality when Pakistani Taliban posed threat to take over 
Islamabad.  The plan to denuclearize Pakistan was averted for the present, for 
which the TTP was being relied upon to provide an excuse for direct US 
intervention with their forces to occupy Islamabad. A large area in our Capital has 
been occupied by the US Embassy, very unusual for any Embassy in the world that 
can provide residential facilities for thousands of people/troops. 
Mission Achieved 
US military intervention in our region starting with Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait and 
resulting chain of events was based on deceit and unabashed lies. The propagated 
cause of this intervention had no relevance to actual agenda i.e. twin goals of 
controlling energy resources of Iraq and Central Asia as well as eliminating 
possible threats to the State of Israel. After decades of bloody conflict US, rather 
the powers launching US forces have achieved success. The Iraqi Army, first 
strengthened by US to contain spread of influence of revolutionary Iran in early 
nineteen eighties that could pose threat to Israel has been completely destroyed. 
Iraq has been destabilised to an extent that there are more chances of its 
fragmentation than recovery towards a normal functional state. Other countries 
of the region already having made peace with the State of Israel, possible threats 
to Israel have been effectively eliminated. Long term contracts on extremely 
favourable conditions have been secured to exploit the vast oil resources of Iraq 
creating a monopoly to exclude other competitors.  
The US, Israel and the western powers allied to US in fomenting trouble have 
escalated the conflict and turmoil in Muslim region by dismantling Libya and 
creating a fresh force calling itself Daish/ISIS operating in Syria, Iraq, Turkey and in

233 

Arabian Peninsula. Afghanistan continues to remain unstable and disturbed. The 
source of turmoil emanates from US as stated by Ms. Clare Boothe Luce, one who 
knew. She says;  
“There existed a relatively small group of wealthy Jews who met once a year in the 
greatest secrecy and planned the strategy of world Jewry for the future.” 
“Did you know all the mischief in the world was caused by five Jewish men?”13  
Gas pipeline project from Turkmenistan to India is next phase of the plan that is at 
implementation stage now. 
Efforts to denuclearise Pakistan have failed so far but the country has been put 
into serious economic and internal security problems. 
After the 9/11 incident when the Americans occupied Afghanistan, Lieutenant 
General Hamid Gul, an ex DG ISI gave a statement that,  
"9/11 is an excuse, Afghanistan is staging point and Pakistan is the target". 
In Urdu language it reads like, 
"9/11 bahana hai, Afghanistan thikana hai our Pakistan nishana hai' 
After over a decade this has proved to be the case. The only impediment in US 
designs is the tenacity and resilience of the Pakistani nation in facing adversities 
and a volunteer National  Army spearheading the fight against forces unleashed 
on Pakistan from the US occupied Afghanistan. The Tehrik e Taliban Pakistan (TTP) 
an umbrella for groups of criminals is being supported by the CIA, Mossad, and 
some other western powers, assisted by the Indians encamped in Afghanistan. In 
Baluchistan another set of organisations with their leaders in London and bases in 
Afghanistan are carrying out terrorist activities. A consistent effort is being made 
to malign our intelligence agencies, Army and other law enforcing agencies like 
the Frontier Corps in Baluchistan and Rangers in Karachi to demonise them and 
downgrade their effectiveness. 

13 Clare Boothe Luce (http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/20/books/review/price-of-fame-by-sylvia-
jukes-morris.html?_r=0)

234 

As a sequel to earlier operations by the security forces in tribal areas and 
Malakand Division to eliminate terrorists sanctuaries, the on-going operation 
‘Zarb e Azb’ to eliminate terrorism from Pakistan according to National Action 
Plan is making good progress, reviving hopes of bringing peaceful living conditions 
in the country. Linkages between different forces working against integrity of 
Pakistan are getting exposed and being dealt with. Although MQM leader Mr Altaf 
Hussian under shelter of British intelligence in London has been absolved of 
money laundering charges by UK authorities, the money trail of extorted money 
from Karachi leads to MQM Headquarters in London is no more a secret.The 
terror network headed by MQM Headquarter in UK spread over many countries 
like India, South Africa, Malaysia and its modus operandi in engaging targets in 
Karachi has been exposed. Killers living abroad fly over to Karachi, engage targets 
and fly back safely being facilitated by concerned staff at Karachi airport. This has 
been going on for years.   
In Balochistan, apart from persuading Marri and Bugti gangs to come down from 
their ‘ferrai camps’, considerable progress has been made to dismantle 
Balochistan Liberation Army (BLA) operating in Mekran and coastal areas of 
Balochistan. BLA was being funded through extortion money from Karachi apart 
from external sources.  
Overall the situation is improving due to intelligence based targeted operations by 
the law enforcing agencies in all parts of Pakistan. However elimination of the 
menace of terrorism will only be possible when all concerned plat their role in the 
fight according to National Action Plan worked out through consensus by political 
leadership of Pakistan.

235 

Taliban 
The term ‘Taliban’ mischievously coined to malign religious seminaries is being 
wrongly used for mainly the ethnic majority Pushtuns in Afghanistan resisting 
occupation of their country by US and NATO forces who installed a minority non- 
Pushtun group in Kabul after invasion of Afghanistan. Mullah Omar was not a 
Talib, which means a student in religious seminary, but a veteran of resistance 
against the Russian occupation of his country in earlier decades. Those who joined 
him were also no more Tailbs or Taliban, plural of Talib, a term used for students 
of religious seminaries. These people had long past the stage of getting religious 
education that they would have completed as children and young boys.  
The oft repeated claim, rather allegation by western powers that Pakistan 
through its intelligence agency, the ISI, created a new force in Afghanistan called 
‘Taliban’ who established government in Afghanistan is simply not true. The 
movement started when Mullah Omar removed check posts established by the 
petty warlords in suburbs of Qandahar.The intelligence agencies people in 
Pakistan had no knowledge of who was Mullah Omar and what was happening. It 
was after some time that the cause of uprising against the criminal warlords, 
controlling small fiefdoms after Russians withdrawal from the country came to 
light. I now cannot recollect the name of the gang leader in Qandahar (they were 
so many) who was openly parading boys he was keeping to cater for his 
despicable unnatural carnal desire. One day Mullah Omar, prayer leader in a small 
mosque was approached by a man lamenting that his two daughters had been 
picked up by a warlord. Mullah Omar accompanied by the girl’s father went to the 
ruffian’s place, admonished his guards and persuaded them to rescue the girls. 
With the help of those guards Mullah removed check post on the road where they 
were collecting money from those passing by. As the people were in great distress 
at the hands of warlords, they joined Mullah Omar as he started to clear the 
check posts around Qandahar first and then gradually moved on till he wrested 
control of Kabul.That is how the movement led by Mullah Omar labeled as 
‘Taliban’ started.

236 

'Tourist' or Terrorist 
The understanding by Mullah Omar of the world around him can be judged from 
an interesting quote by Lieutenant General Zia ud Din during a TV interview on a 
private Pakistani channel. According to the General when he, as head of ISI, the 
premier Pakistani Intelligence Agency met Mullah Omar on the eve of impending 
US invasion of Afghanistan, Mullah Omar told him that the western media was 
calling him ‘Tourist’. The General then clarified that they were calling him 
‘Terrorist’ which was very dangerous and derogatory.  
Mullah Omar’s government which came to be known as The Taliban Government 
was recognised by only three countries i.e. Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and UAE. 
Pakistan had done so; rather it could not have done otherwise, because of its long 
and porous border with Afghanistan. Pakistan had recognised every government 
in Kabul, starting with that of King Zahir Shah, precisely for this reason because 
the country could not afford disputes on its western borders when its long 
eastern border with India was not secure. Afghanistan under Zahir Shah was the 
only country that opposed Pakistan’s entry into the United Nation Organisation. 
Pakistan however remained focused to maintain workable relations with Kabul.   
‘Taliban’ Government brought a semblance of order eliminating infighting among 
numerous warlords, effective drug control and end of crime through harsh and 
deterrent punishments. They were being cultivated by the Americans to allow oil 
and gas pipelines to pass through Afghanistan, giving contracts to a group of 
companies led by UNOCAL. For this the US authorities hosted some Taliban 
leaders in Washington but the deal could not get through due to intransigent 
attitude of the Afghan leaders. Apprehending failure to exploit energy resources 
due to Taliban government in Kabul, alternative plans to remove them were 
initiated which resulted in US occupation of Afghanistan. It was failure of Taliban 
leaders to understand the implications of denying capitalist’s interests which 
caused turmoil in our region resulting in widespread destruction. Had they 
accommodated the demands of western oil cartels, we could have been saved of 
our present travails. But Taliban leaders were men with very limited abilities who 
lacked understanding of the consequences of their intransigence.

237 

Pakistan’s influence over Taliban Government was very limited, if any at all. Some 
people like one notorious Riaz Basra and his group committed crimes and 
murders in Pakistan and fled to Afghanistan. Taliban government did not 
apprehend them to hand over to Pakistan. After 9/11 Pakistan did try to persuade 
Taliban leaders to agree with US demands but they were adamant and 
uncompromising on their stand. A participant of one such meeting narrated that 
when pressed to see the consequences of such defiance, Mullah Omar told that 
for Afghans half loaf of bread (which they were eating at the time) was enough to 
survive and if there was any problem for Pakistan they could do nothing about it. 
Taliban Government despite many objections to their way of functioning by the 
western world brought peaceful conditions, eliminating crime in the area under 
their control. They effectively stopped cultivation of poppy, a feat never achieved 
by any other government in Afghanistan.  Their resistance to hand over Osama 
Bin Laden to US without proof of his involvement in 9/11 tragedy, gave the US 
excuse to occupy Afghanistan; replacing Taliban government with that of 
Northern Alliance, a group of non-Pashtun tribes mainly living in northern parts of 
the country.  
After over a decade of occupation, causing great miseries to the people of the 
region including Pakistan, the US has succeeded in effectively blocking 
exploitation of energy resources by rivals. After withdrawal of their forces in 2014 
leaving a small contingent ostensibly to train Afghan Army, the country is likely to 
fall back to the state of infighting of 1980’as it did after withdrawal of the Soviet 
forces from the country. 
In Pakistan, the ‘Tehrik e Taliban Pakistan (TTP)’ a motley group of criminals is 
supported by external forces. They also generate funds through donations, 
extortions, looting bank and abduction for ransom to carry out their activities. 
These criminals, aptly described as ‘Terrorists Targeting Pakistan (TTP)’ have 
nothing to do with religious education or being ‘Talibs’. They are being used by 
external forces in their efforts to keep Pakistan destablised and weak, amenable 
to following diktats.Some groups of Arabs, Central Asians and others gathered 
from many countries that fought against Russian occupation of Afghanistan got 
settled in Afghanistan and in our tribal areas after Russian withdrawal. After 9/11

238 

and consequent occupation of Afghanistan by the US and NATO forces, they were 
pushed into our tribal areas. Taking advantage of porous borders without 
effective State control, these groups along withsome locals joined the fight 
against US occupation of Afghanistan, inviting frequent drone attacks in our tribal 
areas. 
A major operation against TPP was carried out during 2009 when the terrorists 
briefly established their rule in Malakand Division threatening occupation of 
Islamabad. Pakistan armed forces dislodged the terrorists entrenched on vast 
mountainous areas in a swift, wisely planned and audaciously executed operation 
that dashed all hopes and expectations of our enemies. Terrorist’s dens housing 
‘Human Bomb Factories’ mainly in Mehsud tribes areas of South Waziristan were 
also dismantled during 2009. The modern day followers of ‘Hasan bin Sabah’, like 
Qari Hussain Mahsud and others involved in preparing teen age boys as suicide 
bombers to explode against selected targets had to close shop.  
Pakistan has evolved appropriate response to deal with this serious threat using 
all elements of State power after the tragic incident of Army Public School 
Peshawar where about one hundred and fifty children and their teachers were 
brutally murdered on 16 December 2014. Before that it was mainly left to the law 
enforcing agencies (LEAs) to deal with threat, the forces deployed on road check 
posts waiting for attacks by terrorists, the initiative with them rather than being 
with the State of Pakistan. Operation ‘Zarb e Azb’ started in 2014, being 
conducted in all parts of Pakistan to free the country from menace of all kinds of 
terrorism is progressing steadily to achieve the desired targets.

239 

The Regional Context 
Reviewing our journey since Independence in 1947, one gets amazed as to how 
our early rulers formed alliances with the west against the Soviet Union and 
China. A cursory look at the map would suggest otherwise. Whether it was due to 
exiting personal contacts with the British and the ease in communicating 
with British and Americans in English, this policy resulted in breakup of Pakistan 
even before the country had completed its first twenty five years of existence. 
Ignoring regional realties and shying away from the communists, we harboured 
Masonic Lodges, preferring to be enslaved by the rapacious practitioners 
of western capitalism. Pakistan despite its abundant resources and enviable 
geographical position remains at the mercy of World Bank, IMF etc. Pakistani 
rulers have acted as pawns in the hands of Global Capitalist’s Establishment 
through their agents, the American administration. Our finances are controlled by 
their nominees and employees. 
Our geographical location, which gives us a unique opportunity to act as trade 
and energy corridor between the vast expanses of the Eurasian land mass, most 
populous regions on earth i.e. India and China, the oil rich gulf region and the 
emerging markets of the African continent, have not been exploited. 
Russia, spreading over vast expanses of Eurasia, always needed all weather warm 
water ports in the open seas. Her earlier efforts to reach the Arabian Sea by 
applying force failed. While the Czarist Russia got exhausted north of Aamu 
Darya, its successor, the Soviet Union, after lapse of considerable years invaded 
Afghanistan but had to retreat with disastrous consequences. With this 
experience of application of force having failed, it is time to forge relationships on 
the basis of mutual benefits which are there for everyone in the region.  
Today's Russia, asserting her influence in the region can take the lead in carving 
out a corridor of trade and commerce through the Central Asian states, 
Afghanistan and Pakistan to reach the resource rich South Asia and emerging 
markets of the African continent. China and Pakistan are already working to 
develop a trade corridor between Western China and Pakistan’s coast on Arabian 
Sea.

240 

The differences and conflicts between the countries of the region will get resolved 
if an effective mechanism of drawing mutual benefits through trade and 
commerce can be put in place. Basically US presence in the region is also to 
eliminate resistance in creating trade and energy corridors for the capitalist world 
that control US policies. Their interests demand peace in the region. As we can 
recollect, had Taliban government in Kabul agreed to the terms of UNOCAL, 
representing global energy cartel, US physical occupation of the country could 
have been avoided. Taliban representatives,who were invited and entertained in 
the US, failed to understand impact of their refusal, inviting war to soften up 
Afghanistan for implementing plans without opposition. Key element at this stage 
is to have an effective government in Afghanistan that can ensure peace to 
facilitate trade routes through the country. 
Pakistan was made to play major role in creating ‘New World Order’, paying very 
heavy price in the process. The global powers manipulating world events first 
arrested Pakistan’s unprecedented progress in early years by getting the country 
into war with India, using their most effective operative, Mr Z A Bhutto and his 
associates. While this conflict helped India to manage internal dissentions and 
unrest, Pakistan got dismembered. Strategically located New Pakistan was then 
used to dismantle USSR and the alternative system of economy. While General Zia 
was installed to facilitate Global Capitalist interests in dismantling Soviet Empire, 
General Musharraf was brought in to consolidate those gains by occupying 
Afghanistan and the Middle East. Pakistan became a battleground and continues 
to remain so till now. War, the mother of all big businesses was unleashed in the 
region for material gains. Example of just one item, OIL prices before the war and 
later will suffice to explain the point. Who made colossal gains from war and 
turmoil in the region?  
The managers of global capitalist system owning banks, oil companies, armament 
industries and all big businesses in the world have used US power to their purpose 
for over a hundred years having effective control over US policies and decisions. 
With expanding influence all over the world, they will be no more dependent 
exclusively on the US power in coming times. Till recent years the Capitalist 
system had limited access to a good part of the world aligned with

