71 

Rani Shankail, my Company Headquarters was rained with mortar shells during 
the night. The attackers were chased up to the borders about ten kilometers 
away. This was our first encounter with the Mukti Bahini operating from their 
sanctuaries inside India.  
Once I, with about ten men, marched out to see the two abandoned border out 
posts (BOPs) in my area earlier manned by the former East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) 
who had joined the rebels. After visiting one post and then moving along the 
border to reach the next one it started to get dark. I decided to stay the night 
there. This post was about two hundred meters away from an opposite Indian 
post, only a small stream separating the two. As darkness thickened, I realised 
that it was very dangerous to stay on the post with just ten men carrying personal 
weapons without any other fire support or even communications with any one 
because the wireless set, an old PRC-10 was out of range with others in the 
Company. I decided to take my men to a clump of trees located about six hundred 
yards away from the post along the stream and told them not to make even a 
slightest noise which could give away our location. At about 2 a.m. we heard 
noise of some vehicles moving towards the Indian post. Obviously it was 
additional force coming for some action as I had apprehended. About one hour 
after arrival of the vehicles, intense small arms firing started at our post from 
which I had moved away.  
These were some extremely anxious moments for me because generally our men 
are trigger happy in such situations and want to fire back. I had told my men that 
if we could see someone coming towards us, only then we will fire and that too 
not without my specific orders, myself firing the first bullet. Otherwise they just 
had to watch, rather get the feel of the show. As the night was very dark we could 
not see the enemy but just their direction of fire through tracer bullets. The firing 
continued for about an hour and those were some of the tensest moments of my 
life. One mistake by anyone of us, just a bullet fired, could land us in a situation 
jeopardising our life for no good cause. A familiarisation mission in our own 
territory had landed us in precarious position which could be exploited by the 
enemy.

72 

As continuous firing by the Indians did not get any response from the post, they 
stopped firing. After sometime the noise of vehicles starting and moving away 
from Indian post indicated that additional troops were going back to where they 
had come from. By now it was dawn. I told my colleagues that we will sneak back 
into the post unobserved by the enemy making use of available cover which we 
did. At the post we lit fire creating smoke showing our presence with confidence 
that since additional enemy troops had gone back, the enemy post could cause us 
no harm. We prepared our tea and some breakfast at leisure before leaving the 
post for return journey, again using cover so that our leaving the post could not 
be observed by the enemy. This morning episode, though unnecessary, was to 
keep the enemy guessing about our presence or otherwise on the post during 
night and our so effective fire control. On reaching the company headquarters I 
was admonished by the CO on telephone for remaining out of communication for 
two days. I did not tell him the whole story to escape further rebuke. 
At Ranishankail local Police Officer, the Station House Officer (SHO) was an 
elderly, mature and wise person. Known as ‘Bara Babu’ as SHOs were known, he 
was a great help in bringing peace and normalcy in the area reassuring the 
population that Army was there to help restore peace. Our own effort to reach 
out to the people and interact with them by addressing small gatherings in 
different villages brought positive response from the population who had been 
fed with misinformation that Army was ruthlessly killing the local population. The 
spread of fear had a genuine reason because at start of the operation in Dacca on 
the night of 25th March 1971, the Army in Dacca caused death of civilians by some 
indiscriminate firing. Although both Generals responsible for this operation, 
Major General Khadim Raja and Lieutenant General Tikka Khan had been replaced 
but the damage was done. Bulk of the population fled Dacca to the areas in the 
interior of the country spreading the news. When we reached Dacca on 6th April 
and were initially deployed inside the city, my company being in the Jaggannath 
College, the city gave a deserted look. Very few people could be seen on the 
streets of Dacca.  
As the troops started arriving from West Pakistan, they were formed into columns 
and dispatched from Dacca in different directions to clear areas up to the borders

73 

and link up with troops of 14 Division isolated and trapped in certain areas. These 
troops met resistance at the initial stages of operations but the people involved in 
mass killing of non Bengalis escaped to India, retreating at leisure by blowing up 
bridges and culverts in the path of advancing troops to retard movement. While 
retreating towards India the rebels kept spreading panic among the population 
about the Army coming forward to cause them harm.  
Killings and Atrocities 
Large scale killings and atrocities were committed in East Pakistan but who were 
perpetrators of these crimes and who were the victims will be clear from the 
pattern of Army operations explained, at the cost of some repetition, in the 
following paragraphs.  
On 25 March 1971 when military action was ordered in Dacca, very few troops 
were located at the Cantonment in Dacca. The troops of 14 Division, the only 
Army formation in East Pakistan were located in small cantonments all over the 
country. The force had become ineffective because more than half of its strength 
revolted and the remaining force got confined to barracks. West Pakistani officers 
and men serving in the units of East Bengal Regiment and East Pakistan Rifles 
were brutally killed along with their families including small children. A few were 
lucky to survive like Lieutenant Colonel Khizar, commanding a Battalion of the 
East Bengal Regiment because of an act of unusual mercy by his Second in 
Command Major Khalid Musharraf, was handed over to the Indians. Some 
survivors of a company extricating from Kushtia to rejoin their unit were also 
handed over to Indians. These officers and men went through prolonged 
incarceration as POWs in India and were repatriated with the main force after 
over two years of the conclusion of War. Dead bodies of officers killed in places 
like Mymensingh and Thakurgaon were dragged into bazaars as we came to know 
on reaching these places. These officers, posted to East Pakistan Rifles and were 
located away from the few cantonments fell prey to rebels and criminal gangs 
operating with impunity for those months when the State had lost control over 
that part of the country.

74 

About twenty thousand troops were flown by PIA to Dacca in about two weeks’ 
time to reinforce East Pakistan garrison. As the troops arriving from West Pakistan 
started their move outwards from Dacca, each column encountered a number of 
blocking positions in the form of well laid out ambushes. The pattern was same on 
all directions indicating well coordinated plans. As narrated before in the progress 
of our column advancing towards north from Dacca, the bridges on streams were 
blown off making the vehicular movement impossible. The progress therefore 
was slow in accordance with the speed of marching columns which had to 
negotiate water obstacles causing further delay. This gave the rebels freedom to 
indulge in unspeakable atrocities on non Bengalis before retreating towards 
borders at their leisure. The Army columns advancing towards borders thus could 
not lay their hands on the people who needed to be killed.  
During the initial phase, as the troops advanced on different routes outwards of 
Dacca, the civil population of small villages located en route vacated their houses 
and moved away to avoid contact with the Army. In the towns, while most of the 
population had moved away due to the fear, some people stayed on and came 
out on the roads carrying Pakistan flags to avoid firing from the approaching 
columns. By the time the columns had reached up to the borders, a substantial 
number of civilians had also crossed over to India fearful of the approaching 
Army. These people were put up in temporary camps in the border area and were 
later used as recruiting ground for forming of the Mukti Bahini. After few months, 
the people in these camps wanted to come back to harvest their paddy crops. By 
now they were clear that the Army was helping people to restore normal life, not 
killing them. The Indians forcibly detained these people by erecting fences around 
them and placing guards to prevent their move back. They were assured that by 
December they would be allowed to go back. We, on our part had established 
reception camps at different places along the borders for people returning from 
India. These camps would receive very few people trickling in. These people 
would be registered, given some help in the form of food items and allowed to go 
home. 
After declaration of war on 3 December, I received over one thousand people at 
Panjbibi camp. They informed that the guards had been removed from the camps.

75 

The Indians, apart from taking young men for induction in Mukti Bahini were 
indulging in large scale molesting of captive women. Almost all the women of 
child bearing age whom I saw returning to the camp after declaration of war were 
pregnant. Pictures of women in such conditions were printed by the Times 
magazine and other publications which we saw in the POW camps attributing 
crimes to men of Pakistan Army. I had a Bengali young man working with me as 
volunteer who had moved with family to India in the initial days. He had two 
wives. Both had been detained by the Indians. 
At Hilli railway station the border was demarcated with the help of corrugated 
iron sheets placed vertically. The Bengali civilians were being kept in camp 
nearby. At night there would be wailing, shrieks and noise when the Indian troops 
would comb through the camp, a daily routine to get hold of girls to be taken to 
their bunkers for the night. Conversely the Indian propaganda campaign was 
supported by the world media to demonise Pakistan Army by attributing acts of 
molestation of Bengali women. 
Three under strength Divisions of Pakistan Army had been put into a very difficult 
situation of overcoming resistance and restoring normal living conditions. The 
officers commanding these units were well aware that this task could not be done 
by tolerating indiscipline resulting in committing crimes. It was understood that 
any such laxity would be most detrimental in keeping the discipline, so essential 
for success of the mission. During initial stage of the operation, four persons of 
my unit were punished by holding their court martial on charges of trespassing 
private premises. They were dismissed from service and sent to jail on receipt of 
complaints from the civilians. The prevailing environments of constant danger 
subdued carnal desires and passions. Still if someone could afford to indulge in 
such thought for some time, particularly in the rear areas, there were facilities 
available in almost every small and large town where sex workers in defined 
localities would cater to such needs. Given that these army units, operating 
without rest or relief for about ten months in most disadvantageous position 
could retain their cohesion and fighting spirit is ample proof of a disciplined force 
doing its best against great odds.

76 

Similarly the stories of killing of Bengali civilians attributed to Pakistan Army were 
exaggerated beyond limits. At the start of operation from Dacca on 25 March 
1971, some people had been killed due to indiscriminate firing in the city as we 
came to know on reaching Dacca. Main place where people got killed was Dacca 
University where rebels were concentrated. Because of dissatisfaction of High 
Command with handling of the operation on that night of 25/26 March, both the 
Generals responsible were relieved of command. Major General Khadim Raja the 
General Officer Commanding 14 Division was replaced by Major General M Rahim 
Khan and Lieutenant General Tikka Khan, Commander Eastern Command was 
replaced by Lieutenant General Amir Abdullah Khan (A A K) Niazi who arrived in 
East Pakistan in first week of April 1971, assuming command on 10 April 1971. As 
the troops arrived from West Pakistan and started moving to reach borders in 
different directions from Dacca they did not find the people who deserved to be 
killed as explained above.  
Large scale killing of non Bengalis, mostly the people who had migrated from 
India to East Pakistan and the West Pakistanis working in East Pakistan was done 
by Bengali rebels joined by criminal elements during the months of Jan to April 
1971 when the government had no control over the situation. Another spree of 
large scale killings and atrocities on non Bengalis was unleashed after 16 
December 1971 by Bengali armed gangs; like Qadir Bahini in Tangail area north of 
Dacca. The Indian occupation Army took some time to control such bands of 
criminals operating in other areas where non Bengali population was still left 
ultimately confined to ghettos in Dacca. 
The scale of this killing can be determined from the numbers of non Bengali 
population residing in East Pakistan in January 1971 and those left after the war. 
These people were killed in thousands during that period of about four months 
from January to end April 1971 which was of complete lawlessness in the whole 
country. Criminal gangs in the garb of Awami League activists indulged in 
unspeakable atrocities. The hapless non Bengalis would be collected at one place, 
their women were gang raped and then killed. As the Army columns were 
advancing towards borders on different routes on foot, the bridges and culverts 
on the roads having been blown, progress of move was slow and predictable

77 

allowing criminal gangs to indulge in an orgy of killings at their leisure. When a 
column led by Brigadier Jahanzeb Arbab reached Santahar railway junction in 
North Bengal, the place was littered with dead bodies killed moments before 
arrival of the Army. Other columns also witnessed signs of similar atrocities. On 
reaching Mymensingh we found people of a whole colony of non Bengalis 
butchered; even those who had taken refuge in the mosques had not been spared 
and were killed inside the mosques. When our column was moving towards 
Brahamanbaria from Aashuganj Bridge and was recalled to move towards 
Kishorganj towards the north, lots of dead bodies of freshly killed people were 
found lying along the railway line. Recollection of such atrocities becomes more 
painful when the lies and false perceptions blaming Pakistan Army have become 
an accepted truth. 
Dr. Sarmila Bose in her book ‘DEAD RECKONING – Memories of the 1971 
Bangladesh War’ published in 2011 is a research study on the subject of killings 
and atrocities during that war. She spent some years (2003-6) in her research, 
repeatedly travelling to Bangladesh and Pakistan in search of truth. She 
completely negates Indo-Bangladesh narrative on these issues, absolving Pakistan 
Army to have committed rapes, atrocities and murders.  
Raid across Jagdal Hat 
Proceeding with my narrative, as my Company was replaced and brought to 
Thakurgaon in July, Captain Muhammad Afreen was taken away by the CO to lead 
newly formed Commando Platoon. This platoon comprised of about twenty young 
soldiers who went into an operation in Pachagarh area. A rebel position of 
considerable strength was positioned on the approach from Pachagarh into the 
Titulia salient. Since it had been decided not to go into Titulia salient because it 
was difficult to hold a narrow strip of land flanked from three sides by Indian 
territory, this rebel position had not been cleared. The rebels, undisturbed since 
last so many months has started giving trouble.  
Paucity of troops did not allow use of adequate strength to launch a conventional 
attack so it was decided to conduct a raid on those positions. Only two platoons 
could be made available for the raid. While one platoon from 8 Baluch Company

78 

(Captain Akbar Niazi) took up position to engage the rebels from front, Capt 
Afreen with his commandos surprised the rebels by reaching their position from 
the rear by a meticulously planned move. It was a swift raid on a well prepared 
rebel’s defensive position across a stream opposite Jagdal Hat, a small village 
between Amar Khana and Pachagarh. The raid resulted in over sixty rebels killed 
and many more injured at a cost of only one of our soldier losing life and four 
young soldiers getting injured. The rebels suffered injuries while withdrawing and 
fleeing in the open, subjected to our artillery fire using special fuse (high explosive 
air burst) which made the shell burst at some height above ground. These shells 
would cause great damage to exposed persons who were not under cover in 
trenches. Captain Cheema from Artillery, accompanying raiding party told that he 
had personally counted fifty five bodies but there were still more in the area 
where Lieutenant Qaswar Naseer’s section had gone closer to the Indian border. 
The party had to quickly withdraw before any Indian reaction. This raid was classic 
combination of audacity, meticulous planning and preparation by Capt Afreen 
which was hallmark of all his actions during the prolonged struggle. In at least 
three such actions he deserved the highest gallantry awards but as explained 
earlier we were not working for worldly honours because of our peculiar 
circumstances and attitudes. 
A few days’ stay at Thakurgaon was a great relief. Here the Battalion 
Headquarters were located in the old East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) Wing’s 
accommodation. At the entrance of this complex two Bengal tigers were kept in 
cages at the main gate by EPR people. Our unit inherited these from 8 Baluch and 
continued to look after these wild animals. As transpired later, most obnoxious 
stories were invented of putting people into tiger’s cages. Dr. Sarmila Bose in her 
book gives account of those making such allegations which she found false as 
explained in her narrative. During her visits to Pakistan during her research work 
for her book ‘Dead Reckoning, Memories of the 1971 Bangladesh War’, she 
interviewed our then CO, Brigadier Amir Muhammad Khan in connection with this 
story. 
The Battalion Officer’s Mess was located a little away in a Rest House. ‘Chacha’ 
Jahan Dad, the head waiter looked after officers with his peculiar patronizing

79 

style.  Jahan Dad was a dedicated man who served the unit officers with love and 
commitment. As prisoner, he was offered by the Indians to be repatriated earlier 
but he preferred to remain with the officers in POW camp. An ex Havildar, retired 
from one of the old Punjab battalions, he had got enrolled as Mess Waiter with 
the newly raised 34 Punjab in 1966. He died at ripe old age while still serving in 
the unit. In those few days when I could enjoy the food in the Mess, Jahan Dad 
treated me with most delicious pineapples that he had stocked in the refrigerator. 
Those pineapples were recovered from an abandoned field when almost half its 
yield had already been consumed by conservancy staff of the unit. Fruit in East 
Pakistan was in abundance, particularly coconuts, mangoes, litchi, bananas and 
kathal; a fruit with pungent smell and difficult to prepare for eating. Since it was 
known to increase potency, the trouble to peel it was considered worth the effort 
by the locals. It was said that if some part of its pulp stuck one's beard while 
eating carelessly, the pulp could not be removed; rather beard had to be shaved 
off. Banana from a place Munshiganj near Dacca had a special fragrance found 
nowhere else. 
Move to Bogra/ Hilli Sector 
One late evening as I was about to go to sleep after day’s work and consuming 
dinner, there was a knock at the door of the room. Captain Mian Bux Baloch 
informed me that early next morning I was to go to Brigade Headquarters (Bde 
HQ) at Rangpur where I had to meet the General Officer Commanding (GOC) 16 
Division who was visiting the Brigade. Next morning I started for Rangpur.  After 
travelling for about two hours I reached Bde HQ where I was rushed in to meet 
the GOC, Major General Nazar Hussain Shah, a bulky man who knew me from 
Kharian where he was commander of one of the brigades of 9 Division. He 
welcomed me and told me that my company will be operating under 205 Brigade 
and I should start travelling on Road Rangpur – Bogra where somewhere en route 
I will find Brigadier Hassan, Commander 205 Brigade, travelling northwards. I 
started travelling further south looking for the Brigade Commander whom I found 
meeting a small crowd along the roadside in a school near Plasbari, a small town. 
He told me to join him as he was travelling to visit 4 FF located in area Hilli, a 
small village and a railway station on the north-south railway line in North Bengal.

80 

We reached 4 Frontier Force (FF) Battalion HQ located at a small village, rather 
few hutments named Chattni. Here I was briefed by Brigadier Hassan that there 
was a possibility of an Indian attack on 14th August, our Independence Day. Since 
Hilly offered the shortest approach to Indians in reaching Road Rangpur – Bogra, 
main communication artery in North Bengal, my Recce and Support (R&S) 
Company had been provided to the Brigade to strengthen 4 FF positions.  On a 
map, he indicated a track junction which was supposed to be my battle position 
and told me to reconnoiter this position before my company arrived. 
The Indian border at Hilli ran along the railway line for some distance. In fact the 
main entrance of Railway Station Building, built before partition, opened into 
India and was now blocked with the help of corrugated iron (CGI) sheets. A look at 
alignment of the border would indicate that Hilli town should have been part of 
Pakistan but it was learnt that an influential Hindu family owning a factory on that 
side got the alignment changed resulting in a very unusual demarcation of the 
border. There were some other such travesties in deciding border demarcation in 
the northern part of Bengal where some ‘enclaves’ inside Pakistan were Indian 
Territory and vice versa.  
I did my reconnaissance in heavy rain and on very difficult slushy ‘kachha’ tracks. 
The two small American Jeeps, M-38 A1, which I had with me, helped me to 
negotiate the torturous terrain. After two days my company started arriving from 
Thakurgaon area in groups by train disembarking at Hilli Railway Station. I had 
two officers, Captain Afreen and Lieutenant Muhammad Saeed Tariq 
commanding two platoons and Subedar Aziz Khan, an experienced, mature JCO, 
commanding the third platoon.  
The composition of my R&S Company was one anti tank platoon comprising 
twelve 106 mm Recoilless Rifles (an anti tank weapon), another platoon with six 
Medium Machine Guns and third platoon with twelve Light Machine Guns. All 
these weapons were mounted/carried on the jeeps.  On reaching East Pakistan 
the number of anti tank guns was reduced from twelve to six in a Company, 
considering that the area was not much suitable for use of tanks so there was 
lesser need of anti tank weapons. This premise proved wrong particularly in North 
Bengal where the Indians used tanks during the winters as area was suitable for

