241 

Communist/Socialist system of economy. Soviet Union, Warsaw Pact countries, 
China and India were out of the Capitalists hold. This has changed with the 
demise of Soviet Union, China opening up to corporate influences and India 
converting from Socialist to Capitalist mode.  
Pakistan’s role in facilitating contacts between US and China during General 
Yahya’s brief rule and then joining to fight war against Soviet Union in Afghanistan 
was pivotal in enabling Capitalists global control to create the 'New World Order'. 
Having expanded their operations into China, India and Russia, the Wall Street 
Establishment is now in a position to influence policies in China and India, the 
most populous countries of the world and Russia the dominant power on Eurasian 
scene. For their operations, energy and trade corridors will be needed between 
Russia, Central Asia, China, Indian Sub Continent and emerging markets of the 
African Continent. 
Pakistan with its present boundaries facilitates movement in all directions. If 
Pakistan Government formulates and pursues a policy of providing energy and 
trade corridors through its territory, the country will get ready support from the 
interested powers to stabilize and overcome unrest. Plans to create ‘international 
strategic corridor’ through Baloch inhabited areas of Balochistan would be one 
dimensional venture leaving Indian Sub Continent out of the loop of rail and road 
links. Any effort to further dismember Pakistan will thus obstruct inter region 
movement creating conflicts and impediments in conducting global businesses 
which the interested powers would want to avert. 
Pakistan is in a very strong position to benefit from emerging global and regional 
situation by facilitating inter region and global trade. Vital economic interests of 
the global and regional powers will help in resolving conflicts between countries 
of our region like Kashmir dispute between Pakistan and India to facilitate smooth 
operations of trade routes and protection of energy pipelines from Central Asia to 
India.  
Pakistan, a nuclear armed state, the sixth largest country in size of population in 
the worldthat is more than combined population of Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, 
Arabian Peninsula and the Gulf Statesto its west,should not continue to be a

242 

battle ground of global forces playing games as being done since last over three 
decades.  Pakistan’s rulers must cultivatethe vision to understand and capacity to 
formulate and pursue policies commensurate with the country’s strength to 
realize our true potential; playing active role towards regional stability that will 
bring peace and prosperity for the people of Pakistan and the region.  
The Chinese efforts to gain access to Arabian Sea through Pakistan will succeed if 
work on China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) gains momentum,overcoming 
resistance from various quarters and can be completed in stipulated time frame. 
This will be precursor to many more projects in developing trade and energy 
corridors from Russia-Central Asia towards Arabian Sea and India as well as 
between Middle East, Turkey, Iran and India.  
The vital factor for Pakistan is the terms and conditions decided for providing the 
facilities. Hopefully Pakistan will not be exploited through incompetence or 
criminal collusion of our rulers in signing contracts that are against the interests of 
the State and the people of Pakistan.

243 

The Fallacy of Army’s Rule 
Pakistan Army remains under criticism for its role in assuming power in Pakistan, 
not allowing political governments to function, disrupting political process. The 
term ‘Army’s Rule’ though is grossly misleading. It does not reflect true 
disposition of the governance structure when Army Chiefs assume power and 
their inspiration to do so. Decisions to remove civilian governments by Army 
Chiefs were personal, incited, goaded and facilitated by politicians and welcomed 
by general public at the times when these decisions have been taken during the 
past. Role of Army as institution in governance of the country under Army 
generals who assumed power at different times in the country was very limited at 
the initial stages of these take over’s; a small force used to occupy a few buildings 
in the Capital. The Generals soon consolidated their position; getting 
overwhelmingly positive response from public, politicians, bureaucracy and the 
judiciary.  
A general impression among the public which has considerable weight is that our 
rulers, civilians or military are appointed by the US to facilitate implementation of 
their policies in the region. The examples of picking up a quasi fundamentalist 
General Zia ul Haq to confront Godless Russians and later ‘liberal’ General 
Musharraf to dismantle Jihadist network formed to fight against the Russians 
illustrates the point. The latest example is that of 2008 elections, when name of 
Mr. Yusuf Raza Gilani was finalised during meetings at the US Embassy in 
Islamabad, ignoring much expected Mr. Amin Fahim then heading Pakistan 
People’s Party. So it would be more appropriate to say that civilians or military, 
our rulers are appointed by the US, rather the Global Capitalists Establishment. 
In the presence of retired Lieutenant General  Hamid Gul who was well versed 
with the influence of external forces in our State affairs because of his experience 
as head of our premier spy agency, I uttered the words about the period of 
‘General’s rule’. He promptly corrected me that it is American Agent’s rule not 
General’s rule. If any proof was ever required, one can refer to Lieutenant 
General Shahid Aziz’s book where he narrates American’s methods to cultivate 
officers detailed on career courses in USA.  So the Army’s rule is a gross 
misnomer. Civilians or Military, we are actually being ruled by the agents of

244 

Global Capitalists Establishment, appointed through the US Administration who 
implement their plans.  
Briefly reviewing the past, when President Ayub Khan took over control of the 
Government of Pakistan, the country was already under martial law imposed by 
Mr Iskandar Mirza, the President of Pakistan; soon removed because of his 
continuing intrigues. Ayub Khan ruled for over ten years, putting off his uniform 
soon after assuming power and ruled as a civilian, elected Head of State for rest 
of the period. Except for a few senior officers inducted in his government, the 
Army had nothing to do with governance of the country. A new constitution was 
adopted replacing parliamentary system with the presidential system. While the 
national and provincial parliaments played their role of essential law making, the 
central and provincial bureaucracy played pivotal role in administration, the task 
which they performed effectively.  
If a test of good governance is the level of comfort and ease in lives of common 
people, Ayub Khan’s era was the best period for people of Pakistan during the last 
seven decades since creation of Pakistan. His Himalayan blunder of drifting into 
war with India due to machinations of small group led by his foreign minister 
adversely affected his control over affairs of the State. During his last months in 
office he was virtually a prisoner, isolated and made ineffective by General Yahya 
Khan who took over the Government in 1969.  
General Yahya, in his two tumultuous years organised general elections which 
resulted in breakup of the country when a major group of elected membersfrom 
West Pakistan led by Mr. Z A Bhutto refused to accept election results and 
declined to attend National Assembly session. 
After getting the country dismembered in December 1971, Z A Bhutto assumed 
power as Civilian Chief Martial Law Administrator in his New Pakistan, an 
unparalleled mockery.  In about seven years of his rule he went after everything 
good the country had achieved till then. He nationalised the thriving industries, 
putting government officials to run industries with obvious results. He severely 
eroded the prestige and efficiency of civil services by inducting his party workers 
in the services in his parallel entry scheme. He created a new internal security

245 

force, the Federal Security Force (FSF) putting people of dubious character in 
forming this force that was used to harass his opponents. He created conditions 
where the Army’s one star generals came to a stage of refusing to obey orders 
given by Army High Command. In Lahore three Brigadiers refused to use troops 
under their command in dealing with agitation triggered by rigging in elections by 
Bhutto’s Party.  
In the Armed forces he upgraded posts of Naval and Air Force Chiefs to four star 
ranks equal to that of the Army, ignoring the fact that ranks in the armed forces 
are based on the force they command. The Navy, with about twenty thousand 
personnel was rightly being commanded by a two star Admiral and the Air Force 
with about forty thousand strength commanded by a three star Air Marshal. The 
Army comprising about three hundred thousand persons then was commanded 
by a four star General.  A new post, Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee was 
created along with its headquarters, the post required to be rotated between the 
three services in turn. This was basically to downgrade importance of Army 
Chief’s position. It is to the credit of services chiefs during all these years that the 
armed forces are working in harmony despite efforts to cause dissentions in 
creating an unnecessary organisational structure.  
After about seven years misrule of Mr. Z A Bhutto, General Zia ul Haq assumed 
power in Pakistan. In hindsight it becomes evident that Zia ul Haq was brought in 
by global capitalist interests to confront the Russians in Afghanistan and block 
expansion of  Iranian revolution, both events happening in 1979, about one and 
half year after the man chosen to deal with the outfall was put in place.  Pakistan 
provided critical support to Afghans in their fight against Russian occupation of 
their country. As a result Pakistan had to face multiple threats, series of 
devastative explosions resulting in large scale deaths and destruction. Pakistan 
had also to support a very large number of Afghan refugees, at one time 
estimated to be over five millions, aggravating the country’s economic, law and 
order, drugs and illegal weapons problems which have become endemic, defying 
control even after passage of over three decades. Zia initiated financial 
malpractices. Like bribing legislators by placing large funds at their disposal in the 
name of development projects which was not their job, he placed unaccountable

246 

funds at the disposal of senior Generals of the Army, smearing clean and honest 
working within Army. Generals like scholarly E H Dar and some others quietly left 
prematurely finding the change stifling.The corrosive effect of Zia’s policy 
adversely affected the image of the Army. Before his period officers and men of 
Pakistan Army were not expected to be dishonest in financial matters. 
Maintaining private funds that endorsed misuse of money adversely affected the 
image of the Army despite the fact that barring some exceptions the Army 
retained and abided by the basic values of honesty and integrity. To quote just 
one example, a few years back while visiting Captain Ghulam Muhammad Awan 
my friend in his real estate office, I found one Brigadier Iftikhar, EME,an elderly 
man who had come in connection with sale of his plot. He had agreed to a price 
on telephone. Within about half an hour as I was there the man received calls, 
offering him a million rupees more than what he had committed verbally with my 
friend. The Brigadier was short and crisp in replies that he had already given a 
word and could not go back on that. He was product of those environments 
where a junior could not dare offer to pay a bill in presence of a senior,expenses 
on guests visiting the units were shared according to sliding scale, the senior most 
paying the maximum and there was no concept of offering gifts to seniors. After 
about a month when I went to visit my friend again, he had gone to attend 
funeral of Brigadier Iftikhar who had completed his journey of life. Such conduct 
was the hallmark expected from the personnel of the Pakistan Army that it has 
largely retained despite Zia ul Haq’s damaging impact.   
After Zia was eliminated, a decade of civilian rule saw two political parties led by 
Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif taking turns in short stints. Political leadership 
proved unequal to the daunting tasks faced by the country. Both leaders did not 
display maturity in their conduct demanded by their exalted position, nor were 
they correctly advised from within their parties which did not develop into 
institutions. Their musical chairs ended when General Musharraf assumed power 
in 1999 by removing Nawaz Sharif’s government. 
General Musharraf ruled for about nine years, getting support of a group of 
politicians who were previously allied with Nawaz Sharif. As the events unfolded 
soon after his taking over, he, like Zia ul Haq, was also chosen by the global

247 

powers to support them in their plans to control energy resources of the region 
by occupying Afghanistan. As Army Chief, he did immense damage to interests of 
Pakistan, helping India by launching Kargil misadventure. India which could not 
form a government despite repeated elections after 1996 got their political 
system stabilised after Kargil. The timings of Indian general elections during these 
years reveal real cause of Musharraf’s action. Elections in India were held in Apr–
May 1996 but as the coalition government formed could not stay in power due to 
dissentions, the process had to be repeated in Feb- March 1998. The government 
formed after these elections also became unstable. India again went into 
countrywide electoral process in Sep-Oct 1999, just after Kargil war (May–Jul 
1999) forming a stable government that completed five years. Organising general 
elections at such brief intervals in a country like India, a sub continent rather than 
a country, with population of more than one billion people is not a normal 
happening. India was faced with a very grave situation of instability and possible 
fragmentation 
into 
different 
parts 
with 
simmering 
discontent 
since 
independence. External threat posed by Pakistan through Musharraf’s action was 
fully exploited by the Indians, generating unprecedented media hype on war with 
Pakistan that helped them to overcome internal discord. 
After the 9/11 drama created as an excuse, the US occupied Afghanistan, rather 
its ‘Af-Pak’ theatre of operations, pushing Al Qaida linked fighters into tribal areas 
of Pakistan. Renewed fighting in Afghanistan, now against the US and her allies, 
disturbed peace on our western borders. The situation having gone beyond 
control of para military forces traditionally deployed in tribal areas, Pakistan Army 
had to be deployed on the western borders to fight against terrorist groups, 
created and supported from Afghanistan. India established their support bases in 
the form of ‘consulates’ in Afghanistan near our borders with Afghanistan to help 
these terrorists. The fighting caused Pakistan immense losses in men and 
material, has destroyed our economy and caused incalculable damage to interests 
of Pakistan. Security installations throughout the country remain targets, attacked 
many times with considerable damage. Federally Administered Tribal Areas 
(FATA), Balochistan and Karachi are particularly affected, remaining parts of the 
country also having lost peaceful living conditions for the citizen.  Pakistan lost its 
prestige during Musharraf’s rule despite being a nuclear power.

248 

The role of Zia ul Haq and Pervez Musharraf in working for global power’s interest 
becomes easier to understand by reading Lieutenant General (retired) Shahid 
Aziz’s book ‘Yeh Khamoshi Kab Tak’ published in 2012. While doing courses in the 
US he narrates US Defence department persons asking him to work for them with 
the incentive that his interest will be looked after as being done for selected 
officers of friendly countries. He also mentions an officer doing course with him 
trying to persuade him to visit Chile, South America, on vacation with family to 
meet a senior person of ‘Free Masons’ with similar, rather better incentives. It is 
obvious that Shahid Aziz was not the only person offered with the choice. It was a 
normal practice by US operatives to work on promising people in all spheres of 
our decision making bodies to serve their interests. 
Army’s rule is therefore a gross misnomer. The Army as institution does not select 
its Chiefs not does it ever ask them to take over the governments. As explained in 
preceding paragraphs the Army has no role in governing the county when the 
Generals take over governments. They, during the past have used existing State 
governance structure which offers no resistance to their taking over and get ready 
support from eager politicians to prolong their rule. 
Propaganda Themes Used Against Army  
Some of the themes used to criticize Pakistan Army, apart from takeover of 
governments by Army Chief’s at different times, are the development and 
commercial projects associated with Army. While takeover of governments by 
Generals, their causes and consequences have been covered in the preceding 
chapters, a brief background of these projects would help to remove 
misunderstandings on these issues. 
Defense Housing Schemes (DHAs) 
When the Governments at local, provincial and central levels failed to undertake 
projects to meet increasing housing demands of the growing population; the gap 
was filled to some extent by the Defense Housing Schemes in major cities of 
Karachi, Lahore and Rawalpindi/Islamabad.  It all started due to enterprising spirit 
of a group of naval officers in Karachi, by the name of Pakistan Defence Officers 
Cooperative Housing Society Ltd in March 1953, a humble beginning with

249 

allotment of mere 76.2 acres of land. A retired Army Officer Lieutenant Colonel 
Nizam ud Din served its secretary for a long period making it a success story 
through his dedicated efforts. In nineteen sixties as I remember the young officers 
sold their rights for the price a scooter. Italian ‘Vespa’ brand scooters has come 
into use before motor cycles eased them out from the market after few years. 
The property dealers working in Karachi would visit cantonments in other parts of 
Pakistan and buy the rights fromofficers for paltry sums. Officers of the Army 
during nineteen sixties and seventies were not aware of material benefits lying in 
these plots for them in future. Most of us did not know that we were eligible to 
get plots, thinking that such befits come at the end of the service. Pakistan Army 
was not concerned with the scheme in any way for many years. No Army 
manpower or budget was ever used in the scheme. Later when the scheme 
expanded, a measure of supervision was provided through the local garrison 
commander to oversee its functioning.  
Seeing success of Karachi experience, similar schemes were launched, in Lahore in 
early eighties and for Rawalpindi/Islamabad starting in mid-nineties. Land for 
these schemes has been bought from land owners through money paid by the 
members and development undertaken on receipt of periodic installments paid 
by members. Retired personnel of the armed forces are employed in managing 
the schemes with top slots now held by serving officers. No State funds or State 
land have ever been used in these schemes. Some irregularities that came to light 
in these schemes were promptly addressed and corrective measures enforced. A 
major problem arose in Rawalpindi/Islamabad scheme courtesy Malik Riaz of 
Bahria Town with disastrous consequences for persons responsible from the 
Army.  A three star General had to commit suicide soon after retirement.  
Overall it has been a great service to the people of Pakistan with very small effort 
by the Army in organizing and patronizing these schemes that provide secure 
living for a large number of families, major population in DHAs being non-defense 
related citizens who bought the properties in these well managed schemes.   
Criticism on this account is therefore most unwarranted.

250 

Fauji Foundation 
A Post War Services Reconstruction Fund (PWSRF) was established in 1945 for 
Indian War Veterans who served the British Crown during World War II. At the 
time of partition (1947) when Pakistan came into being, the balance fund was 
transferred to Pakistan in the proportion of its post World War-II veterans. Till 
1953, the fund remained in the custody of the civilian Government, when in 1954 
it was transferred to the Army. 
Instead of disbursing the balance fund of about Rs 18.2 million (USD 0.2 million) 
among the beneficiaries, it was invested it in establishing a Textile Mill. Later from 
the income of the textile mill, a 50 bedded TB hospital was established at 
Rawalpindi. 
As a charitable trust started in 1954, Fauji Foundation is operating on a 
completely self-sustaining basis, channels approximately 80% of the profits from 
commercial ventures into social protection programs that serve a beneficiary 
population representing approximately 7% of the country’s population. Only 
some retired army persons are employed by the Foundation, its main strength 
being civilian professionals from various fields.  
Army Welfare Trust 
Started in 1971 with a meager amount from welfare fund, the organization 
progressed due to honest hard work of one man; Major General (retired) Fahim 
Haider Rizvi. Assisted by a competent team of professionals, he made the trust a 
great success. No State funds or defense budget was used in the projects that 
now employs over eleven thousand persons and is contributing positively to 
national economy.

