151 

were shocked when the proceedings were received back for promulgation of 
sentence. Lieut General Tikka Khan, the Punjab Martial Law Administrator had 
mitigated the sentence to just two years simple imprisonment for each criminal.  
The existing judicial system is criminal friendly and needs basic changes where the 
judges should be tasked to ensure provision of justice instead of merely disposing 
of cases as presented before them and avoid hiding behind devious and crafty 
clauses of law to let off obvious offenders. 
On completing over two years in command, I stayed on in Quetta being posted as 
staff officer, GSO-1 (Training) at Headquarters 12 Corps. Lieutenant Colonel 
Ghulam Abbas Awan (later Brigadier) serving in the unit took over command on 
promotion. Under him the unit soon moved to Nawabshah in Sindh for anti dacoit 
campaign which it did with remarkable success, keeping its traditions alive under 
the dynamic leadership of the CO, reputed for courage, initiative and unbounded 
energy. Ghulam Abbas is younger brother of Brigadier Amir Muhammad Khan the 
unit’s CO in East Pakistan. Brigadier’s Amir’s son Lieutenant Colonel Alam Amir 
also joined the unit on being commissioned and got its command, a singular 
hounour; his father and uncle having commanded the unit earlier.  
With experience of staff work at the Brigade earlier, I felt most comfortable in 
working at the Corps Headquarters. Brigadier (later Major General) Zahoor Malik 
a most competent, firm and demanding officer was Chief of Staff, the Corps being 
then commanded by Lieutenant General Khushdil Khan (KK) Afridi. Baluchistan 
during that period was most peaceful province. The troops were doing their 
routine peacetime training located in small cantonments at Zhob, Khuzdar and 
Sibi apart from the main cantonment of Quetta.

152 

Army Hajj Contingent 1984 
While serving at Headquarters 12 Corps, I got the chance of performing Hajj, a 
religious obligation, as part of Army Hajj Contingent in 1984. The Army had 
introduced a scheme of sending a small contingent of the Pakistan Army to 
perform Hajj travelling by road, a facility which got discontinued after few years. 
A contingent of about one hundred and forty persons comprised all ranks of the 
Pakistan Army including about fifteen officers.  It was a unique experience of road 
travel, enjoying hospitality of the Armies of Iran, Turkey, Syria and Jordan that no 
amount of spending money could provide. It merits narration.  
Our contingent assembled at Rawalpindi and after necessary preparations started 
its journey on 29 July 1984. The route to be taken was through Iran, Turkey, Syria 
and Jordan to reach Saudi Arabia. The shorter route i.e. from Iran to Iraq and 
Saudi Arabia was not available because of ongoing war between Iran and Iraq 
during that period. Our convoy consisted of four large buses, a jeep and a small 
ambulance vehicle. Elaborate reception arrangements had been made at every 
place where we were to stay, senior officers of the garrison receiving the 
contingent with usual military fanfare, the bands in attendance. This special 
treatment continued throughout the journey in Pakistan as well as the countries 
through which it passed.  The convoy was escorted by the civil and military police 
of host countries from Rawalpindi to Tabuk in Saudi Arabia. A date wise progress 
on journey of the contingent is briefly recounted as follows: 
 29 July 84 – From Rawalpindi to Lahore via Kharian. Raining throughout the 
day. Very pleasant weather. Night stay at Lahore. 
 30 July 84 – Lahore to Multan via Faisalabad, Jhang, Shorkot, Kabirwala. 
Main road i.e. Lahore – Sahiwal Multan road in bad shape needing repairs. 
 31 July 84 – Stay at Multan and visits to Mazars of Hazrat Sheikh 
Bahauddin Zakria, his grandson Hazrat Sheikh Rukne Alam, Hazrat Shah 
Shams Sabzwari. 
 01 August 84 – From Multan to Sukker via Bahawalpur – Rahimyar Khan. 
Lunch at Rahimyar Khan. A hot day. At Sukker, a non garrison town, 27

153 

Punjab made excellent arrangement for the night stay attending to minute 
details. I was to command this excellent unit a year later. 
 02 August 84 – Sukker to Quetta via Sibi where we stopped for lunch. Sibi 
was not as hot as could be expected. Starting from Sukker at 6 AM we 
reached Quetta by 7 PM, were received and addressed by the Corps 
Commander. 
 03/04 August 84 – Stay at Quetta for rest and maintenance of vehicles. 
 05 August 84 – From Quetta to Dalbandin. Night stay under arrangements 
Kharan Rifles.  
 06 August 84 – Left Dalbandin early and after having tea at Nokkundi, 
reached Taftan by 1500 hrs for crossing over to Iran. Reached Zahidan for 
night stay. Were lodged in some hostel. 
 07 August 84 – Reached Kirman in the evening. Had lunch in Mahan in the 
premises of Shah Niamatullah Wali’s Mazar. Commander’s jeep overturned 
15 km short of Kirman due to the driver dosing off. It rolled down from the 
highway into a considerable depth. Because of sandy terrain no one got 
injured although the jeep was severely damaged and left there. Not even 
Brigadier Akram’s glasses which he was wearing got damaged. 
 08 August 84 – Reached Isfahan in the evening. Lunch in the area of a 
mosque in Yazad. 
 09 August 84 – Stayed in Isfahan in the Arty Centre. Visited the famous 
Mosque of Shahs of the Safavid period, now renamed Masjid e Imam. Also 
saw Masjid e Sheikh Lutfullah and the main polo ground in the same 
vicinity. Also were taken to Gulistan e Shuhada. Offered Fateha. A large 
number of very young people are buried here as apparent from the 
photographs displayed on every grave. These young men have died during 
the ongoing war with Iraq and activities of Mujahidin e Khalaq a counter 
revolutionary organization.

154 

 10 August 84 – From Isfahan to Qazvin. Passed through Tehran in the 
afternoon.  
 11 August 84 – From Qazvin to Tabriz, road passing through beautiful 
mountainous area. Had lunch on the roadside in a clump of trees. Stay in 
Tabriz comfortable except bathrooms most inadequate. 
 12 August 84 – From Tabriz to Agri in Turkey, crossing the border in the 
afternoon. At the borders a very large concentration of vehicles awaiting 
clearance. Our crossing was very smooth. Had lunch on the Iranian side of 
the borders and parted with the Iranian Liaison party led by Col Ali Larijani 
who made untiring efforts to make our journey through Iran smooth. Brig 
Trimzi (Artillery) our Defense Attaché also remained with us to help us 
during the journey. On the Turkish side we were received by our Military 
Attaché Col Jilani, (Artillery). The terrain and crop pattern was little 
different, the people also looked more open and happy. At Agri, lodged in 
‘Ordu Evi’ that was very comfortable. The General Officer in the area came 
to meet our party. 
Some impressions while travelling through Iran were that after the fall of Raza 
Shah Pahlavi as a result of a revolutionary movement led by a religious leader 
Ayatollah Imam Khomeini in 1979, Iran was going through difficult times. A war 
with Iraq was causing lot of casualties to the young men. The economy was 
suffering due to war and the hostility of western world. As we entered Iran from 
Zahidan we found the roads very good with parking places made at frequent 
intervals. From Zahidan to Kirman the road passes through hot, arid region with 
hardly any vegetation. This area, the province of Iranian Baluchistan-Siestan is 
sparsely populated. The terrain is just like our area of Naukundi – Taftan. From 
Kirman onwards to Isfahan climate was a bit cooler. There were fruit gardens 
particularly of Pistacho along the route to Isfahan. This region is like our Quetta 
but the valleys are more open and the mountains not so high. The whole areas 
seem under populated with vast stretches of land lying waste. The revolution had 
one most visible effect that women were wearing ‘chadors’ a large piece of cloth 
covering the women from head to tows. We did not see any woman with her 
head uncovered. This was a complete change from the period of Shah when the

155 

dress code particularly in the cities was known to be largely western. People like 
to get out in the open places and parks. In fact on our first day of entering Iran as 
we travelled northwards from Taftan in the afternoon we saw a few families 
enjoying picnic in a clump of poplar trees. They had spread mats under the thin 
shade of these trees. To us it was a strange site because we do not consider 
poplar trees shady and suitable to serve as picnic point. But as we moved on we 
found that the area up to Kirman was devoid of vegetation and such clumps of 
poplar trees provided whatever shade they could. North of Kirman the terrain 
changed and as we progressed in our journey towards north and North West 
there was abundant vegetation and orchards particularly in the valleys around 
Tabriz.  Overall impression is that the war was causing large casualties of young 
men and the adverse effect on economy had taken away the happiness and 
affluence from the Iranian society. One could see large number of incomplete 
building structures waiting for better times to be completed. 
 13 August 84 – Started from Agri in the morning, had tea at Pontos and 
lunch at Tetvan on the western end of Van lake. Stopped at the Mazar of 
Hazrat Owais Qarni to offer Fateha and reached Diyarbakir late in the 
evening. This was a longer leg of journey passing through the Kurdish area 
where Army is deployed to deal with the unrest. 
 14 August 84 – Stayed at Diyarbakir. Were lodged in ‘Ordu Evi’ a very 
comfortable place. Had a round of the city which still retains parts of the 
old outer walls intact. Visited Mazar of Hazrat Suleman bin Khalid bin 
Walid.  
 15 August 84 – Started for Gaziantep. Had lunch at Urfa the birth place of 
Hazrat Ibrahim (AS). Visited Gulzar e Ibrahimi where he was thrown into 
fire by King Nimrud. Also saw the cave where he was reportedly born. 
Water of the spring in the cave is known to have healing effects for 
diseases. Reached Gaziantep in the evening and lodged in the ‘Ordu Evi’. 
Had dinner arranged with local dignitaries. 
 16 August 84 – Started from Gaziantep and crossed the border into Syria. 
Visited Mazar and Mosque of Hazrat Zakria at Halb (Allepo). Visited Mazars

156 

of Hazrat Khalid bin Walid and Hazrat Umar bin Abdul Aziz at Homs. 
Reached Damascus late in the evening and were lodged in the officers’ 
club in the city. Being weekend, the people were enjoying western style 
music and dancing in the club. 
 17 August 84 - From Damascus to Maan in Jordan. Very well arranged 
lunch at Zarqa. Night at Maan was chilly and arrangements inadequate to 
cope with it. Tasted very bitter coffee served in small cups. 
 18 August 84 – From Maan to Tabuk. Five hours spent on the border 
crossing where the Saudis checked everything in the luggage and the buses 
very thoroughly. Before that the border crossing so far i.e. from Pakistan 
into Iran, from Iran to Turkey, from Turkey to Syria and from Syria to 
Jordan had been a big party at every crossing with tea, coffee and snakes 
laid out on the respective sides of the countries and the military bands 
playing.  
At Tabuk stayed with the Pakistani Brigade designated as Khalid bin Walid 
Brigade, then being commanded by Brigadier (later Major General) Mehboob 
Alam. The facilities provided to the Brigade in this specially built separate 
cantonment were very good. The officers however were unhappy because they 
were away from their families for a long time. Lodged in ‘Ziafa’, their guest house, 
this was the best accommodation I had the chance to live in so far. Large room 
with best quality thick slabs of marble, onyx used in  the bath room, elegant 
furniture and fittings and heavy expensive crystal decorations made it very special 
facility. According to the officers this was nothing as compared to the guest 
houses in use of Saudis which were far more lavish and luxuriant. 
 19 August 84 – The comfort of the accommodation and the facilities could 
not be enjoyed because of continuous coordination meetings and other 
organizational activities. Visited Masjid e Rasul (SA) at Tabuk. 
 20 August 84 – Started from Tabuk in the morning and reached Madina tun 
Nabi (SA) at night. Here we were lodged in a building whose only 
advantage was that it was closer to the Masjid e Nabvi. Six to nine persons 
were occupying one room and the hygienic conditions were deplorable.

157 

 21 August 84 – In the morning offered first prayers in the Masjid e Nabvi 
(SA). The main mosque was difficult to approach because of great rush. We 
got the place under the sheds outside the main mosque. 
 At about 10 AM I presented myself at the ROZA-E-RASUL Sallallaho 
Alaihe Wassallam. With utmost humbleness I praised Allah Almighty for 
His great kindness in affording me this opportunity. The feelings I had 
while offering Salat-o-Salam at the Roza cannot be described in words. 
 Ejaz Akmal, my wife’ younger brother who was then at Jeddah working for 
Shafaat GmBh had asked his friends in Medina to see me.Mr. Sarwar with 
another person came to see. 
 22 August 84 – After Isha prayers visited Shuhada – Uhad graves, the site 
of battle of Uhad and 6xMasaajid made on the site of Battle of Khandaq on 
the names of Sahaba e Kiram, Hazrat Abu Bakar, Hazrat Omar, Hazrat Ali, 
Hazrat Salman Farsi and Hazrat Fatima tuz Zahra. Also visited Masjid e Zu 
Qiblatain. 
 23 August 84 - Routine of prayers and Ziarat. Not feeling well because of 
bad throat. 
 24 August 84 – Greater rush in the Mosque at the time of Jumaprayers. 
 25 August 84 – Ziarat e Rauza and prayers 
 26 August 84 – Ejaz Akmal came from Jeddah. Spent a very good day in his 
company visiting his friend in the city. 
 27 August 84 – Prayers and Ziarat 
 28 August 84 –Forty prayers completed at Masjid – Nabvi. Mr Ghafoor of 
Mehran Hotel took us for outing/drive. His reference was given by 
Brigadier (then Lt Col) Fateh Malik. 
 29 August 84 – Purchased some gift to be taken back for officials.

158 

 30 August 84 – Presented at the Rauza – Nabi (SA) to offer last Salat o 
Salam of current journey as on way back we did not plan to stop at 
Medina. 
 31 August 84 – Started from Medina at about 08:15 AM. Stopped at Bir Ali 
to get into the state of ‘Ihram’ for performing ‘Umra’. Reached Mecca – 
Muazzama around 4 PM but took a long time to reach the accommodation 
because the vehicles had to pass through hundreds of thousands of people 
moving in the area of Harram. Offered Asr, Maghrib and Isha prayers at the 
place we were lodged and started for Harram that was about two 
kilometers away at midnight. Entered the Harram from Bab-e-Fatah (old 
Bab e Salam). The sight of Kaaba was stunning and for some time I stood 
in awe forgetting the world around me. This was the place we had been 
turning our faces to since childhood during our prayers and here I was, a 
humble creature physically present to see it. It took some time to recover 
my senses and we started the process of performing Umra with utmost 
feelings of reverence.  At this time there was not much rush during the 
Tawaf, the seven rounds around Kaaba and Sa’i, the walk between Safa 
and Marwa, so we performed all ‘Manasik’ of Umra with deliberation and 
ease. Stayed in Harram till after Fajar prayers and then returned to the 
lodging. 
 01 September 84 – Stayed in lodging during the day and went to Harram 
for Maghrib prayers. After Magrib prayers did Tawaf in the peak rush hours 
to get the feel of it. Stayed till after Isha prayers. 
 02 September 84 – Went to Harram in the later part of the night at about 
2:30 AM and remained there till after Fajar prayers. During day prepared 
for the next day’s move to Mina. It was decided that move should be 
between 1 to 2 AM when our buses can be brought from parking, avoiding 
traffic jam. 
 03 September 84 – Moved to Mina at about 03:30 AM and reached 
without stopping or getting into traffic jam’ a real surprise considering the 
scale of movement towards Mina that day when everyone was to move to

159 

Mina. It was mainly due to our Guide Mr. Ashraf, a student at the Medina 
University detailed with the contingent, who because of his experience 
with earlier parties advised on the timings of the move. Camp at Mina was 
well organized. We established our cook house, a deviation from earlier 
practice, which served us well. This was advised by Ejaz Akmal when he 
came to see me at Medina. Weather was quite hot.  
 04 September 84 - (9th Zil Haj) Moved to the plain of Arafat starting a little 
late in the morning on the advice of Mr. Ashraf our guide and reached by 
11 AM without difficulty. Stayed at Arafat till after sunset. This stay is the 
main event of Haj. Effort to reach Masjid-e-Nimra was not successful and 
we prayed in the area of our tents. 
 Night 4/5 September 84 – Started move from Arafat at about 8.30 PM 
towards Muzdalfa and soon got into traffic jam. Covered 4 kilometers in 
two hours. Spent rest of the night at Muzdalfa picking up pebbles for 
throwing at the ‘Satans’ later during the process of Rammi. 
 05 September 84 (10th Zil Haj) Started from Muzdalfa for Mina after Fajar 
prayers covering the distance of one and half kilometers in about two 
hours. A party was sent on foot to the slaughter house for offering 
‘Qurbani’ (sacrifice) of animals on behalf of all of us. The party confirmed 
to have completed the process at slaughter house after which we had our 
heads shaved (the ritual of Halaq). ‘Rammi’ the symbolic stone throwing 
on the ‘Satan” at three sites in Mina was also done on first of the three 
days of this process. Tawaf e Ziarat, the third essential act to complete the 
Haj was done in the afternoon by some members of the party. Rest of us 
went for it on the next day. It is to be done during the three days stay at 
Mina on 10, 11 and 12 Zil Haj.  
 06 September 84 (11th Zil Haj). Went for Tawaf e Ziarat in the morning and 
did Rammi in the afternoon. 
 07 September 84 (12th Zil Haj). A very tough day. Prepared for move to 
Mecca and went for Rammi by mid day. The rush at first Jamra was 
crushing. I got lifted up in the crowd and landed on ground some distance

160 

away. Started from Mina at 4 PM for Mecca but could not enter the city 
despite trying different routes /approaches. Finally by 2330 hours decided 
to stay in the buses for remaining part of the night outside the city.  
 08 September 84 – Entered Mecca city in the morning at about 0730 hours 
and reached our lodging which was crowded because another group of 
army persons had also landed there. There was some unpleasantness 
because one Colonel Sultan refused to vacate a room despite being told by 
Brigadier Ahsan Bhatti his group leader. Ejaz Akmal came at about 11 PM 
and took me to his place in Jeddah. 
 09 September 84 – Stayed with Ejaz during the day. One Mr. Ashiq Qureshi 
from Multan and his wife were also staying with Ejaz. We kept roaming in 
the markets till 10 PM because the lady guest wanted to see some fancy 
fittings for her house. Purchased toys for children. Ejaz dropped me back 
to Mecca by about 1 AM during the night 9/10 Sep. 
 10 September 84 – Nothing significant. 
 11 September 84 – Spent the day inside Harram offering prayers and 
performed Tawaf e Wida after Isha prayers. 
 12 September 84 – Return journey started. Left Mecca around 7 AM and 
after delays at a number of check posts reached the area of Khyber after 
bypassing Medina.  Stayed in a roadside camp established by some road 
construction/maintenance company. The place was manned by Pakistanis 
who were very happy to be our hosts. The person in charge hailing from 
Kalarkahar/Bochal area remained awake throughout the night and kept 
serving us very good tea. He and his colleagues were thus kept very busy 
because half of our contingent was having stomach trouble.  We had taken 
our meal from a roadside stall in Khyber area which comprised bread, 
cheese lying open in a large tin and cold drinks. This food was cause of 
trouble. 
 13 September 84 – Reached Tabuk in the evening just before Maghrib 
prayers.

