161 

 14 September 84 – Stayed in Tabuk. This was rest and maintenance day 
and we were greatly helped by our hosts the Pakistani troops in that 
cantonment. Risaldar Nawaz from our neighbouring village Akwal came 
over to meet and also three young men from my village, Hayat, Ghulam 
Rasul and Ijaz Hyder met and presented a Rado wrist watch, a very 
gracious and thoughtful gesture. Risaldar Nawaz had given me a prayer 
mat and Capt Dr Khizer from Akwal; although not present, had left a 
present (wall clock). 
 15 September 84 – From Tabuk to Amman after crossing the border. Were 
lodged in a small hotel in the Zarqa Cantonment. 
 16 September 84 – Conducted tour to see display of equipment and a field 
hospital in Zarqa cantonment. Reception by our Ambassador, Dr Ihsan 
Rashid in the evening. Dr Ihsan an educationist informed that literacy rate 
in Jordan was high. 37% of population was in the educational institutions. 
The country has no oil or other significant resources but the manpower 
resource is well organized. There was hardly any crime in the population of 
2.4 million.  
 17 September 84 – Busy day. Visited Jordan River Valley, Dead Sea and 
Mazars of Hazrat Maaz bin Jabal, Shurhabil bin Hasana, Abu Ubaida bin 
Omar Aljarrah, Zarrar bin Uzwar all famous and familiar names of the early 
period of Muslim history. Also saw the place of the prophet Hazrat Shoaib. 
Dinner by our Defence Attaché, Group Captain Jawaid Ahsan. 
 18 September 84 – From Amman to Damascus. Visited Mazar of Sayeda 
Zainab and the graves of a large number of Sahaba e Rasul (SA) including 
both Moazzins of the time of Prophet (SA) Hazrat Bilal and Hazrat Abdullah 
bin Rawaha in Damascus graveyard. Visited the famous Banu Umayyad 
Mosque, earlier it was St Paul’s Church. Prophet Hazrat Yahya’s Mazar is 
inside the Mosque. Outside the Mosque visited Mazar of Sultan Salahuddin 
Ayubi. Visited industrial exhibition in the evening. Stayed in the officers’ 
club.

162 

 19 September 84 – Started from Damascus early for Gaziantep crossing 
over to Turkey by about 4 PM. In the evening sumptuous banquet by the 
local Corps Commander for officers at the ‘Ordu Evi’ where we were 
staying. 
 20 September 84 – From Gaziantep to Diyarbakir. Stay at ‘Ordu Evi’. 
 21 September 84 – Stay in Diyarbakir. Visit to the local Bazaar.  
 22 September 84 – From Diyarbakir to Agri. Dinner with the General 
Officer who had done his staff course at Quetta in 1959 and remembered 
about old days at the Command and Staff College. Very comfortable stay in 
the ‘Ordu Evi’. 
 23 September 84 – From Agri to Tabrez crossing the border into Iran. 
Tabriz is the main city in a beautiful and fertile valley. The weather was 
rather chilly. 
 24 September 84 – An unfortunate incident occurred just before journey 
started in the morning. When we got onto our vehicles and were lined up 
for move, an NCO, Havildar Muhammad Sharif of Army Medical Corps 
complained of pain in his stomach. He had complained of pain earlier also 
during the journey and was given an injection by the medical team 
travelling with us. The medical officer Major Yusuf told a nursing assistant 
to give him another injection. As soon as he was administered the injection 
his condition worsened and he died within minutes. Apparently, nursing 
assistant mistakenly gave a wrong injection while the medical officer failed 
to check it negligently. Our Defence Attaché and the Iranian Liaison 
Officers made arrangements to send the body to Pakistan. After some 
delay we resumed our journey passing through a very fertile valley to 
reach Tehran in the evening. 
 25 September 84 – Stayed in Tehran in a hostel. The officers from the 
contingent were conducted to the General Headquarters (GHQ) of Iranian 
Armed Forces to call on Commander in Chief of the Army. The Iranian 
Army, fighting Iraqi Forces for so many years by then did not have any

163 

General Officers. The Army was being commanded by Brigadier Zaheer 
Nejad, a retired and recalled officer. Under the GHQ were divisions 
commanded by officers of the rank of Colonels. The importance given to 
our contingent can be gauged from the fact that two officers of the rank of 
Colonels remained with us during our travel through Iran in our onwards as 
well as on return journey. Col Ali Larejani senior of the two was a very 
energetic and pleasant person.  
In Iran, as a routine the contingent on arrival at the destinations for the night stay 
was first addressed by the local authority figures; mostly religious leaders. Their 
main thrust was the justification of their cause to fight Iraqi aggression. Our 
leader, Brig Akram in his reply would always dilate upon the need of stopping the 
fight between the two brotherly Muslim countries. This stance of not condemning 
the Iraqi aggression was somewhat frustrating to our hosts but that was 
Pakistan’s official line.  
Went to Bazar for a short while but it was mostly closed because of their weekly 
off day. The shopkeepers of the few shops which were open did not seem to like 
us as was evident from their attitude. In the evening we were taken to witness a 
demonstration about the war. This was arranged by the ‘Pasdaran’ who are real 
strength of the Iranian Revolution. At the site of demonstration a model of the 
battle of ‘Majnun’ island was depicted which the Iranians had taken back from 
Iraqis recently. It was very impressive demonstration of use of fire power and 
skills to overcome different kinds of obstacles. 
 26 September 84 – From Tehran to Isfahan. Night stay comfortable 
especially after Tehran. 
 27 September 84 – From Isfahan to Kirman the longest leg of journey, 
about 700 kilometers. Reached late in the evening after long lunch break 
and a ‘Pistachio’ buying break at Rafsanjan where some people went to 
Bazaar and rest of us waited in the buses. This area is famous for growing 
‘Pistachios’. Felt like nearing home, Quetta being four nights away. 
 28 September 84 – Stay in Kirman. Friday prayers offered in the city’s 
Jamia Mosque after having visited an exhibition and Kunj e Ali Museum, a

164 

public bath complex of the old times and the covered Bazaar which was 
mostly closed because of Friday being holiday. The Bazaar has very 
artistically designed arches.  
 29 September 84 – From Kirman to Zahidan. Long speech session on arrival 
and a little shopping in Zahidan Bazaar. 
 30 September 84 – Crossed over to Pakistan at Taftan. The contingent 
received by the Inspector General Frontier Corps Balochistan, Major 
General Mohammad Akram. After having lunch at Nokkundi, reached 
Dalbandin in the evening. The road between Taftan and Nokkundi about 
80 miles is the worst patch. In fact there is no road, just a track. Night stay 
at Dalbandin. 
 01 October 84 – From Dalbandin to Quetta.  
 02-03 October 84 – Stayed at home with family. Yaman, Adnan and Omar 
were very excited about the toys. Number of people came to meet.  
 04 October 84 – From Quetta to Sukker after having lunch at Sibbi. 
Comfortable night stay under arrangements 27 Punjab. 
 05 October 84 – From Sukker to Multan. Haversack lunch at Rahim Yar 
Khan and tea at Bahawalpur. Travel on the Pakistani roads now seems 
hazardous and road conditions looked deplorable after having travelled on 
the good roads in other countries. Parking sites, road signs and distance 
indicators could be arranged without much expenditure. 
 06 October 84 – Stay at Multan. It was 10th of Muharram. Stayed in the 
room. 
 07 October 84 – From Multan to Lahore via Faisalabad. Convoy stopped at 
Shahkot Rest House from where the leader and few other persons went to 
deceased Havildar Sharif’s home near Sangla Hill to offer Fateha and 
deliver his belongings and some money collected by the delegation to the 
family.

165 

 08 October 84 – Stay at Lahore. Had lunch with Aslam Bhai’s family at their 
home in Qila Gujjar Singh. 
 09 October 84 – Started from Lahore for Rawalpindi. Lunch at Kharian. Met 
Brigadier Javed Majid, my Brigade Commander at Sialkot after a long time. 
Reached Rawalpindi by 5 p.m.  Sarfaraz Bhai, Zafar Bhai, Kukku and little 
Rabia had come to receive. Yusuf had come from village to know the 
programme. 
 10 October to 15 October 84. Dispersal process including recording of the 
court of inquiry of the Jeep accident in Iran and visit to village on 12/13 
Oct. 
 16 October 84 – Back to Quetta to spend some leave and resume duties. 
Some overall impressions about Iran have been mentioned earlier. In Turkey we 
travelled through the south eastern part of the country which is not very well 
developed. Some parts of the roads we traversed were just dusty tracks.  The area 
is inhabited by mainly Kurds an ethnic group spread over, rather divided in three 
countries i.e. Turkey, Iran and Iraq. The people were very friendly towards us 
particularly the older lot as we experienced when we had the chance to visit the 
Market in Diyarbakir.  For the first time I saw the Olive trees.  
Travelling through Syria was journey through history, the old historical cities like 
Aleppo, Hamas and particularly Damascus, the oldest inhabited city of the world. 
The countryside is fertile and well populated. The main road we travelled on was 
in fairly good condition. Jordan again was very rich in the historical sites 
particularly the Jordan River Valley that we visited on our return journey.  
In Saudi Arabia the marked difference was condition of the roads. Broad multi 
lane roads facilitated travel to great extent. We spent about three weeks in Saudi 
Arabia. Haj is a tough physical exercise particularly during the summers because 
of intense heat.  However with the spirit of a sacred undertaking it becomes 
easier to go through the physical discomfort particularly for the younger and fit 
people as we were at that time. If one considers the difficulties of people 
performing Haj in earlier times when they had to travel on foot, on horses and

166 

camels' one can appreciate the changes and comforts brought into our journeys 
and facilities which are improving with passage of time. However there is always 
room for comment.  Our accommodation at Medina was very near the Mosque 
but not very clean. Only two bathrooms were available for seventeen men and 
four ladies. The person responsible for maintaining the building was stubborn and 
mean. General attitude observed was that the local people were arrogant 
towards Pakistanis but were scared of the Iranians who came for Hajj in more 
organized manner. At Mecca the accommodation was clean and the owner very 
cooperative but the place was away from Harram and we could not offer all our 
prayers in Harram. The overall arrangements by the Saudi Government were 
elaborate to manage about 2.5 million people performing Haj.

167 

Shikarpur and Thereafter 
After serving in Headquarters 12 Corps for about two and a half years, I received 
posting orders in May 1985 to command 27 Punjab, deployed in Sind. This was an 
unexpected posting for me. As I learnt later, I had been picked by Lieutenant 
General Muhammad Aslam Shah, Commander 4 Corps to command this unit with 
which he had strong affiliation having commanded it on promotion from Major to 
Lieutenant Colonel’s rank. As Chief of Staff of 10 Corps Rawalpindi, at the time of 
coup by General Zia ul Haq against Bhutto’s government, he got 27 Punjab at 
Rawalpindi as part of 111 Brigade. The unit was made responsible to guard 
Rawalpindi Jail where Mr. Bhutto was detained and ultimately hanged.  
In 1985, the unit was deployed in upper Sind, with its Headquarters (HQ) at 
Larkana. In an unfortunate incident, the unit lost five of its officers at the hands of 
dacoits. The officers were travelling in a vehicle from Dokri, a place about 20 
kilometers away from Larkana to have dinner at the Battalion HQ. Moving 
unarmed against instructions and laid down procedures they got stuck in a 
roadblock laid by dacoits who were busy in looting vehicles on the road. Not 
realising the danger, they got into a situation where dacoits opened fire on them 
and killed them. Because of this tragic incident it was decided to replace the CO.  
I joined 27 Punjab in first week of May 1985 at Shikarpur where Battalion HQ had 
been moved from Larkana. An interesting, rather comic situation came up when I 
tried to take bath after arrival to freshen up after train journey from Quetta to 
reach the unit. As I poured water from the bucket it was unbearably hot. 
Wrapping towel I came out of bathroom and asked the staff that probably geyser 
was on and they should put it off. Enjoying my ignorance they advised me that it 
was not the geyser but the sun which caused my discomfiture. I was to fill up the 
bucket and wait for at least one hour for the water to become bearable.  
Companies of the Battalion were widely spread, deployed in Garhi Khairo and 
Kandhkot. The Battalion HQ was moved from Shikarpur to Jacobabad shortly after 
my joining the unit. Here I had a chance of seeing the residence of Brigadier 
General John Jacob who gave present name to a small town Khangarh from where 
he operated to secure the newly established borders of British India in mid

168 

nineteenth century.  He was a remarkable man who despite his very busy life of 
fighting skirmishes on the frontier which included raids right up to Dera Bugti, 
could also spare time to think of inventions like a large clock which was still 
surviving and functional at his residence now in use as the Deputy Commissioner’s 
House. Having lived without getting married and raising a family, he is buried in 
the city alongside the main road leading towards Quetta.  
I undertook visits of different places in the unit’s area of responsibility meeting 
deployed troops, getting the feel of conditions in interior Sind, the Province I was 
to serve in again later. 
Lahore 
In the meantime orders were received for the unit to move to Lahore as part of 
10 Division/ 4 Corps. By August 1985 the unit moved to Lahore. It did not take 
much time for the unit to regain its élan due to change of command and posting 
of some of its officers serving elsewhere back to the unit. With Major Raja Haider 
as Second in Command (2 IC), Majors Javed Iqbal, Waqar Raja, Javed Manj, Ibrar 
as company commanders and Captain Asif Alvi as Adjutant, I did not have much 
problem in getting the unit back to its very high standard of competence level in 
training and sports. Ibrar, a national level sportsman in his younger days, was 
instrumental in winning a number of Divisional level competitions. Australian 
Army Chief visited the unit busy in carrying out training and was impressed by the 
standards. 
The unit was made responsible to maintain Lahore Garrison Golf Club, its course, 
the fairways and greens yet in initial stage of development which required lot of 
work to be done. Just a few weeks after this task was assigned, the President, 
General M Zia ul Haq decided to play golf on this course along with the Corps 
Commanders on their dispersal after a conference at GHQ. For me as Secretary of 
the club, it was an unfamiliar task. In this I was greatly helped by CO 23 FF, 
Lieutenant Colonel Mansur Hamid (later Brig), who earned my everlasting 
respect. 
Once a Bara Khana, (meal on special occasions for all ranks of the units together 
at one place) was arranged by the unit on the occasion of 6th Sep celebrated as

169 

Defense Day. The meal was arranged for all the Punjab Battalions stationed at 
Lahore Cantonment which at that time were six in number, making a fairly large 
gathering. Just before start of the evening, I was informed that the Governor of 
Punjab, Makhdoom Sajjad Hussain Qureshi was also to join on the occasion. 
During get together at Garrison Club in the afternoon, the Governor had been 
invited by Punjab Regiment’s senior retired officers, who among others included 
redoubtable Lieutenant General Azam Khan, former Governor of East Pakistan to 
attend the function. The function lasted till quite late in the evening, everyone 
enjoying the occasion. I was greatly impressed with pleasant small talk by the 
Governor in his chaste Seraeki, music to the ears. 
Quetta, once again  
By end of 1987, I received posting order as officiating Colonel Staff of 19 Division 
at Mangla. Before I could move out, this order was cancelled and instead I was to 
move to 41 Division located at Quetta on the same appointment. Brigadier Bilal 
Ahmad, FF, who was Chief of Staff 4 Corps at Lahore, was posted on promotion to 
command the newly raised 41 Division. He had known me in command of 27 
Punjab at Lahore and wanted me to be his principal staff officer. He got my 
posting to Mangla cancelled and instead I had to move to Quetta. 
I reached Quetta and assumed new responsibilities. The Division was in its raising 
process. Basically the HQ and some of supporting arms and service units were 
being newly raised. Two existing brigades and some artillery units were placed 
under command of the Division and later a new Brigade HQ was raised. The 
Division was lodged in the accommodation vacated by 16 Division that moved to a 
newly established cantonment at Pano Aqil. Soon our new Division was to 
participate in the largest exercise with troops held by the Army under General 
Aslam Beg. The exercise named ‘Zarb e Momin’ was held during winter months of 
1989 in Thal desert, area between Rivers Indus and Jhelum. A few months after 
the exercise, the Division was again moved to upper Sindh for a special task 
assigned by the Army. Within a span of about eight months the Division had to 
move through Bolan Pass thrice which is a very taxing exercise for staff in 
coordinating those moves.

170 

The Division was moved to upper Sind in first week of June 1990 to counter a 
grave internal security situation. One day, when the General Officer Commanding 
(GOC) was away, I received a call from General Headquarters (GHQ), Military 
Operations Directorate that the Division was to move on training to upper Sind 
immediately. This was an unusual order because the Division was not planning to 
do any training during that summer having recently participated in the large scale 
Army exercise spanning over couple of months. I got in contact with the GOC to 
apprise him and discuss employment scheme of troops in different places. 
Brigadiers Imtiaz Shaheen and Nisar were sent to Larkana and Sukkur respectively 
using small aircrafts for liaison with civil authorities. The troops started moving 
out by trains the next day and move was completed most swiftly in about three 
days’ time, our railways rising to the challenge as always on such occasions. Out 
of the two Brigades available, one commanded by Brigadier Imtiaz Shaheen was 
placed in Larkana Division, the other commanded by Brigadier Nisar placed in 
Sukkur Division and the Divisional Artillery (Brigadier Baqir Shah) placed at Nawab 
Shah, thus covering the area which was the responsibility of 16 Division for 
internal security duties. Because of tension with India, 16 Division had been 
deployed on the border and was not available for dealing with unrest in its rear 
areas. We placed our Division HQ at Sukkur. 
Reason for sudden move of our Division was revealed on arrival in the area. The 
day our troops started reaching their assigned areas, residents of a village 
comprising about forty houses of non Sindhis in Khairpur district had been forced 
to vacate their houses. A day before, a number of shops had been burned in 
Jacobabad/Shikarpur districts. It was Benazir’s first government when there were 
complaints of Punjabis being evicted from the Province. Press reports indicated 
opening of camp for such people by district administration of Rahim Yar Khan. As 
troops arrived in the area, this practice stopped. An officer, Major Nadeem, 
Officer Commanding (OC) our Field Security Section was sent to confirm the 
report about camp in Rahim Yar Khan. He came back with information that at the 
check post located on the boundaries of Sind and Punjab, district administration 
Rahim Yar Khan was maintaining record about the evicted people coming by road 
using trucks loaded with their luggage. Since 1st January of that year (1990) till 1st 
week of June, over twenty thousand families had been forced to leave Sind.

