11 

Hindus who revered cows. Both communities had lived under a system where the 
Muslims, less in numbers were a dominant class for almost a thousand years.  
The Muslims came into the Indian sub-continent from a position of strength that 
they enjoyed for about a thousand years despite being less in numbers than 
Hindus. Before the advent of nation states and present democratic systems the 
general public was ‘subjects’ of the kings and not ‘citizen’ of a State. As the 
Muslim emperors and kings were ruling most parts of the sub-continent starting 
from early eleventh century, the Muslims as a community did not feel threatened 
or in danger.  End of British rule from the sub –continent created a different 
situation where rule by a majority under the promised democratic system would 
relegate the Muslims to a position of permanent minority.  
To avoid that possibility and to secure Muslim’s interests, Quaid-e-Azam (Great 
Leader) Mr. Muhamad Ali Jinnah gave a call for a separate homeland for Muslims. 
His call reached all parts of the sub-continent despite very limited means of 
communications in those days resulting in emergence of Pakistan. 
Life in the household with agricultural background entailed multiple chores like 
grazing animals after the school hours, bringing fodder from fields, chopping 
wood and other numerous small tasks mostly involving outdoor activities. I still 
feel longing for the fragrance of land and its crops of different seasons. The village 
at that time was a self-sufficient unit meeting almost all the requirements of life. 
The means of transporting materials were mainly confined to camels for longer 
distances and donkeys for short hauls. Movement of people was mostly on foot. 
For distant travel, camels were used to carry the women and children being 
placed in ‘Kajawas’ (a wooden contraption). The present means of 
communications which make movement of goods and material so easy were not 
available then. The communities were therefore forced to stay self-contained, 
devising their own solutions to meet essential requirements.  
Travel was an adventure undertaken under extreme compulsion. As a child I 
would hear my grandmother narrating account of very long travel on camels and 
the railway network during second and third decades of twentieth century. My 
grandfather Malik Sher Muhammad and another person named Ghulam

12 

Muhammad were the first two Muslims from our village who acquired primary 
education in whatever system was in place during last decade of nineteenth 
century. Both young men got inducted into revenue department as ‘Patwaris’ and 
were called ‘Munshis’ a title that continued to be used for their next generation. 
Munshi Sher Muhammad, my grandfather died young when my father was just six 
months old. Munshi Ghulam Muhammad reached ripe old age.  As school 
children, we would see him wearing ‘Sherwani’ and ‘Kullah’ holding a long staff in 
his hand gracefully strolling out of his house to visit his piece of land watered by 
‘Persian Wheel’ running on his well located nearby. He had given part of his 
spacious dwelling on eastern corner of the village for village school that remained 
functional till a new building was constructed by the department in nineteen 
sixties.  
My grandfather ‘Munshi’ Sher Muhammad was selected as member of a small 
team of revenue officials deputed to the State of Las Bela on the Arabian Sea 
coast for making revenue record of the State. Because of that my grandmother 
had a chance to travel on the newly introduced railway system more than once. 
She would narrate as to how they would travel on camels to catch a train at Injra 
Railway Station on Attock – Mianwali Section, the nearest one from our village. 
Unpredictable Soan River had to be crossed before reaching railway station which 
posed problems. The train journey would take three days. There were no fast 
moving trains available then. Karachi at that time was a small place, the travellers 
mostly staying at Khara Darr and Mitha Darr in one of the two inns named after 
their owners (I cannot recollect the names of those owners that grandmother 
used to tell). From Karachi to Bela the journey was conducted in seven stages, 
each stage covered in one day travelling on the camels.  The first stage was from 
Khara Darr to Hab Chowki, from where the State of Las Bela started. Midway was 
Uthal and the seventh stage was Bela. After serving in Las Bela for about seven 
years my grandfather returned to village, spending last years of his life before he 
died in 1925 complaining of chest pain. There was no method or facility to 
diagnose heart attacks that he may have suffered.  
The village community was self-sufficient in its basic needs. Food was grown in 
the fields, sown with the old plough using two animals, the practice of thousands

13 

of years as can be seen in murals from the Indus Valley civilization preserved in 
frescos at ruins of Harrapa and Mohan Jo Darro. Introduction of 'tractor' has 
eliminated the need of old plough and its related gear which is becoming extinct 
and will fade away altogether from the agricultural scene.  
Wheat, the main crop was sown in early winters after the land had been prepared 
by ploughing at least twice and then its surface made plain with the help of a 
heavy wooden plank known as ‘majj’ pulled by the two animals. Sowing was done 
by adding a device known as ‘nal’ to plough and the seed released in the ‘nal’ by 
an experienced hand to avoid cluttering or leaving gaps. Gram and mustered were 
also sown during the same period. The crops took about six months to be ready 
for harvesting and depended totally on the rains for growth in our rain fed areas. 
Wheat crop was ready for harvesting in mid April, by 1st of Besakh in the Bikrami 
Calendar in the Punjab and Pothohar region. The festival of ‘Besakhi’, celebrated 
with zest particularly by the Sikh community was to start the harvesting process.  
The first step was to cut the crop. Armed with sickles the whole household would 
reach their fields early in the morning and start cutting plants, binding these into 
manageable sizes for easy handling. Anyone who lagged behind in cutting would 
invite the neighbors and relatives for help. This was called ‘Maang”. The food 
served to them would be very well prepared 'Dall Chana' with 'Tandoori Roti' 
during early part of the day. In the evening it would be 'Ghee' and 'Shakar' (brown 
sugar) consumed with the Tandoori Roti. This was standard practice from which 
no one deviated. The food otherwise was very simple. Wheat was staple diet 
supplemented by Millet (Bajra), Corn and Maize (Jowar) for some months in the 
winters. For afternoon snacks, particularly for children, seasonal grains like gram, 
corn, millet and maize were roasted by the local Bhatiara/Bathiari who started 
work after Zuhar prayers and closed by Maghrib prayers. Milk was not sold in the 
village. It was processed to make butter and ‘lassi’ a drink which was available 
free of cost to anyone who did not have animals of his own. Pulses, occasionally 
chicken and vegetable grown in the village by some families called ‘Maliars’ on 
small pieces of irrigated land around the wells were consumed mainly with the 
evening meal. Meat would be available only when someone’s animal became sick

14 

and had to be slaughtered. Other source of meat was through hunting of the 
rabbits and birds.  
Coming back to the processing of the harvested wheat, the next stage was to 
separate grain from the plants which involved spreading plants on a compacted 
part of the field, called ‘Khalara’ and crushing these with the help of heavy 
branches of trees bound in a certain pattern pulled by the animals moving in 
circles. This was known as ‘gah’ and the device made with the help of branches 
known as ‘mairra’. Once the plants were thoroughly broken, the whole material 
would be collected in a heap of particular shape known as ‘dharr’.  Further 
process was dependent on gentle breeze to separate grain from the husk ‘Bhoosa’ 
by throwing up small portions of the material in the air using a device known as 
‘karahi’. The grains being heavier would fall near the heap and husk a little away 
completing the separation process. This however would take a couple of days to 
complete because blowing of breeze in a certain direction and speed was not 
there all the time. The husk would be compressed with the help of five to six cots 
‘Charpoys’ bound together to form an open container turning it into a cone 
shaped ‘Bhowara’ for use during the year for feeding animals. The grain would be 
put into jute bags containing two and a half maunds (about one hundred 
kilograms) each. The measures used were vessels of various sizes like ‘Chaha’ 
equal to about three ‘Sers’ (its fourth part a ‘Paeeni’ and ‘Lap’ being the smallest 
measure). One ‘Ser’ was a little less than a kilogram. It was further divided into 
‘Pao’ a fourth part and ‘Chitank’ the sixteenth part. Similarly for currency, one 
rupee was also divided into sixteen parts called ‘aanas’ which was further divided 
into four parts called ‘paisa’. One could make purchases of small requirements 
even against half a paisa, called ‘dhela’. Smaller coins like ‘Pai’, ‘Ratti’ and ‘Kauri’ 
had gone out of use by then; only their names used in metaphors. The coins were 
of metal, the Ruppee of silver and other smaller one of different metals. Paper 
currency came later. 
After completing process in the field at ‘Khalara’, the grain would be loaded on 
camels and brought home, a happy ending of a long, difficult process in which 
everyone from the house including children had remained involved.  This whole 
process of harvesting crops has now been simplified by the use of tractors and

15 

other agricultural machinery during recent years. The equipment and gadgets 
used in agricultural process before advent of Tractor age like, ‘Hal’, ‘Jula’ ‘Panjali’, 
‘Karah’, ‘Tringul’, ‘Karahi’, ‘Maj’, and many others have become extinct. 
With wheat brought home, the season of marriages started. After keeping certain 
quantity of wheat for domestic requirements till next crop, additional wheat was 
sold to generate funds for marriages and other expenses.  
In our rain fed area, crop yields totally depended on weather conditions during 
the year. If it rained at appropriate intervals when needed for crops, enough grain 
was produced in both seasons to meet essential needs. But it was not always so. 
Starting in early nineteen fifties there was a period of drought spreading over 
about seven continuous years, the rains being scanty and untimely. It caused a 
famine as limited stocks of grains of all kinds got exhausted. There was no help 
from other parts of the country, the means of communications and transporting 
materials being rudimentary.The famine conditions due to lesser rains were 
compounded by arrival of locust storms for a couple of years that would eat away 
every green leaf sprouting from the earth. We as children from schools were the 
‘main force’ employed to fight the menace. We joined the villagers who used to 
dig a long trench and we would drive the product of hatched locust eggs called 
‘poong’ towards the ditch to be buried in it. A poisonous medicine was also used 
in the process. Our whole day was spent in the fields and we were rewarded with 
glass of milk prepared from ‘milk powder’a novelty for us seen for the first time. It 
came as aid from America; a name becoming familiar as later a new variety of 
wheat that gave better yield and was light in colouralso came from USA 
replacingthe old variety. 
During prolong famine, a time came when people had to grind the seeds of  
‘pohli’ the yellow colored small thorny plant found in wheat fields at the time of 
harvesting wheat. The bread made from its flour was tasteless and difficult to 
swallow. Older people would remember such famine earlier when people had to 
feed themselves by processing bark of trees. 
The main population of our village was of the Awan tribe who had come in this 
area about one thousand years back when King Mahmood of Ghazni

16 

(Afghanistan) started his attacks across the Indus River. The tribe led by Qutub 
Shah settled in the area bounded roughly by Soan River in the North to Salt Range 
in the south/south west and line Chakwal – Choa Saidan Shah in the east. The 
tribe was of Arabic origin who had ventured east in search of livelihood and 
ultimately landed up in this region. A theory, that the tribe is from local Jaat stock 
as given by some British writers, in not tenable. The use of household words 
describing utensils in the house and other items of daily use were pure Arabic 
words like ‘Sahnak’ for the large earthen utensil used to knead flour, the word 
‘Tabak’ for the larger plate and ‘Sahanki’ for small plate, ‘Wassal’ for the onion 
and such so on. These names were different from the words used for describing 
these items of daily use in rest of the surrounding areas.  The title of ‘Malik’ with 
the names of Awans is an Arabic word, different from titles added to the names of 
people of other tribes and casts in the area. The dress and style of its wearing was 
peculiar, particularly the style of wearing headgear. The ‘Chador’ covering lower 
part of the body was of two different sizes, a larger one for formal occasions and 
a comparatively smaller one for normal use. These were different from small 
‘Dhoti’ worn in Punjab.. Till the fifties and early sixties there was no concept of 
getting out of one’s house and moving about in the village without headgear. 
Haircut was also of a particular pattern. All this gradually changed after nineteen 
sixties due to external influences and changing environments.  
As mentioned earlier, the village was self sufficient in most of its requirements of 
daily life. The main source of income being through agricultural activity, the 
agriculturist was supported by other artisans. Under a term called ‘saip’ the 
artisans were attached with different agriculturist families to get a share from the 
harvested crops as compensation for their work. There was no concept of cash 
remunerations. A ‘Lohar’ combined the work of blacksmith, carpenter and mason. 
The weaver produced cloth from thread woven by the women at home on their 
‘Çharkha’. Mian Muhammad the weaver in our neighbourhood was a very skillful 
artisan producing Khes (sort of light weight blanket) of very intricate designs 
when he was free from producing coarse cloth for general use. The coarse cloth 
was taken by ‘Dhobi’ (washer man) to a stream, Nullah Ankar, about five 
kilometers away from the village for bleaching it to white from its original off 
white colour. Dhobi was also responsible to prepare food for weddings and other

17 

occasions in his famous ‘Deg’ locally known as ‘Rangan’. The ‘Teli’ produced oil in 
his small factory, a ‘Ghaani’ from the local oilseeds like ‘Mustard’ and ‘Tara Mira’. 
A potter produced earthen wear of all kinds used in the household through a long, 
laborious process requiring considerable skill and aesthetic sense. In fact all the 
artisans working in the village had a well developed aesthetic sense related to 
their work producing very presentable products.  The cobbler ‘Mochi’, apart from 
mending shoes would also make new shoes, starting the process from treating 
the hides to producing finished shoes of particular patterns for men and women. 
In my village a large community of cobblers was concentrated producing fancy 
ladies shoes called ‘Khussas’ using golden thread to embellish the tops. This was a 
well organised handicraft industry. An elderly man, Haji Noor Muhammad with his 
impressive attire including a stylish headdress would collect the pairs of shoes 
from the community every evening and would go to Talagang on a ‘Tanga’ a horse 
drawn carriage, to deliver the produce to a shop owned by Sheikh Yousuf, a 
‘Khoja’. These shoes were then sent to other cities and were quite a famous 
variety. 
The barber ‘Nai’ was an institution in him. Apart from his work of haircutting and 
some shaves, a new trend of not growing beards, the barber was the messenger 
whose message was considered most important. He was the event manager on 
occasions like marriages and funerals.  His wife was to assist him in managing the 
female side. She was also the matchmaker suggesting matches and 
communicating between the parties. The barber’s house was also the beauty 
parlour, the women visiting to get their hair done, making plaits and braids of 
different patterns for special occasions.  Barber also acted as a surgeon, who 
would circumcise the children by diverting their attention followed by a quick cut 
with a sharp blade. He would apply a self prepared balm to heal the wounds. The 
healing process was long and painful. Aulia Nai, an elderly man was expert in such 
surgery. In my childhood I had cuts from Baba Aulia twice in his treatment for 
some kind of boils on my hands and I carried the scars for a long time.  
The medical services were provided by Hakeem Ghulam Muhammad, whose shop 
or ‘Matab’ was full of aromas due to preparation of different medicines. He was 
good in understanding and diagnosis of ailments by traditional method of holding

18 

a patient’s wrist to check the pulse ‘Nabz’. His medicines were mainly herbal, 
prepared by him in his shop. His young assistant was continuously busy in grinding 
something in a marble bowl known as ‘Kharl’. 
There were a few families of vegetable growers, the ‘Maliars’ who would grow 
vegetables on small pieces of land irrigated from nearby wells. These wells were 
located on eastern and western sides of the village on the banks of small seasonal 
Nullahs. Water from the wells was drawn through ‘Persian Wheel’ using animals 
to run the wheel. Main components of the system were ‘Chakli’, ‘Khara’, ‘Mahl’ 
and ‘Lota’ using wood and local material, later replaced by iron components 
brought from other parts of Punjab. Water was brought by women in pitchers 
from these wells. On western side of the village a small spring, which dried up 
later gave very good quality water used for drinking.  
Fetching water was a major work for women, generally done in the afternoon. At 
this time there was lot of rush on the wells. Usually they would carry two pitchers 
on their heads, an odd one carrying three. In the houses pitchers would be kept 
on wooden stands for three to five pitchers known as ‘Gharwanji’. The water 
being a very scarce commodity and brought to the house with much labour would 
be carefully used for drinking and cooking. Men would generally take bath in 
bathrooms outside the Mosque; with water taken from the well located inside 
mosque premises. From that well, water was taken out with the help of bucket 
pulled by rope fixed on a round wooden structure by one person assigned with 
this job for which he was compensated by the community. The women would 
generally bathe on the wells from where they brought water. Washing of clothes 
was mainly done on the wells and on a stream close by the village which had 
running water that has dried up now. The present day emphasis on rain water 
harvesting was then practiced in the form of water being stored in small 
reservoirs known as ‘Bann’ at suitable places in the undulating ground. This water 
was used for drinking by animals and the people alike particularly while working 
in fields away from the village. 
Life in the village was very different from present times. There was no electricity, 
main source of light after sunset was earthen lamp filled with locally made oil 
from Tara Mira. This lamp, called ‘Diva’ would be placed on a wooden platform

19 

known as ‘Darokha’ with some steps to adjust its position. Lantern had also come 
into use and a few Patromax lamps, a novelty used for special occasions like 
weddings. The lamps would be used for a short duration because people routinely 
consumed evening meals just after Maghrib prayers and would go to sleep after 
Isha prayers. This enabled everyone to start the next day early.  
The first job of women of the household was to grind flour for the day on their 
‘Chakki’, a job done by the morning prayers time, prepare food and deliver to the 
men who started their work on the fields after morning prayers. Ploughing and 
working the fields was major task spread over most of the year. It was time 
consuming and laborious to prepare even a small field with the help of old 
instruments pulled by the animals. With introduction of tractors one cannot 
conceive the timeframe and effort involved in agricultural activity in those times.  
Whole families, brothers and cousins were lodged in rows of adjacent houses. 
There were few disputes among men but womenfolk would have many things 
against each other that they would take out in the absence of men. Some fertile 
minds would invent their own invective according to the situation. Crime was 
almost nonexistent. One murder in the village in my childhood was that of a 
person being thrown in an unused well by his wife with the help of her paramour. 
In another incident a party, a small ‘Lashkar’ armed with sticks and ‘Kulharis’ (axe) 
attacked the Mohalla of cobblers due to some dispute. In the ensuing battle two 
men, one from each side, were killed. Romantic liaisons were discreet and 
dangerous but village life was not lacking in these. 
Overall atmosphere was that of peace and contentment as the limited 
requirements of people were being met. The children were a happy lot as there 
was plenty of time to play in the fields outside village which would continue till 
late during moonlit nights of summer’s months. Marriages were mostly arranged 
in summers after harvesting wheat crop which generated income to be spent on 
such occasions. Marriage proceedings were quite lengthy, starting about two 
weeks before the actual date of marriage. The bridegroom’s friends and male 
cousins would get together in the evenings, their main activity singing songs 
where everyone was persuaded to sing. Without modern days microphones, 
singing taxed the vocal cords but some of the young men could sing very well.

20 

Hafiz Sadiq, apart from reciting the Holy Quran, had melodious voice for songs 
and used to remain in great demand on these occasions. Folk dances by men on 
the sound of 'Dhol', the drum, were performed with enthusiasm and verve. 
Hussain Dholi (called Senu; many of us did not know his real name nor bothered 
to find out as distorting names was normal practice) was the only one from village 
who remained quite busy and his work was supplemented occasionally by getting 
more 'Dholis' from the neighbouring village Akwal when required, particularly on 
the occasions of bull races.  
Husain Dholi had also to provide his services to the women performing their 
dances. Otherwise men were not to be seen around the place where women 
would gather to perform 'Gharoli' a set of female folk dances, an important part 
of the marriage proceedings. Women would go to the village 'cultural center' in 
the afternoon, carrying a small size decorated earthen pitcher, a small 'Ghara' to 
perform 'Gharoli', their session ending before sunset. Although that small pitcher 
is extinct, the practice has been immortalized by our great singer Aabida Parveen 
in her popular song 'main yar the Gharoli bhardi' meaning that I dance for my 
friend. This 'cultural center' was an open space with a rainwater pond at one 
corner of it, located on eastern end of the village under massive 'Pipal' trees. 
During Eid days a 'Mela' would be organised at this place. Main entertainments 
during the Mela at this spot were competition to carry weights, swings for 
children and stalls of various eatables, mainly sweetmeats. Groups of acrobats 
would also visit occasionally to display their skills like walking on a rope and other 
likewise items. 
Occasionally some theatre groups called ‘Nutt’ would be invited to perform in the 
villages, a group from village Hamok in Khushab being very popular in the area in 
the fifties. They would stage traditional dramas based on the love stories like Heer 
Ranjha and Sohni Mahinwal etc. The show would be arranged in the fields during 
the nights, particularly around dried water storage ponds called ‘Banns’, because 
its layout facilitated the view of spectators. People from adjoining villages would 
also come over to enjoy the performance which would last till the time of Fajar 
prayers. In late fifties theatre groups of Alam Lohar and Inayat Bhatti started 
coming to Talagang to perform, their shows attracting lot of people. Once a story

