261 

My next short stay at Quetta (Jun-July 1974) was in the re-assembly camp set up 
for the returning prisoners of war from India. A few months after that I again 
landed in Bugti-Marri tribal area with 53 Punjab (later 18 Sindh), the unit I had 
been posted in. This stay ended in April 1975 but I had to come back repeatedly 
to Balochistan at different times (1976-77), (1981-85) and (1988-90). My stay in 
Balochistan in different capacities gave me ample opportunity to travel the length 
and breadth of the province witnessing the transformation from once peaceful 
conditions to present unrest.  
Balochistan’s problems stem from wrong policies of the Governments at the 
Centre and are compounded by incompetence of provincial governments. In 
areas inhabited by Baloch tribes, the central government has pandered to the 
wishes of few individuals, the tribal ‘Sardars’ giving them funds to keep peace in 
their respective areas. The effort to reach out to the people and work for meeting 
their basic needs has not been attempted, retaining and strengthening the Sardari 
system in Baloch areas.  
The hard working Pushtuns being egalitarian society have remained unaffected by 
unrest in other areas of the province. They are involved in agriculture and trading 
activity, making judicious use of available resources, producing good quality fruit 
in some areas. The Baloch mostly are still living a pastoral life tending to livestock 
with some exceptions like oasis of Panjgur-Turbat date plantations. Population 
along the coastal area spreading to about five hundred kilometers is mainly 
engaged in fishing activity to sustain their livelihoods. 
The thinly populated, resource rich Baloch inhabited areas of the province remain 
a lucrative target of the world and regional powers. First the Russians had 
cultivated Baloch young men who kept displaying emblems of Azad Balochistan 
on their car plates but the Russian physical thrust from the north petered out in 
Afghanistan.  US occupation of Afghanistan helped in starting insurgency in parts 
of the province from bases in Afghanistan where the Indians joined the effort to 
support elements working for Azad Balochistan. Plans of creating ‘international 
strategic corridor’ toaccess Central Asian energy resources also were in the news.

262 

Our Army, under attack from domestic front, is already committed in operations 
within our own country. Apart from commitments in FATA, the troops that were 
inducted for operations in settled areas of Malakand – Swat have not yet been 
relieved by the civil administration. Propagating that there is Army operation in 
Balochistan is to give a wrong twist to the prevailing situation; where the Frontier 
Corps (FC) an Interior Ministry force, is being employed by the provincial 
government. Provincial Government formed in 2008 which has now been 
replaced after 2013 elections, comprised of almost all the tribal leaders. All of 
them were either ministers or advisors with no opposition in the assembly. They 
failed to bring peacefulliving conditions in the province because of disinterest and 
incompetence; some of the ministers accused of being involved in the crimes like 
abduction for ransom.   
Akbar Bugti. Nawab Akbar Bugti’s death in 2006 was used to expand and energise 
unrest.  The effort failed. There were a number of questions. Who persuaded the 
aged Nawab to go into a cave in Marri tribal area which is otherwise off limits to 
Bugtis due to tribal feuds? Who were projecting him to be the Commander-in-
Chief of the Balochistan Liberation Army, raining missiles on gas installations, 
damaging rail and power lines? And most important is that those Army officers, 
who died with him in that cave, were they wearing suicide jackets to blow up 
themselves? Who triggered that explosion in the cave?  
The answers to these questions can be found in recollecting the situation that 
Akbar Bugti had created for himself. He had exiled a good part of his tribe, some 
of their men killed and their lands and properties confiscated. A faction led by Mir 
Ahmadan Khan Bugti, his cousin from his Raheja sub tribe was forced to live in 
Multan and Dera Ghazi Khan areas for over a decade. In early 2006 the Army 
helped about twelve thousands of them to return home. These tribal people 
wanted Akbar Bugti to be tried by tribal Jirga and executed for his crimes. After 
fierce clashes between the two factions Akbar Bugti fled to the mountains in the 
Marri tribe’s area chased by Mir Ahmdan’s men and was trapped in a cave. 
Instead of surrendering to Mir Ahmdan he asked to see Army officers to negotiate 
his surrender. Five Army officers led by a Lieutenant Colonel went into the cave 
unarmed to negotiate but that was a trap for them. A powerful explosion caused

263 

death of all those inside the cave including Akbar Bugti. Apparently he committed 
suicide unless some other evidence is revealed as to who triggered that explosion. 
Akbar Bugti was certainly not killed by the Army.  
A man who claimed to have killed his first man at the age of twelve died a violent 
death in circumstances of his own choosing. With him he caused death of many 
others. Projecting him as a hero or a victim is to distort the facts. 
Missing Persons. A powerful section of media has used the issue of ‘missing 
persons’ to malign  the Army and intelligence agencies. Glib tonged anchors on TV 
programs and hired pen pushers in print media have continued the campaign for 
years. The real story of these missing persons is that since last many decades i.e. 
since the USSR was supporting Baloch separatists, some young men established 
their hideouts known as ‘Ferrari Camps’ in different parts of the Baloch inhabited 
areas. In 1983-85 when I was serving at Quetta there were over thirty ‘Ferrari 
Camps’, some of these just across Murdar Range from where rockets would 
occasionally land in Quetta Cantonment area. Since they were not much of threat 
and also that security forces did not have adequate manpower to comb through 
these areas, they were left undisturbed. During recent years some people have 
gone over to Afghanistan where they get funds, weapons and training for 
sabotage activities in Balochistan. For their families all these persons living in 
‘Ferrari’ camps and Afghanistan are supposed to be ‘missing persons’. Some of 
them died natural deaths, got killed in internal feuds or lately during skirmishes 
with troops of FC Balochistan that is portrayed and projected as a great crime 
committed by security forces.  
Problem in Balochistan can be easily overcome if effective steps are taken to 
reach out to the common people to meet their essential needs. The main 
grievance against the Centre is that Balochistan’s resources have been exploited 
without giving due share to the Province. The example is of Sui gas which was 
discovered in early fifties but living conditions in the area did not improve. Here 
the Government was giving money to the tribal leader instead of reaching out to 
the people to improve their conditions. The tribal leader, Mr. Akbar Bugti never 
spent that money on the people of the area because he never wanted change in

264 

status quo that would challenge his authority. If even a fraction of that amount 
was spent to improve conditions of the people, all the basic needs of people 
would have been met and the area transformed with modern facilities provided 
for. The money was mostly spent on patronizing night clubs in Karachi by Bugti 
brothers in fifties and sixties when Karachi was enjoying a vibrant night life 
comparable if not better than Beirut in those times. 
This practice of enriching individuals continued by successive governments; for 
example in 2012 the government provided two hundred and fifty millions rupees 
to each member of the provincial assembly for development work in their areas. 
As there is no check on the manner of spending this money, it mostly goes into 
personal coffers of the members instead of any benefit to the communities.  
To overcome the unrest, there is a need to make some basic changes in pattern of 
governance particularly in the Baloch inhabited areas. Following measures will 
resolve the problems; 
 The whole Province should be declared ‘A’ Area. Large parts of the Province 
under the administration of ‘Sardars’ with their own forces, the Levis 
responsible for law and order in ‘B” Areas should be brought under normal 
policing and judicial system. 
 Local Governments must be made functional without delay to involve the 
people in managing their affairs. This step will erode influence of separatist 
elements depriving them of their main propaganda themes of deprivation 
and denial of rights. 
 Each union council should be allocated a reasonable amount as non-
lapsable grant on yearly basis to be spent by the communities according to 
‘Community Development Methodology’ to meet their basic needs. If 
Rupees ten crore (of the year 2015 value) are allocated to each Union 
Council, this amount comes to fifty seven billion for the 567 union councils 
of the Province. It can be easily made available from the annual budget of 
the Province.

265 

 The old scheme of establishing about six small army cantonments in the 
area must be revived. Mere placing of Army in the area will help in 
stabilizing law and order situation, deter any adventurism by foreign forces, 
make social services like health and education accessible and contribute to 
overall economic progress for the people of these areas.  
 Part of income from mineral resources of the Province should be spent in 
the area from where these are extracted. This will meet the major demand 
of people of the area. 
 To counter external forces stoking unrest in the area, there is need to build 
up regional linkages with Russia, Central Asian states, Iran, Afghanistan, 
China and India for developing trade and energy corridors benefitting the 
region. China-Pakistan-Economic-Corridor (CPEC) is one project that on 
successful completion can bring positive change in the lives of people of the 
areas.

266 

The Question of Provinces in Pakistan 
Pakistan, the largest Muslim country of the world could not maintain its integrity 
mainly due to inequality of the size of provinces and unresolved regional 
concerns. In 1971, it was fragmented into two parts just before completing 
twenty five years of its existence. Remaining Pakistan continues to face the same 
problems with increased complexity.  
Sitting in a small mud fort at Sangsila in the wilderness of Bugti Tribal agency in 
early 1975, I used to ponder over the fact that while the unrest was confined to 
Marri Agency and some area around Wadh – Khuzdar, two small pockets of the 
vast province of Baluchistan, why was it being projected as revolt of the whole 
Province against the State of Pakistan. Having been repatriated from India shortly 
before that and having firsthand knowledge of how a small active group could 
achieve its objectives with outside support, the thought was most disturbing. 
The need of forming smaller provinces was advocated by many people at 
different times.  Air Marshal (retired) Asghar Khan suggested forming of about 
twelve provinces. General Zia ul Haq who replaced Z A Bhutto could have resolved 
the problem but he was more concerned about fighting the Russians in 
Afghanistan and had no interest to take up domestic issues. In 1984 while serving 
at Quetta I was required to suggest topics for discussion by officers during a study 
period. I included the question of forming smaller provinces in my suggestion. My 
immediate senior Colonel (later Brigadier) Nazar Abbas who had recently come to 
Quetta after serving in General Zia ul Haq’s Chief Martial Law Administrator’s 
(CMLA)  Secretariat got suspicious as if I had suggested  this topic on someone’s 
behest. He told me that this was a very sensitive issue pending with the CMLA 
Secretariat and how I had come to suggest it for discussion. It took some effort to 
convince him that I had thought of it on my own because my observation and 
experience in Balochistan. The topic was excluded from subjects for discussion. 
Background of the Present Provinces 
In 1947 when Pakistan came into being, the large province of Bengal was being 
divided, its eastern part becoming erstwhile East Pakistan. Punjab, stretching 
from River Indus to River Jumna and then ruled by the Unionist Party government

267 

who were not in favour of Pakistan was also being divided, its western portion 
becoming part of Pakistan. The Frontier Province less tribal areas was going 
through referendum on the issue of joining Pakistan or otherwise. Baluchistan 
had multiple arrangements of governance i.e. British ruled areas, tribal agencies, 
different states like Kalat, Kharan, Mekran, Lasbela and others. It got the status of 
province much later. Only Sindh province existed in its present form and its 
assembly passed the resolution to join Pakistan. The provinces were, therefore, 
unequal in sizes of population and geographical expanse which needed to be 
addressed by the new country.  
In 1956, when the first Constitution worked out by the Constituent Assembly of 
Pakistan was adopted after much deliberation and delay, the present day Pakistan 
was one of its two provinces. The province of West Pakistan was created by 
amalgamating existing provinces, states and tribal areas made into One Unit. The 
province was effectively administered by a Governor assisted by a small team of 
ministers. The administrative tiers in the province were the Commissionaries, the 
Districts and Tehsils. Later the Union Councils under Tehsils were formed during 
Ayub Khan’s period. No change was made in this set up of two units, West 
Pakistan as one unit and East Pakistan the other in the second constitution 
adopted in 1962. Life in the late fifties and early sixties when this arrangement 
was in place was the only period when bulk of the population of this country lived 
in peace and relative prosperity as there was almost 100% employment. It was a 
liberal, tolerant, happy and contended society till the 1965 War with India and its 
aftermath which disrupted Pakistan’s progress as a model for third world 
countries. 
Just before the elections of 1970, General Yahya Khan the President/Chief Martial 
Law Administrator, whose decisions were bereft of logic or reason because of his 
well known shortcomings, ordered fragmentation of the West Pakistan Province 
into four parts. At that time there was no popular demand for this break up 
except for some nationalist elements particularly Wali Khan’s Party in frontier 
who had opposed creation of Pakistan. This decision was a surprise for the 
common man who was only familiar with the demand of adult franchise instead 
of a small number of Basic Democrats electing the President.

268 

Is Pakistan a Federation? 
Today, those who harp on terming Pakistan as  ‘federation’ comprising ‘federating 
units’ need to revisit our not very distant history. ‘Federation’ defines a country 
consisting of individual ‘states’ that have control over their own affairs but form 
part of a central government that is left with a few subjects in its jurisdiction like 
external affairs, currency and defence. Pakistan was not formed by any 
'federating units’ if we refer back to the conditions in 1947 as explained above. 
Pakistan came into being through ‘The Indian Independence Act 1947’ that 
partitioned British India into the two new independent "dominions" of India and 
Pakistan. The main clause of the act is; 
"Division of British India into the two new and fully sovereign dominions of India 
and Pakistan, with effect from 15 August 1947" 
Large scale migration of population took place on both sides; original inhabitants 
of the land migrating on the basis of religion. That does not happen in forming 
‘federations’.  
Pakistan has to be a unitary State with central legislative and devolved powers at 
different tiers of the administrative units like provinces, districts, tehsils and union 
councils. Repeated use of term 'federation' by many people over the last few 
years is ominous development. This makes it easier for our enemies to further 
fragment Pakistan if a provincial assembly is bribed to pass a resolution to secede 
from Pakistan. To forestall such possibility there is need to make basic change in 
our constitution to resolve the issue. 
1973 Constitution 
After 1971 war when we lost East Pakistan, a new constitution was adopted in 
1973. This constitution was adopted more because of pressure of prevailing 
environment resulting from breakup of the country rather than merit of the 
document itself.  The assembly that passed this constitution had no mandate to 
do so. The members of that assembly had been elected for the National Assembly 
of Pakistan who refused to attend Assembly proceedings, forcing a crisis which 
led to breakup of Pakistan. After that break up, a constituent assembly should 
have been elected through fresh elections to frame constitution for the new

269 

country but that was not done. Those people who had no mandate to draw upa 
constitution and were guilty of contributing to break up of Pakistan produced a 
flawed document that left many things undecided for the future in the form of 
concurrent list etc. Numerous amendments have further distorted it. According to 
some people Mr. Z A Bhutto wanted to change it into presidential form for which 
he went into early elections to get two third majority in the parliament. His 
scheme failed due to rigging and the consequences. Now this document is only 
good for unending debate on its interpretations. 
The Problem 
The 1973 constitution did not provide solution to the genuine concerns on the 
inequality of the size of provinces and other problems posed by different 
nationalist groups within the country. The political government formed in 1973 
soon clashed with two provinces, the NWFP (now KPK) and Baluchistan, dissolving 
provincial governments and imposing governor’s rule in these provinces. This was 
followed by an armed uprising by Marri and Mengal tribes in two small parts of 
Baluchistan. The central government was ultimately overthrown by the Army in 
1977. The constitution could not prevent successive martial laws nor could it save 
its initiator from the gallows despite its article 6. 
If we study the systems of other developed and developing countries of the 
world, we will find that we are unique in maintaining a governance system which 
can only lead to misrule. It is a system designed for paralysis which we are 
experiencing. No country, roughly equal to Pakistan in geographical and 
population size throughout the world, has so large provinces with such a large 
number of legislators, ministers, advisers, chief ministers, governors etc, creating 
a class of oligarchs, who rule for personal gains at the cost of common citizen’s 
interests. 
The Solution 
Whereas large unequal provinces provide a cause to secessionist elements 
facilitating their work in fragmenting the Country, small size provinces, like in 
Afghanistan, Iran, Turkey and other medium size countries of the world; would 
effectively eliminate the threat of further disintegration of Pakistan. Nigeria,

270 

facing religious based secessionist war in Biafra Region in 1960s solved this 
problem by forming smaller provinces. A look at the administrative divisions of 
some other countries would give a clear insight:- 
The solution of our problems lies in making basic changes in the administrative 
structure of our country aimed at effective governance responsive to the needs of 
common citizen. These changes are outlined in the following paragraphs. 


Country 
Area (Sq km) 
Population 
Provinces/States 
Afghanistan 
647,500 
32,738,755          34 provinces 
Iran 
1,648,195 
70,472,846           30 provinces 
Iraq 
437,072 
28,221,181 
18 governorates 
Bangladesh 
147,570 
153,546,901 
6 divisions 
Egypt 
1,001,449 
80,335,036 
26 governorates 
France 
547,030 
59,765,983 
26 regions 
Germany 
357,021 
83,251,851 
16 states 
Indonesia 
1,919,440 
230,512,000 
30 provinces 
Italy 
301,230 
57,715,625 
15 provinces 
Norway 
324,220 
4,525,116 
19 counties 
Pakistan 
803,940 
167,762,049 
4 provinces 
Philippines 
300,000 
92,681,543 
80 provinces 
Poland 
312,655 
38,625,478 
16 provinces 
Saudi Arabia 
1,960,582 
23,513,330 
13 provinces 
Spain 
504,782 
40,077,100 
17 autonomous areas 
Sri Lanka 
65,610 
21,128,773 
8 provinces 
Sudan 
2,505,813 
36,992,490 
25 states 
Switzerland 
41,290 
7,301,994 
26 cantons 
Syria 
185,180 
19,747,586 
14 provinces 
Thailand 
514,000 
65,493,298 
76 provinces 
Tunisia 
163,610 
10,102,000 
21 governorates 
Turkey 
780,580 
67,308,928 
81 provinces 
Ukraine 
603,700 
48,396,470 
24 provinces 
United Kingdom 
244,820 
59,778,002 
114 counties

