171 

Photocopy of a page from the record showed details like the number of people, 
from where they were coming and where they intended to go, the truck number 
etc.  
The civil administration was at a loss on arrival of troops because they had not 
asked for troops in aid of civil power as is the practice in dealing with unrest 
beyond control of other law enforcing agencies. Mr Kamran Lashari, the Deputy 
Commissioner (DC) Sukker did take some days to call on the GOC after getting 
clearance from his superiors. In fact the administration and the provincial 
government were involved in ethnic cleansing, which had started gaining 
momentum. Having evicted such families who were living scattered in upper 
Sindh, now the attacks on settlements of ethnic non Sindhis were started. Had it 
been allowed to continue, the settlements in lower Sindh, in districts like Sanghar 
and Badin would also have been evicted. Reportedly when General Aslam Beg the 
COAS was asked by Prime Minister as to why troops had been moved in the area, 
his reply was that since 16 Division, responsible for internal security duties in the 
area was deployed in their battle locations on borders because of tension with 
India, there was a need to keep the lines of communications and logistic bases 
secure which were getting disturbed by increasing unrest. 
On arrival in the area, Headquarters (HQ) 5 Corps at Karachi started asking for the 
situation report. Since the GHQ had moved us on training, there being no request 
from the civil government for troops in aid of civil power, it created confusion 
initially as the Division was part of 12 Corps at Quetta. HQ 5 Corps responsible for 
the internal security duties for the province of Sindh provided us with the three 
types of lists. One was regarding the dacoit gangs operating in different areas, a 
fairly comprehensive list with names of gang leaders, gang members and their 
areas of operations. From the list one could make out that it was a very elaborate 
set up covering whole of upper Sindh which in the names of dacoits was actually a 
force capable of converting into insurgent force. The second list given was that of 
‘Patharidars’ a term used for protectors of these dacoit gangs. This included all big 
landlords like Jatois, Pagaras, Mahars, Mumtaz Bhutto and others. It was a well 
known fact that these big landlords were patronizing criminals for use against 
their disobedient and unmanageable tenants, the ‘Haris’, a tool used to terrorize

172 

people in the area. The third list was that of the Al Zulfikar (terrorist) organization. 
This list included names of people, the leaders in different areas and members of 
their teams. This again was an elaborate set up mainly comprising young, 
educated Sindhis, some of whom had got training in India for sabotage activities. 
Our intelligence officer had succeeded in getting the picture, revealing that 
groups of ten to twelve people would travel in boat from Karachi, disembark at 
nearest point on the Indian coast from where they were taken to a small town 
named Bhoj in area opposite Tharparkar. There, in a training course of six weeks 
they were trained in sabotage activities like blowing up railway lines, oil and gas 
pipelines, and target killings etc. According to information, thousands of Sindhi 
young men had got the training and they were waiting for weapons to be given 
and the tasks assigned.  This information was also reported in the press after few 
months when some members of the organization were caught near the borders 
and interrogated. As revealed by the informant, Benazir’s instructions to the party 
workers during her visits to Larkana were not to cooperate with the Army.  
While the move of our Division thwarted Benazir’s government plans of ethnic 
cleansing, driving out non Sindhi families from Sind, her government was also 
under pressure due to rampant corruption.  Although not brought out in public, 
the fact that her government was involved in ethnic cleansing and she was privy 
to the plans of Al Zulfikar fully supported by India contributed to her 
government’s removal. It was most ironic that the people of Pakistan were 
looking up to Benazir to make Pakistan a politically stable and economically 
prosperous country but she was found wanting in her capacity to provide that 
leadership rather conversely, she was working against interests of the State. Her 
government was soon removed and fresh elections resulted in change at the 
center as well as Sind where new provincial government was formed by Jam Sadiq 
Ali. The government under President Ishaq Khan helped political parties with 
funds to defeat PPP in elections. Later Air Marshal (Retired) Asghar Khan who had 
gone into election alliance with Benazir’s PPP got a case registered against the 
Army Chief for distributing funds to political parties. The real reasons for 
removing PPP government and efforts to deny Benazir’s Party in winning 
following elections were not made public even by the Supreme Court who 
disposed of Asghar Khan’s case many years later. A retired Brigadier called to give

173 

his statement was told by Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhri led Supreme Court to 
read only first three paragraphs of his eleven paragraphs statement. The rest 
eight must have been found too hot to handle by the Court. 
Stay in Sukker during summers becomes quite uncomfortable despite extensive 
use of air conditioners in offices and residential quarters of senior staff. The DC, 
Mr Kamran Lashari would occasionally invite us for dinner followed by local 
musicians playing their traditional instruments while singing folk songs. I had 
earlier spent some time in Sind in command of 27 Punjab and had seen conditions 
of poor people of the area. This stay of about seven months from May to 
December 1990 gave me further insight. The poor people of Sind, particularly the 
‘Haris’, tilling lands were being exploited by three different categories of 
oppressors. The first one was ‘Wadera’ the landlord, the other class was Police 
and yet another group was the ‘dacoits’ who could do anything with the lives of 
poor people, their womenfolk and their meager resources. Dacoits were living off 
the land in control of vast area on both side of the Indus River, known as Kacha 
bounded by flood protection bunds.  During a chance to fly low level in a small 
military aircraft from Sukker to Karachi, I observed that these bunds were placed 
at considerable distance from the water line, encompassing very large tracts of 
fertile land. This land had been distributed to big landlords in the form of 
Shikargahs, the private game reserves. The chunks of lands spreading in 
kilometers were known as Ketis, like Keti Jatoi, Keti Bugheo, Keti Bhutto etc. The 
meaning of the Keti, I was told by the locals, was that the land which could not be 
measured. It was true that these chunks of land could not be measured because 
of periodic changes in course of water running through the area.  
The landlords owning these vast lands would do a very small investment on the 
rulers by inviting them in winters for ‘shikar’ (hunting). Generally two such parties 
were arranged during the season; one for the top men of civil bureaucracy and 
another for top generals of the armed forces. The hunting party would start in the 
morning in an area where partridges or other birds were preserved and most of 
the time placed after procuring from other areas. The shikaris (hunters) would 
move in a linear formation towards the direction where birds were expected to 
be. Another party of workers, Haris of the landlord, would move to drive the birds

174 

towards direction of Shikaris. A very sumptuous lunch would be arranged on the 
site. By evening the party would wrap up and disperse. This arrangement was 
enough for the host to enjoy patronage of most influential people in the 
government.  
The vast lands bounded by flood protection bunds formed at unreasonably wider 
distance are a great asset which if used purposefully, can bring prosperity to the 
poor people tilling these lands and overall increase in national wealth. In 1991 
from Bunji I wrote to Mr. Mushahid Hussain Syed, advisor to then Prime Minister 
Mr. Nawaz Sharif to distribute lands to poor Haris if Muslum League wanted to 
get ingress into interior Sindh. I assume it was on this suggestion that soon a 
scheme was launched to distribute land measuring twelve acres to landless 
‘Haris’. Major General Sikandar Hayat, a serving Army officer, was made in charge 
of the scheme which was later discontinued with the fall of Nawaz Sharif’s first 
government. 
In the politics of Sindh Province, Mr. Altaf Hussain led Party Muhajir Quami 
Movement (MQM) later replacing the word ‘Muhajir’ with ‘Mutahidda’, had 
considerable presence in Sukker. This Party emerged as major political force in 
the cities of Karachi, Hyderabad, Sukker and some other cities in Sindh. A general 
perception that the party was created by the ‘Establishment’ is not correct. 
Transforming from a student’s union to a political Party, its leader Mr. Altaf 
Hussain was first brought to notice of the President, General Zia ul Haq when 
large numbers of Pushtuns in Karachi were massacred in 1985 after Ms Bushra 
Zaidi a college student, died in traffic accident. Late Brigadier Mian Arshad Iqbal, 
AC, hailing from Nowshera, who was then Brigade Major of the Armoured Brigade 
responsible for Internal Security duties in Karachi, narrated the incident during a 
sitting at his house in Quetta during 1990. According to him on that tragic day the 
President was in Karachi and had to be briefed by Brigade Commander on the 
situation before leaving for Islamabad. During briefing when the President was 
shown pictures of mutilated bodies of the people killed, he delayed his departure 
and asked for Haji Hanif Tayyub of JUI to be called. It took a couple of hours to 
trace Haji Hanif and bring him to meet the waiting President. Haji Hanif Tayyub 
after discussion told the President that a boy, Altaf Hussian could control this

175 

situation. Thus Mr. Altaf Hussian came to the notice of ‘Establishment’ when he 
was already a known player in Karachi’s deteriorating situation.  
In mid 1990, while deployed in upper Sindh, 41 Division had change of command. 
Major General Bilal Ahmad’s frequent trips back to Quetta were not liked by 
senior leadership and he was replaced by Major General (later Lieutenant 
General) Muhammad Akram considering the sensitive nature of the job which 
required a serious and dedicated professional.  
By end of the year 1990, having spent three years with 41 Division as its first 
Colonel Staff and passed over for further promotion, I was posted as 
Commandant Northern Light Infantry (NLI) Regimental Centre located at Bunji 
near Gilgit. I joined the Centre in first week of December 1990.

176 

Lure of Mountains 
Bunji 
Northern Light Infantry Centre is located at Bunji, about 55 kilometres south of 
Gilgit. Bunji, a small place on eastern bank of Indus River, was the last outpost of 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir till mid nineteenth century. From then on it 
served as staging point for launching further incursions by Kashmiri forces 
towards Gilgit. By mid nineteenth century the Kashmiri forces after some struggle 
succeeded in wresting control of Gilgit. After sometime the British decided to 
occupy this area to counter possible Russian incursions into this region. The 
British abandoned their first attempt of establishing residency (1877-1880) at 
Gilgit but again towards the end of nineteenth century (1889) British Residency at 
Gilgit was re-established. Gilgit was taken on lease from Maharaja of Kashmir 
from where the British expanded their control over Hunza and Nagar after some 
tough fighting. Apart from Gilgit, other small states and principalities in those 
inaccessible mountainous areas, like Nagar and Hunza towards east of Gilgit 
bordering China,  Punial, Gupis, Ashkoman, Yaseen towards west and Chilas 
towards south of Gilgit were administered by the British Resident in Gilgit. While 
Hunza and Nagar were ruled by hereditary rulers titled as ‘Mirs’, others 
principalities were ruled by governors titled as ‘Rajas’ appointed by the British. 
The lease period of British was yet to be completed when the momentous event 
of Independence of the sub continent from British rule took place in 1947.  
I recollected the tale of Subedar Abdul Rahman; senior JCO of my company when I 
joined 34 Punjab deployed on the ceasefire line in Dewa - Batala opposite Chamb 
Sector in June 1966, who marched from Jammu to Bunji as a young man, a Lance 
Naik in 6 J&K Regiment. I had listened to his adventures which seemed so distant, 
evoking romance of his exciting journey through difficulties and travails of 
traversing snow clad high mountain passes on foot. There was no mechanical 
transport in use in those days on the route taken by their unit to cross Burzil Pass 
and ultimately reach Bunji. His unit 6 J&K had its Headquarters and two 
companies, a Muslim Company commanded by Captain Hassan Khan and a Sikh 
Company comprising mostly recruits, located at Bunji. Its other companies were 
deployed at Skardu and elsewhere in Baltistan.

177 

It was from Bunji that Muslim Company of 6 J&K commanded by Captain Hassan 
Khan marched towards Gilgit to join Gilgit Scouts who had started liberation 
movement in Northern Areas. This Company was stopped by Gilgit Scouts mid 
way between Bunji and Gilgit to determine its intentions and after confirmation 
was allowed to reach Gilgit. The Scouts numbering a little less than six hundred 
were being led by their Subedar Major Babar Khan from Nagar. The Scouts were 
commanded by Major Brown, a young British officer who was made ineffective if 
not complicit. Babar Khan along with six Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs) of 
the Scouts arrested Brigadier Ghansara Singh; the Governor sent by Maharaja of 
Kashmir to take over control of Gilgit from the British, declared independence and 
started their campaign to liberate Northern Areas from Dogra rule. The Scouts 
JCOs, Babar Khan and Shah Khan from the States of Nagar and Hunza respectively 
were influential men in the area being from the ruling families.  
Major Brown was replaced by Major Aslam Khan (later Brigadier) as commandant 
Gilgit scouts who established himself at Bunji where he raised more forces and 
organized the liberation campaign sending forces to Baltistan, Astore and Kargil-
Zoji La sectors. A man with exceptional organizational abilities and drive he made 
vital contribution in liberating vast areas from Dogra rule. His role although is not 
given due recognition in the local lore. His memory however, remains preserved 
in the form of ‘Shangri-La’ a holiday resort near Skardu where he is buried along 
with his wife. He had selected this spot where he could form a small artificial lake 
by blocking a stream and then moved a crashed aircraft laying over sand dunes 
near Skardu Airport. He used wooden logs as rollers to move this aircraft for 
about twenty kilometres on a dusty track and then furnished it into a two 
bedroom lodging facility. Remaining infrastructure was built around that aircraft 
later. 
Reaching Bunji in the month of December was an adventure. An officer from the 
Centre, Captain Ghulam Muhammad Awan, had been sent by outgoing 
Commandant, Colonel Ashraf Hussain Shah to Rear Headquarters Force Command 
Northern Areas (FCNA) at Chaklala to contact and accompany me in my travel to 
the Centre. First we tried to travel by air but the flights were not operating 
because of bad weather. For air travel one had to get up early in the morning and

178 

reach the airport before sunrise. There, as it happened often, after waiting for a 
couple of hours one was told that flight would not operate because clouds had 
appeared in area of Nanga Parbat blocking the valley through which PIA Fokker 
aircraft, with maximum ceiling of about eighteen thousands feet, had to pass 
through. The adverse weather conditions would develop suddenly making air 
travel most uncertain. Going to the airport and coming back disappointed was a 
routine exercise. It happened with me twice during that tenure in Northern Areas 
that our aircraft took off, flew for some time and then had to land back at 
Islamabad airport because of unexpected cloud cover around Chilas.  
Abandoning the option of air travel after some unsuccessful efforts, we started by 
road on the Karakorum Highway (KKH). It was last week of December and before 
leaving Chaklala we did check up the road condition ahead which was reportedly 
clear. During the travel it started raining and by the time we reached Chattar Plain 
we found that we could not go any further because of heavy snowfall blocking the 
road. We had to abandon this effort and came back to where we had started. Yet 
another option was to travel by helicopter going to Gilgit if one could arrange a 
seat in it. Ultimately this option worked and we landed at the helipad of NLI 
Centre Bunji one fine morning in late December 1990. 
Colonel Ashraf Hussain Shah, a Punjab Regiment officer and a course mate from 
PMA briefed me about the organization. He had worked hard to improve 
conditions at the Centre. During his tenure, Chief of the Army Staff, General Mirza 
Aslam Beg and some other senior officers visited the Centre. Before that hardly 
any senior person would visit the place because of it being on the wrong side of 
Indus River across KKH, linked through a suspension bridge. Another reason was 
the Commandants who were mostly passed over for promotion like me were 
hardly interested in receiving any visitors. Colonel Ashraf had been posted to the 
Centre with a special consideration. Before him Colonel Muhammad Aziz had 
gathered around him few officers who like him were active participants in 
activities of the Tablighi Jamaat. Unfortunately during that period sectarian 
tension had developed in Gilgit resulting in clashes between Sunnis and Shias. A 
private force, a ‘Lashkar’ comprising Sunnis marched from Kohistan district 
towards Gilgit causing destruction of several houses of Shias in villages along the

179 

way before it was stopped just south of Gilgit. Word spread that while passing 
through Bunji, the Lashkar had been provided with weapons and ammunition by 
NLI Centre and some thought that Commandant had actually joined the Lashkar. 
Although untrue, this was a very negative perception. Colonel Aziz was posted out 
and replaced by Colonel Ashraf Hussain Shah.  
The sectarian tension between predominant Sunni population of Pakistan and the 
Shias exacerbated during the period of Zia ul Haq when religious seminaries were 
funded and used to recruit fighters for war against the Russians in Afghanistan. 
There was no state control over the movement on our western borders, nor any 
restriction on movement of Afghan nationals within the country. Although 
refugee camps had been established but very large number of Afghan nationals of 
every ethnic and sectarian dispensation were free to move anywhere they liked. A 
large number had got them registered as Pakistani nationals due to lax 
procedures in giving national identity cards. In Northern Areas, external forces 
were involved using their local agents to disturb peace in the strategically 
important area on our borders with China. According to reports, posters 
distributed in the area by rival groups to fan hatred using abusive and derogatory 
language against each other were printed at faraway Multan in the same press, a 
clear indication on the common source of funding and people involved in 
fomenting trouble being the same. One important player in this game got killed in 
Gilgit due to personal enmity during my tenure. His removal from the scene and 
simultaneously our efforts in reaching out to motivate ex-servicemen and the 
common people helped in reducing intensity of the trouble for quite a few years 
afterwards. 
With this sectarian background, my posting created ripples in the concerned 
circles, a Sunni replacing a Shia Commandant, of which I learnt a little later. In 
Pakistan Army, sect of a person was never a consideration. Before Pakistan’s 
involvement in the fight against Russians in Afghanistan, there was hardly ever a 
case of sectarian dispute in the country, the Sunnis facilitating Shia’s annual 
Muharram processions by making arrangement for provision of milk and 
‘sharbats’ on well defined routes from where processions had to pass through the 
towns and cities.  In Northern Areas, there were four different sects i.e. Shias,

180 

Ismailis, Sunnis and Nur Bakhshis living peacefully for ages. The Sunnis were 
mainly in Chilas District, the Shia’s predominantly in Baltistan and Nagar, the 
Ismailis in Hunza and Punial and Nur Bakhsi’s, small in number in some parts of 
Baltistan. In Gilgit, people of every sect were residing in the town. During the 
years of sectarian tension, at start of summers every year a vehicle would 
suddenly appear in the main bazaar spraying bullets resulting in killing of some 
persons. That was enough to spread terror and the whole tourist season would go 
without much business because of the effects it created nationwide. The 
terrorists were never caught by local police.  
Winter months were generally a lull period, when except for essential training 
activities and routine there was nothing much to do. It was a good opportunity to 
get acquainted with the place, environment and problems before summers which 
was a busy period. On the occasion of Eid, I asked Subedar Major (SM) about 
arrangements for Eid prayers. He told me that there was no such practice in the 
Centre of offering Eid prayers; Sunnis joined the villagers of Bunji in their village 
mosque and the Shias and Ismailies went mostly to Gilgit. I told the SM to make 
arrangements for offering Eid prayers centrally at one place, an unprecedented 
event hitherto. It was most satisfying that persons of all four sects prayed 
together and continued to do so on all subsequent occasions of Eid during my 
stay there. In my monthly address to troops during Durbar, I would conclude the 
proceedings by a word of advice to all that sects were created because of political 
reasons and not due to any religious consideration, and sectarian differences 
were always exploited for political reasons.  
Centre Commandant enjoyed a prestigious position in the entire area because he 
could give employment to a large number of young men each year. Being 
successor of the Scouts, the Centre was also responsible to look after interests of 
retired persons of Gilgit Scouts, Northern Scouts and Karakorum Scouts which had 
merged to form the NLI Regt. These people, advanced in age, were quite 
influential in their communities. They proved very useful in joining our effort to 
overcome sectarian tensions in the area. The Centre, under the direction of Major 
General Zahir ul Islam Abbasi, Commander FCNA, organized nine ex-servicemen 
rallies in different valleys ending with a grand rally at Gilgit. The aim of holding

