131 

unit and individual level, the outcome could not be any different. Prolonged stay 
as prisoners in India also increased concern creating compassionate feelings for 
the prisoners. 
After spending two months leave, I reported at re-assembly camp established at 
Quetta for detailed debriefing and further disposal. Another such camp had been 
established at Kharian. Here we were made to write detailed account of our 
actions. Adjusting to changed environments was taking time as long detention 
had taken its toll. For example crossing a road became an ordeal. It seemed as if 
while crossing the road one would be crushed by approaching vehicles. The 
judgments of time and space had gone wrong. Market prices of various items of 
daily use seemed unrealistic. At Quetta I went to a shop to buy an ash tray. I could 
not reconcile to the price demanded for a plastic ash tray and came back without 
buying it. Since it was a necessity item for me then, I went again next day to buy it 
at the asking price. We took time to become normal without any professional 
help from the State and the Army. 
After a few weeks at re-assembly camp we were given movement orders to join 
different units where we were posted. I was posted to 53 Punjab located at 
Kharian, the old station from where I had gone to East Pakistan. Since my unit, 34 
Punjab did not exist at that time because units that were in East Pakistan were 
not immediately re-raised, we the ‘returnees’ were posted to different units. Two 
of my other unit officers, Majors Khurshid Ahmad Mallal and Nisar Hussain 
Bukhari were also posted to 53 Punjab. My company officer Captain Afreen was 
posted to 2 Punjab, also located at Kharian.  
Move to Dera Bugti  
As I was trying to adjust to the routine of cantonment life, an unexpected order 
disturbed that process. The Brigade, of which 53 Punjab was a part, was ordered 
to move to Dera Bugti in Balochistan. Here at Kharian we the ‘returnees’ were 
provided with the opportunity to appear for Staff College Entrance Examination 
and promotion examinations that we has missed during last about four years. 
Special examinations were arranged during the month of August 1974. As we 
were going through these examinations, Major M Saeed Azam Khan of our unit

132 

who on return had been posted to 29 Punjab located at Kahan, Marri Agency in 
Balochistan and was with us in Kharian for the examinations got the news that his 
Commanding Officer (CO) Lieutenant Colonel Mumtaz had lost his life in an 
ambush near Kahan. Major Saeed Azam was required to immediately join the 
unit. He reached Kahan and found that a person named Sher Muhammad from 
nearby hamlet; a regular visitor of the CO was involved in laying that ambush 
based on his information about Colonel Mumtaz’s movement. Major Saeed Azam 
caught up with the criminal getting him killed when next firing incident took place 
near Kahan soon after. Lot of hue and cry was raised by terrorists’ sympathisers in 
the National Assembly and Major Saeed Azam had to face inquiries and 
punishment. His Unit apparently was going through a bad spell because after a 
few months the next CO Lieutenant Colonel Rao Muhammad Iqbal also got killed 
when while travelling he made his escort to practice anti ambush drill during 
move. The man firing Light Machine Gun could not hold the gun in position and 
his firing resulted in CO’s death and injuries to other persons. Iqbal Rao, hailing 
from Okara was gem of a person. He had been my Company Commander in 34 
Punjab at Kharian during 1967-68. He had been posted to 34 Punjab after serving 
in Pakistan Rangers deployed in Tharparker area and would narrate the harsh 
conditions of life around Mithi, Diplo and other places in Tharparker area.  
In September 1974, we moved to Dera Bugti via Guddu, Kashmore and Sui. One of 
the units was placed at Kahan in Marri tribal area and two units in Bugti tribal 
area. 53 Punjab with its headquarters at Dera Bugti, located in an old abandoned 
dilapidated fort which only had mud walls standing, placed my company along 
with another company commanded by Captain Muhammad Javed (later Major 
General) at Pathar Nullah on the route Dera Bugti – Kahan. This place was close to 
the boundary between Bugti and Marri tribal areas, a place called Doi Wadh. Near 
the company location was a nullah with two to three feet running water. During 
operations inside Marri tribal area, we found perennial streams with crystal clear 
water full of fish. We learnt that tribal people were under the impression that fish 
in those streams was not an edible item. Our mosquito nets became a convenient 
gear to catch the fish easily that we ate with relish during our stay.

133 

My company was tasked to provide protection to Oil and Gas Development 
Corporation (OGDC) people working on a site called Muhammad Lath, about 
fifteen kilometers west of Pathar Nullah. For their movement, Road Opening Day 
(ROD) procedures had to be followed every day by deploying troops on a defile 
and some other places on the route to avoid any hostile action against OGDC 
workers. One day when Brigade Commander, Brigadier Jalal, nicknamed ‘Baba 
Thand’ visited Pathar Nullah, I suggested that my company and the OGDC workers 
should be moved onto the site to avoid considerable effort and resources on daily 
movement. The suggestion was accepted and I was ordered to move to the work 
site. The OGDC people were waiting for the oil rig to be brought to the site and 
had no work except some digging to pitch tents for living. They had good quality 
tents, larger in size as compared to those of ours. We had bivouacs, one each for 
two men and small forty-pounder tents for officers. Initially the OGDC workers 
had problem in shifting to the site because at Pathar Nullah camp they were 
indulging in small business. Their vehicles made frequent trips to Kashmor, 
bringing necessary provisions for sale to the local people. They resorted to writing 
applications against me and I had to give explanations for things like arresting and 
detaining their men. Gradually they adjusted to the new realties. My company 
officer Captain Shahid Mehmud organised the work of erecting boundary walls 
around our small compound with stones available in the area. This place is now 
known as Pir Koh Gas Field after drilling operations succeeded in discovering gas 
reserves. The name has been chosen because a holy man is buried in that area at 
the place known as Ziarat Pir Suri. 
After sometime, my company was shifted to Sangsila west of Dera Bugti, a small 
mud fort located in a wider valley. A stream of considerable size made its way 
through a low hill north of the fort. Here, the water had made a pool; where 
according to local tradition the depth of water was said to be unfathomable. 
Anyway, the water was abundant but unfortunately was wasted, not being used 
for irrigation. There were remnants of an unsuccessful effort to build a small dam 
for irrigation during the Ayub Khan era when Nawab Akbar Bugti was under 
detention but the project was abandoned as soon as he was released, obviously 
he never wanted that kind of development in his area. In fact the tribal people 
were also not keen to raise crops, nor had much knowhow about agriculture

134 

which demanded some hard work. They were content on grazing goats and sheep 
which did not demand labour and they had ample time for playing some musical 
instrument and asking Hal Ahwal, with anyone passing through the area. 
According to their custom, this Hal Ahwal had an elaborate procedure. The men 
had to narrate all the happenings which they had gone through or heard about 
since their last meeting with each other which could be after a long time. 
Obviously there was a lot to talk about and they had ample time at their disposal 
to spend on such activities. I had observed that the population was very sparse 
and their living and requirements were very simple. Despite availability of water 
in some streams which could be harnessed, vast tracts of cultivable lands were 
lying unutilised except for grazing purposes.  
We undertook search adequate operations deep into mountains following Sartaf 
Nullah in Marri tribe’s area north east of Kahan. Here also we found some 
perennial streams but the water was not utilised for irrigating the fertile virgin 
lands.  
Bugti tribe had seven sub-tribes headed by their ‘Waderas’. Nawab Akbar Bugti 
was from Raheja branch settled in and around Dera Bugti. One of the sub tribes, 
the Massuri’s did not accept Akbar Bugti as their tribal head; they had differences 
since the time of his father. Another sub tribe, the Kalpars settled around Sui 
were also not under any influence of Nawab Bugti, mainly because they had jobs 
with the Sui Gas installations thus becoming economically independent and 
getting out of shackles of tribal system. In fact at that time (1973-74) it was only 
about forty households supporting the Nawab that would obey his commands. 
His position got strengthened when successive governments gave large amounts 
of royalty for the newly developed Pir Koh Gas field, the money which he never 
used for welfare of his tribe. Earlier, the royalty from Sui gas fields was also used 
by Bugti brothers in patronizing vibrant night life of Karachi in fifties and sixties.  
Akbar Bugti, who claimed to have killed his first man at the age of twelve, died a 
violent death in a cave in Marri tribal area in August 2006. Proclaimed as 
Commander-in-Chief of a terrorist group known as Balochistan Liberation Army, 
waging war against the State of Pakistan, his force was firing rockets on gas 
installations and carrying out sabotage activities like blowing up railway and

135 

power lines.  When his position was detected and a party comprising four officers 
led by a Lieutenant Colonel of the Pakistan Army approached him to persuade 
him to come out of the cave, an explosion resulted in instant death of those 
officers.  Akbar Bugti also got killed. A man who had enjoyed a prestigious 
position in Pakistan in various capacities should not have succumbed to 
machinations of such terrorist groups sponsored by foreign powers working 
against the interests of the State. May be his old age blurred his judgment. In any 
case it was a most tragic event. I vividly recollect memories of having conducted 
him on a tour of Cooli Camp in Quetta Cantonment. One afternoon, when I was 
Colonel Staff of 41 Division, I got a message that the Governor, Mr. Akbar Bugti 
wanted to visit Cooli Camp to see the barrack where he had been detained during 
Ayub Khan’s rule. I met his party at Seven Streams (Pani Taqseem) roundabout, a 
famous landmark in the cantonment and conducted him to the area. Although 
Cooli camp was still largely in the same dilapidated shape, he could not exactly 
locate the barrack where he remained in confinement. He departed after having a 
cup of tea in the Divisional Officers Mess located on Staff College Road. His voice 
was surprisingly meek compared to his large frame. He had other peculiarities 
which I noticed at different occasions, for example while sitting at a large dinner 
table in Quetta Club, instead of sharing prescribed menu, he got his own food 
served to him comprising Dall and Chapattis with lot of green chilies as his salad. 
At another occasion, while listening to Farida Khanum the famous Ghazal Singer 
of the time, at Serena Hotel Quetta, he sat good part of the night without getting 
up even once although he was consuming a lot of water from a jug placed before 
him. People like me, much younger to him, could not continue sitting unmoved 
like him.  He was a remarkable man who regrettably lost his bearings in old age, 
and his tragic end was indeed sad news. 
Coming back to events of 1974, sitting in wilderness at Sangsila I began to have 
very disturbing thoughts. Although the unrest, for which Army had been deployed 
in Baluchistan at that time, was confined to two very small pockets, the Marri 
tribal area and some area around Wadh/ Khuzdar, the impression given 
throughout Pakistan and the world was that province of Balochistan, almost forty 
five percent land mass of Pakistan, was in revolt against the State of Pakistan. 
Because of my recent catastrophic experience in erstwhile East Pakistan, I knew

136 

how a small group with support from outside powers could achieve objectives far 
beyond their capabilities as it had led to break up of Pakistan. The solution I 
contemplated was to replace large unequal provinces of Pakistan with about 
thirty almost equal size provinces named after principal cities. 
In about eight years of duty in the province of Balochistan at different times 
between the years 1967 to 1990, I had the chance of traversing whole length and 
breadth of this vast land. My observation is that Pashtuns, living in areas east and 
northeast of Quetta have utilised the land and available water resources to the 
optimum level because of their hard work. The areas inhabited by non Pashtun 
communities and  tribes are vast tracts of unutilised lands except some pockets 
like Mastung, Qalat, Khuzdar and Panjgur/ Turbat, the later known for very good 
quality dates. The Province is wrongly named if ethnicity is the consideration of 
naming it. Pushtunes, Brahavis, Mekranis, Iranians, Jats, Hazaras combined are 
much more in numbers than Balochs living in the Province.  There are more 
Balochs in Punjab and Sindh than in Balochistan. The province itself is populated 
by tribes and communities other than Balochs in Balochistan. Brahavis are 
concentrated in Kalat plateau, Medes (like Nausherwanis having affinity with 
Siestan in Iran) mainly inhabiting Kharan, Jats and Lassi living in Las Bela and 
surroundings and people of Arab and African origin in coastal areas of  Makran. 
Population in all these areas would not total up to be more than three million 
people. The hinterland is devoid of population, the habitations mainly 
concentrated in small towns. 
In April 1975, 53 Punjab was ordered to move back to Kharian as it had come 
under a scheme where its manpower had to be shed to other units, keeping only 
a skeleton staff as an economy measure.  
53 Punjab, later re-designated as 18 Sind, had very well trained and competent 
junior leaders, the JCOs and NCOs. Raised by Lieutenant Colonel Hafeez Ur 
Rahman, my CO in East Pakistan in earlier part of 1971, this unit was now being 
commanded by Major Jamil Masud (later Brigadier) as an officiating CO. The unit 
performed assigned tasks most successfully without suffering casualties except 
four people wounded in a road accident. The unit used to provide food to poor 
people from its unit cook houses wherever it moved and established its camps.

137 

This and other practices like sacrificing animals before undertaking any move or 
operation seeking Allah’s blessings contributed to safety and success of the unit’s 
actions which of course were undertaken with meticulous planning. 
Re-Raising of 34 Punjab at Okara Cantonment 
After coming back from Baluchistan, I was posted to my parent unit, 34 Punjab, as 
it was re-raised in April 1975 at Okara, a new cantonment still under construction. 
I joined the unit in June 1975. Out of the manpower we had in East Pakistan, only 
about thirty people rejoined, the rest readjusted in other units during the 
preceding year while a good number had gone home. Training to integrate 
manpower from other units, introducing them to the drills and procedures of an 
R&S unit was started in earnest under the officiating CO Major (later Lieutenant 
Colonel) Mohammad Saeed Azam Khan, who was a Company Commander with 
the unit during the 1971 War. 
Re-raising of 14 Division at under construction cantonment posed serious 
accommodation and allied problems. Officer’s accommodation being last priority 
after the completion of barracks for the troops was most inadequate. Only one 
house was made available to the unit that was occupied by the officiating CO. I 
rented portion of a house in Okara City courtesy Captain Ali Shan, a local from 
Okara serving in the unit.  For attending to duties in an infantry battalion, it was a 
most inconvenient arrangement, travelling considerable distance between the 
city and cantonment on motor cycle. Briefly I moved to a private under 
construction house in the Cantonment but that was again a very unsatisfactory 
arrangement. After some time, I got a house allotted in very unusual manner. 
Major General Naseer Ullah Khan Babar was in command of this Division in its 
process of re-raising. General Babar had been awarded for gallantry during 1965 
War. Flying a small helicopter in Chamb area when our forces were advancing into 
the salient, he mistakenly landed at a place where he found a group of Indian 
soldiers. Using his presence of mind and enormous confidence, he herded them 
to nearby Pakistani unit. While in command of the Division, he made it a practice 
to address all officers of the garrison at frequent intervals asking them of their 
problems. He offered his availability to everyone at any time even while during his 
walk or in his house. He was living in one of the newly constructed Bawani type

138 

houses located in a row without any protocol or guards etc. Frustrated by 
inconvenience that I was suffering from, I decided to avail of his offer when one 
evening I just walked into his house unannounced. There I found a couple of 
senior officers with families visiting him. After enjoying the hospitality, I begged 
my leave.The General, leaving his guests seated came out with me and asked if I 
had some problem for which I had come to him. I told him of my problem and 
suggesting the solution that my unit had been given only one house as compared 
to two houses given to other major units and if allotted a house to the unit my 
problem will get solved. He told me to come to his office next day when in my 
presence after getting details of houses available or likely to be available, he told 
his staff to allot a house to my unit. I was allotted a newly constructed house out 
of four houses built for Ordnance Depot at the end of cantonment about six miles 
away from entrance to the cantonment on main Lahore Multan  road. Around the 
houses we had sugarcane fields, where we could watch the process of turning 
sugarcane into ‘Rowh’ that after adequate heating turning into ‘gur’ during the 
winters. Fresh milk and vegetables were taken from nearby ‘Dera’ in close vicinity. 
It was like living in a village enjoying benefits of village life. 
After collecting weapons, vehicles and equipment authorized to the unit from 
different places and completing individual level training, the unit went to Field 
Firing ranges north of Muzaffargarh to carry out live firing from major weapons 
like the recoilless rifles and machine guns. Move from Okara to the ranges with 
over one hundred vehicles mostly jeeps collected from other users became a 
difficult logistic exercise when the vehicles got stranded due to mechanical faults 
all along the road travelled. The capacity and patience of our recovery team was 
fully tested and the unit ultimately reached the ranges to undertake firing 
practices.  
Here a most unfortunate and tragic incident occurred. We lost six men when a 
106 mm recoilless rifle bust into pieces. I was conducting the fire standing in half 
dug foxhole on one side of four recoilless rifles placed in a row at appropriate 
distances. I was assisted by Battalion Havildar Major (BHM) Muhammad Sadiq 
who was with the unit in East Pakistan. A very handsome man and most effective 
professional, he had been approved for promotion and was to put on the rank of

139 

Naib Subedar shortly. A few minutes before the incident, he was exhorting a little 
unsteady young soldier carrying the heavy round from stock towards gun 
position, not to be scared. He told the man ‘do not get scared, you will not die, I 
have done so much firing of this weapon, nothing happens’ Alas those words 
were not true that day.   
After some rounds had been fired in turn one by one from the rifles, when I 
ordered ‘fire’ to the crew of number three gun placed away from me, a loud bang, 
hissing sound of flying something in the air and smoke engulfed the site.   After 
some moments as the smoke got cleared we found that projectile of the round, 
which should have gone to the target placed at eight hundred yards away from 
weapon, was lying unexploded in front of the position. The rifle itself had broken 
into three pieces, its front and breach lying on the site, its middle portion about 
one meter length disintegrated into pieces spread in the area. Six people had lost 
their lives including BHM Sadiq.  After East Pakistan, particularly at Panjbibi on 13 
December 1971, for me this was again a close call. A small piece of barrel flying in 
the area could have been fatal. I had undergone training course at the Infantry 
School and conducted lots of fire from this weapon but could not understand 
what caused the accident.  
The news was immediately passed to the Division. General Babar dispatched 
Lieutenant Colonel Ahmad Jan commanding Supply and Transport Battalion of the 
Division as president court of inquiry. As the inquiry progressed involving a team 
from Pakistan Ordnance Factory (POF) reaching site and referring the matter to 
manufacturers in the US, it transpired that the particular type of gun, Type ‘A’ had 
been considered unsafe and withdrawn from inventory by manufacturers.  We 
had collected this used gun from Ordnance Depot Drigh Road, Karachi from the 
old stock deposited with the Depot some years back. According to inspection 
procedures, the inspection team at the Depot gave remarks ‘visually inspected, 
barrel pitted, serviceable Class One’. On arrival in the unit when presented to 
technical team for initial inspection, same remarks were repeated on the record 
book. As users we had no clue of the extent of damage by ‘pitting’ of inside 
surface. Declared ‘serviceable Class One’ we had clearance to use the weapon. 
The reason for withdrawal of this type of rifles given by the manufacturers was

140 

that riveting of spotting rifle fixed on the main barrel had gone deeper into the 
rifle making it weak and thus unsafe. Combined with pitting due to earlier use, 
this rifle could only fire six rounds and exploded at seventh round on that day 
causing us an avoidable tragedy if we knew better. The force of ignited propellant 
charge required to push the projectile towards target caused blowing up the rifle 
itself because of weakened barrel.   
General Babar, while sending the Inquiry team, instructed Lieutenant Colonel 
Ahmad Jan that he should conduct the inquiry without causing unnecessary 
harassment to the unit. Here again it reflects upon the character of the man 
commanding the Division. The Generals of that time inspired confidence in 
subordinates and commanded deep respect due to their conduct. They accepted 
mistakes and were not afflicted with ‘zero error syndromes’.  
General Babar was picked up by Prime Minister Z.A. Bhutto to become Governor 
of the NWFP, now KPK. During his farewell visit to our unit I asked him about his 
feelings.  He replied that for the present job in the Army he had been trained for 
years. He was being pushed into a new field of which he was unsure about the 
future. 
After spending about a year with the unit I was posted to South Waziristan Scouts 
(SWS) at Wana, the Agency HQ of South Waziristan.

