41 

General Yahya Khan’s Rule 
President Ayub Khan handed over power to the Army Chief General Yahya Khan in 
March 1969 after agitations against his rule initiated by Mr. Bhutto and also 
because of his sickness. There were reports at that time that the President was 
forced to hand over power to the Army Chief instead of the Speaker National 
Assembly according to the 1962 Constitution. Yahya Khan announced general 
elections which were held in December 1970. The results of elections were 
against calculation of the President and his team who expected a split mandate in 
both East and West Pakistan. According to results Awami League led by Sheikh 
Mujib Ur Rahman swept elections in East Pakistan based on his six point formula 
demanding provincial autonomy. Only two seats were won by others. In West 
Pakistan Mr. Bhutto’s PPP won majority of seats in the provinces of Punjab and 
Sind. The provinces of Frontier (now KPK) and Baluchistan voted for the 
nationalist and religious elements. 
General Yahya is credited with holding fair elections in the country but that can 
only be said about West Pakistan. In East Pakistan the elections were won by 
Awami League because of massive rigging, intimidation and violence. The 
opponents of the Awami league were prevented to go to the polling stations. The 
government machinery in the province was totally ineffective and could not 
prevent Awami League workers who controlled the polling process denying other 
parties to exercise vote. 
A major decision by General Yahya before the polls was to break up 'One Unit' 
which had been formed by amalgamating the existing provinces, states and tribal 
areas into one Province of West Pakistan according to the first constitution 
adopted in 1956. This arrangement was not changed in the second constitution 
adopted in 1962. The decision to do away with One Unit was reportedly taken on 
behest of Mr. Wali Khan who contacted Yahya's brother Agha Muhammad Ali, a 
Police officer to ask his brother to dismantle One Unit. This was not a public 
demand at that time. The public demand was adult franchise, one man one vote, 
to replace the system of Union Council members electing the President according 
to 1962 Constitution. This was granted in the Legal Framework Order formulated 
by Yahya Khan's government and elections were held accordingly.

42 

According to election results, Awami League had an overwhelming majority. It 
was in a position to form the government but was not allowed to do so, starting a 
chain of events which in a short span of one tumultuous year led to break up of 
Pakistan. The National Assembly session, called at Dacca on 03 March 1971, was 
boycotted by Mr. Bhutto who stopped his party members to attend the session 
and threatened others from West Pakistan of physical violence like breaking their 
legs if they tried to attend the session. This development precipitated the crises 
causing widespread disturbances leading to virtual anarchy. Military action to 
control the situation further aggravated the situation resulting in open rebellion 
in East Pakistan, culminating in war with India and break up of Pakistan. Mr. 
Bhutto ultimately achieved his objective of ruling a country even if it were only a 
part of what was once the largest Muslim country of the world enjoying most 
prestigious position in the comity of nations.  
General Yahya Khan as President mostly remained in an inebriated state and did 
not want to leave the President House. A general impression about him was that 
during service he was always hard up in clearing his mess and club bills which 
mainly were for drinks he used to consume in large quantities. On reaching the 
President House he found that the drinks were free so his problem had been 
solved. He was enjoying the best quality drinks free of cost. After elections, he 
first tried to get assurance from Mr. Mujib to keep him as President even if was to 
be without any powers but Mujib could not give him this assurance. Mr. Bhutto 
then invited him to Larkana where understanding developed between the two. 
After this meeting General Yahya postponed the National Assembly session called 
at Dacca on 3 March 1971, precipitating the crisis. 
General Yahya, after being released from detention by Zia ulHaq in 1977 lodged a 
petition in the Lahore High Court.8 The General made an affidavit therein. In the 
said affidavit in paragraph 9, the following is stated, 
“That this threat of Mr. Bhutto that whosoever will go to Dacca his legs will be 
broken could put at stake the national solidarity. This aggravated the situation in 
East Pakistan and was a violation of the legal framework order. This threat from 

8 Petition number 1649, year 1978, The Lahore High Court.

43 

Mr. Bhutto’s side provided a cause of revolt in East Pakistan. This was no less 
dangerous than the six points and clearly meant separation of the two wings of 
the country. The deponent times and again used to warn him and it was a matter 
of habit with him that he listened patiently but never bothered to act upon any 
advice. The speech delivered by Mr. Bhutto in Iqbal Park was tremendously 
perilous to the integrity of Pakistan. Rather, it was more suicidal to the integrity of 
Pakistan than the six point’s formula ……. but Mr. Z. A. Bhutto was a clever and 
venomous toad. Mr. Bhutto was slave to his lust for power so much so that he 
proposed the concept of two prime ministers in one country which the deponent 
strongly condemned. In answer to Mr. Bhutto’s threatening speech of IDDHER 
HAM UDDAR TUM at Karachi, Sheikh Mujib on 12.3.1971 also delivered a public 
speech wherein he reiterated the unity and solidarity of Pakistan. It is the opinion 
of the deponent that Mujib was patriotic at that time unlike Mr. Bhutto. Had Mr. 
Bhutto not been elected to the Assembly he would not have been able to make 
such unpatriotic speeches and statements which ultimately contributed to the 
breakage of Pakistan.” 
If one man is to be held responsible for dismemberment of Pakistan, it is General 
Yahya Khan.   
 First, he wrongly if not forcibly assumed power. According to the 1962 
Constitution that was in place, the Speaker National Assembly was to take 
over when President Ayub Khan was made to quit.  
 Then Yahya Khan took a decision to break up one unit which had come into 
being after detailed deliberations and delay of about nine years when the 
first Constitution was adopted in 1956. Even in the second Constitution 
changing the form of government from parliamentary to presidential 
system, the arrangement of one unit was not changed. West Pakistan 
under this arrangement had functioned with great efficiency when the 
district governments were effective and the Divisional Commissioners were 
in support of the district administration. Yahya Khan’s decree in forming 
large unequal provinces is cause of continuing political instability of present 
day Pakistan. If at all the provinces were to be formed, the commissionaries

44 

existing at that time in both wings should have been formed into new 
provinces. 
 After holding elections in 1970 he failed to form government and hand over 
power to the political party leader who had won majority of seats during 
elections. Although people around him were working for their own interest 
but it is a fact that he succumbed to their devious plans which caused break 
of Pakistan. 
At another level the events were progressing according to the master plan aimed 
at cutting Pakistan to size. This strand was working through Sheikh Mujib and Z A 
Bhutto as scripted by their global masters.

45 

Call to Arms 
After completing training at the Pakistan Military Academy as part of 2nd War 
Course in June 1966, I joined 34th Battalion of the Punjab Regiment then part of 
the 9 Infantry Division located at Kharian Cantonment. The unit had been raised 
on 29 December 1965 at the Punjab Regimental Centre, Mardan and moved to 
Jamrud Fort near Peshawar under the newly raised 9 Division. After a few months 
the Division was ordered to move to Kharian Cantonment, built with US aid in mid 
fifties. On reaching Kharian I found that the unit was deployed on ceasefire line, 
later termed ‘Line of Control (LOC)’ after the 1971 war. Only a small rear party 
was left at Kharian. I joined the Battalion Headquarters located at a small place 
named ‘Padhaar’ in Bhimber Sector. The unit was then being commanded by 
Lieutenant Colonel Muhammad Abdul Rashid, who had taken command on 
promotion. I was first posted to ‘D’ Company located in area Dewa - Batala. Here 
apart from enjoying the ripe mangos falling from the massive old trees, I listened 
to interesting accounts from Subedar Abdul Rahman about his journey as part of 
6 Jammu and Kashmir Battalion of State Forces from Jammu to Bunjicrossing over 
Burzil Pass and his company commander Captain Hassan Khan’s role in liberation 
of Gilgit and Northern Areas. Subedar Abdul Rahman, a wrestler from Bhimber 
area was then a Lance Naik in Hassan’s Company.  
I was soon moved to a post named ‘Ban Chihraan’ in ‘C’ Company opposite ‘Lalial’ 
post occupied by the Indians. These were well known land marks referred to in 
the context of fighting during recently concluded 1965 war. My company 
commander here, Major Riaz Hussain Javed was a tall, loud and very energetic 
person, a good hockey player. He later died of heart attack while commanding a 
battalion of Azad Kashmir Regiment at Kharian. Other company commanders 
included Majors Razzaq, Raja Asghar, and Captain Shaukat Butt. Captain M Saeed 
Azam Khan, a Janjua from the famous village Mator near Rawalpindi who was the 
first officer to join the unit on its raising, was holding key appointment of Adjutant 
of the unit. Saeed Azam with whom I had long association afterwards was a saint 
like person with a subtle sense of humour, never joining dubious activities and 
had the grace to tolerate others follies without rancor. Major Nisar Muhammad 
Khan, the second in command had also joined the unit at Padhaar. The unit

46 

reverted back to the Cantonment in September 1966 where an intensive period of 
training started. Here the unit was converted from normal infantry battalion to 
the Reconnaissance and Support Battalion, taking over vehicles, weapons and 
equipment from 25 FF in swapping roles.  
All units of the Division were newly raised comprising two types of manpower. 
One category was of skeleton staff taken from old units and some retired 
personnel recalled during the September 1965 war with India.The other category 
was of young recruits joining after a short period of training at respective 
Regimental Centers. The Division was commanded by Major General Bahadur 
Sher, a fearsome officer who was an ideal choice to mould raw manpower into an 
effective fighting machine. His dedication, hard work, commitment and 
competence made 9 Division a highly trained, motivated and spirited formation in 
just three years of his command. During my later service I did not see any other 
general officer who’s orders were obeyed hundred percent. He was the man who 
could ensure implementation of his orders by constantly guiding and monitoring, 
getting the best out of his command. 
Since his methods and approach were unique and never replicated by anyone 
later, a little detail would not be out of place. Main points in organising training of 
raw manpower of the Division with possible offensive role as Army Reserve were: 
 During first year, the scope of training was limited to individual, platoon 
and company level training. While in the cantonment, no officer including 
Commanding Officers could come to the offices before 10 AM. They had to 
remain in the unit training area with the troops. The small arms issued to 
the Division were the newly introduced Chinese 7.62 mm caliber series 
weapons which included pistols, rifles, sub machine guns, light and heavy 
machine guns. Extensive practice on functioning of these weapons was 
given enabling the men to dismantle and assemble these weapons in 
complete darkness of the nights. The firing results of the units were 
genuinely above 80%. A very different approach was adopted to achieve 
these results. Every unit would give half of their training grant to the 
Engineer Battalion of the Division who would prepare targets and make 
these available at firing ranges along with range organisation, the

47 

manpower and safety measures laid out. The units just had to take their 
weapons and ammunition and start their firing practices without wasting 
time on fixing targets and safety flags etc. The firing was done by the 
individuals without spoon feeding or being given words of command for 
every action, a major deviation from normal practice. After start of firing by 
the first detail, there was only one word of command given by the officer in 
charge throughout the day i.e. ‘Detail Change’ till the day’s proceedings 
were concluded.  The men would advance to the firing point, take up 
position, fire and clear their weapons, all their actions being watched by an 
NCO quietly without speaking a word. He could just tap a man’s shoulder if 
there was some mistake but it was very rare. The officer seeing that 
everyone had completed the process would order ‘Detail Change’. On this 
all waiting details that would be busy in carrying out different practices like 
using aiming rests, mirrors to correct their positions, and other musketry 
practices would change to next position. It gave tremendous confidence to 
soldiers in handling weapons and firing standards improved to a great 
degree. The range organisation was a model which unfortunately was not 
emulated. 
 During the second year scope was expanded to battalion level training. In 
outdoor exercises mostly practicing offensive operations, the General 
would be present in the battalions at two occasions; the orders by the 
battalion commanders and standing on the objective of battalion attacks 
that was mostly during the nights. He would get timing of units adjusted to 
ensure that he did not miss any battalion event. Prayers for his sickness 
never materialised. 
 During the third year, progressing to brigade level training, brigade 
exercises were held culminating in a divisional exercise. Instead of an 
elaborate control organisation to conduct Divisional exercise, the General 
assisted by four officers had complete control of the Divisional exercise, the 
two brigades advancing on two different axes in ‘advance and encounter 
battle’ role. While getting run down on actions by the units on wireless sets 
of his small control net, he himself manning his set instead of an operator

48 

or staff officer, he would ask for the actions of various company 
commanders whom he would refer by name. He knew the company 
commanders and their abilities by now having frequent interaction with 
them during the last three years. Since he was using wireless sets of my 
unit and I had the frequency, it was great education listening to him and his 
grasp of continuously changing situation. 
 The General would provide guidance for the smallest detail. He had 
ordered that the vehicles when stopped or parked must face the direction 
in which these had to move out. If the moving column had to stop even for 
a very short duration, the vehicles were immediately camouflaged by using 
appropriately garnished nets. This appeared cumbersome at first but with 
practice it became easier. Once Lieutenant Colonel Saeed Qadir (later 
Lieutenant General) commanding officer of Electrical and Mechanical 
Engineer (EME) Battalion of the Division came to our Mechanical Transport 
Park asking to start up the vehicles. 34 Punjab had about 150 vehicles, 
mostly jeeps to carry the recoilless rifles and machine guns detachments. 
His purpose of visit was to find out which of the vehicles emitted smoke. 
While returning from exercise area, the General has observed our vehicles 
emitting smoke and instead of asking our CO, he asked the EME officer as 
to why these vehicles had defects. The General knew who was to be made 
accountable to get results from his subordinates. 
 For physical training apart from the normal routine, a special exercise plan 
known as BX Plan was introduced. These exercises of about fifteen minutes 
were to be done before the afternoon games period and every individual 
was to do these at that time wherever he was located. The cooks carried 
out these exercises outside their place of duty i.e. the Cook Houses. 
 Almost half of the year was spent outdoors in the exercise area bounded by 
Grand Trunk (GT) Road in the west, up to Bhimber in the east and from 
Jhelum River down to the Chenab River. There was no dearth of fuel 
required for training and we had become familiar with the terrain to the 
extent that we could even refer to old trees in the area.

49 

 Although every day created some amusing scene, I will quote one such 
incident which still brings smile in solitude even after so many years. In 
initial phase of training in our new role when most of our weapons were 
jeep mounted, one afternoon the General called our Commanding Officer 
(CO) to his lonely tent pitched in the area of Daulatnagar on Gujrat – 
Bhimber road. We were busy in our platoon level outdoor training, our unit 
camping near Daulatnagar. While the Divisional Headquarters was working 
at Kharian in normal routine, the General had pitched his tent in the 
collective training area, with just a small detachment from the Military 
Police and a staff officer with him.  Concerned about how the weapons and 
equipment were being placed on the jeeps, the General briefed our CO 
about his idea and told him that he will see the load tables of different 
vehicles.  Next morning he came for visit where vehicles of company 
headquarters and my platoon were lined up in a nullah bed near 
Daulatnagar and started with his usual fault finding and outbursts. We were 
all standing beside our vehicles according to seating order, the driver 
standing beside the driver’s seat, commander besides his seat and others in 
the same pattern. I could hear my driver engrossed in remembering ALLAH 
by repeating ‘Ya Allah, Ya Allah’ in whispers which were quite audible to 
me. When the General asked a jeep driver that how much tyre pressure 
was to be maintained, the driver although aware of the answer and the 
limits of pressure also written on the tyre in front of him stammered in his 
response. Our CO completely absorbed in the situation shouted at the 
driver asking him in Urdu which meant, 
‘Jawan, do not get scared, if the General has to eat someone he 
will eat me not you’  
The General concluded his visit realizing that he had overdone his acting by 
getting such response from our CO who was otherwise most deferential, if 
not scared of the man. 
 A large number of young officers, Second Lieutenants joined the newly 
raised units who had sprinkling of seniors officers taken out from the old 
units. Officers from short courses were passing out from the Pakistan

50 

Military Academy every month so after one year of being raised, each unit 
had about ten to twelve Second Lieutenants on its strength. To improve 
their professional competence and mould them into effective team, the 
General ordered a very comprehensive promotion examination spread over 
about two weeks for them to get the next rank, of a Lieutenant. According 
to Army rules no such examination is required and the promotion is 
granted after completion of short period. It was a very unusual and 
interesting activity when about one hundred and twenty young officers 
spent about two weeks together in outdoor activities being put through 
tests of physical fitness, firing skills, decision making in battle situations, 
knowledge about administration, rules and regulations etc. It created very 
healthy feelings of comradeship among the officers of different arms and 
services in the Division in addition to a concentrated dose of professional 
training. 

 There is endless tale of interesting incidents. Each day was an exciting day 
generating activity stimulated by boundless commitment to achieve 
professional excellence by everyone in the Division under an inspiring 
commander.   
The years between 1966 and 1971 spent at Kharian were full of learning, 
adventure and joy. The life and its requirements were very simple. A young 
officer’s pay in mid sixties when I joined my unit was less than Rupees 500/- (five 
hundred) per month. This was more than enough because the expenses on food 
were about one third of pay and rest of the amount was enough for other 
expenses i.e. on clothes, travel and entertainment, mainly cinema even if one had 
to travel to other cities. The quality and quantity of food was much better than 
one can afford these days. The day started with bed tea. Breakfast comprised 
porridge, two eggs, bread, butter, jam and tea. After some snacks with tea or 
coffee in the offices/unit, lunch in the mess contained two dishes, one a meat 
dish and the other vegetable or lintels and fruit.  That was followed in due time by 
evening tea with biscuits. Dinner again was an elaborate affair in the form of 
frequent dinner and guest nights. The expenses on the day's meal, the 'daily 
messing' was not to exceed Rs 3.5 as laid down in the regulations. However the

