111 

Our group was brought to Ranchi, in Bihar Province of India. As we detrained at 
railway station, we found the attitude of Indian officers completely different from 
what we had experienced in East Pakistan. They were harsh and mean in their 
conduct. On reflection we realised that the Indians’ exemplary conduct in East 
Pakistan was a deliberate effort to save them of any problem during our transit 
which their hostile attitude would have provoked. They were very sweet and nice 
till we reached India. All of that appeared to be so well planned by our enemies 
down to minute detail.  
After staying at Ranchi camp for about two days, some prisoners were moved to 
another camp at Ramgargh, about forty kilometres away from Ranchi. I along with 
Captain Afreen was part of this group. Our request that we should be allowed to 
meet with and stay with officers of our unit who were also brought to Ranchi was 
not met by the Indians.  
The camp at Ramgarh, as at other places, was made by converting barracks of 
other ranks of the Indian Army into prisoner cages. Barbed wire was erected 
around a group of three to four barracks to make a cage. The whole cantonment 
was converted into prisoner camp. We were in Camp No 25. There was another 
small camp at Ramgarh for senior officers. There were about three hundred 
officers at Ramgargh camp No 25, kept in two cages each comprising three/ four 
barracks. Initially we were provided with tubular cots which the Indians kept 
withdrawing as punishment and reissuing, a continuous process for over two 
years. Cook houses were established inside the cages where our unit cooks were 
employed, provided with rations authorised to soldiers. It was Dall and chapatti 
during day and meat/ vegetables with chapatti in the evening, apart from 
morning and afternoon tea.  Life in the camp started with recounting the events 
and exchanging notes with other officers. Major Sajid Jalal Mazari, who was 
Artillery Battery Commander with 34 Punjab at Thakurgaon also landed in this 
camp and through him we came to know the details of actions of our unit.  
The reality of losing half of the country weighed heavy on everyone’s mind 
particularly when every unit that encountered the enemy fought with 
determination, grit and courage. The incidents of unparalleled gallantry were 
many but it all went to waste. The units of the three under strength Divisions

112 

deployed to defend every inch of East Pakistan had soon got isolated and 
bypassed, the Indians reaching undefended Dacca in less than two weeks. The 
available troops, if deployed according to the strength and capacity, could have 
defended Dacca and its surroundings for considerable length of time, giving 
adequate chance to the international community to work out a ceasefire but that 
was not planned by our conspirators sitting in Islamabad. 
It was after about three months that we realised that we were not in transit to 
Pakistan as initially told by Indians. As the events unfolded later, our new ruler in 
remaining Pakistan wanted to consolidate his power before he could get the 
prisoners back. It was very frustrating, considering that there was no justification 
for Indians to keep us because war had ended and we, upon release could not 
participate in any on going operations. The uncertainty was causing great anxiety 
to everyone. Those who were married and had been away from their families and 
children since March 1971 and even earlier were in a more difficult situation.  We 
all took it with fortitude and exceptional grace not giving Indians any feelings of 
being low on morale, denying enemy the pleasure of seeing us in low spirits. 
Indian administrative staff of the camp would make all possible efforts to 
maintain a calm and peaceful atmosphere but an overall attitude of defiance by 
the prisoners would result in frequent tension. 
During early months when we still believed the Indians about us being in transit, 
two officers from our camp made good their escape and reached Pakistan. Major 
Arjmand Malik (Artillery) and Major Abdul Qadir (Armoured Corps) both serving 
with the Special Services Group (SSG) made use of fog one early morning to cross 
over the barbed wire fences. On reaching Pakistan they wrote a letter that they 
had taken five days to reach Pakistan. By now the other prisoners also started 
considering escape realising that our repatriation was uncertain and we were in 
for a long time. The Indians had marked all our clothes with thick black lines for 
distinction but some of us succeeded in keeping a pair without marking in case we 
could get away. Organised into pairs, those who were keen to escape started their 
preparation by physical fitness routine. My company officer, Captain Afreen 
paired himself with Captain Akbar Niazi, 8 Baloch, with whom he had affiliation 
since their joint raid on rebels’ positions at the base of Titulia salient in Pachagarh

113 

area in July 1971. Captain Akbar Niazi was a courageous person inclined to 
rashness while Afreen had a remarkable sense of balancing courage with 
prudence. During operations he always strived to kill the enemy without causing 
casualties to own men. Careful planning and audacious execution always got us 
intended results.  
After a few months in the camp, an underground tunnel was started using some 
improvised tools of digging and concealing the excavated earth. It was a slow 
process. In our camp, the tunnel was detected by Indians after a few weeks of 
work.  As we later learnt that almost during same time period tunnels had been 
started in most other camps but all except one were detected. The one successful 
was at Fatehgarh Camp from where Major Nadir Pervez awarded SJ as 2nd 
Lieutenant during Rann of Kutch skirmishes in April 1965, his cousin Major Tariq 
Pervez (later Lieutenant General) and some of their colleagues escaped and 
reached Pakistan. The other option of escape was to jump over barbed wires 
when visibility was poor due to fog. Major Arjmand and Qadir had done it when 
we were thinking of being in transit. It was intriguing as to how they had thought 
of escaping at that time. Later on Major Qadir was caught spying for India. After 
doing his Staff Course at Quetta, he was posted to one of the Brigades as Brigade 
Major but was caught while still on joining time as he was already under 
surveillance. Major Arjmand had reportedly left the Army and had gone to USA or 
somewhere out of the country. 
It so happened that during the whole year there was no fog despite changing 
seasons since last time that enabled escape of two officers from our camp. The 
escape party would prepare themselves every evening and keep waiting 
throughout the night if visibility conditions permitted approaching the barbed 
wires. After initial couple of months, the Indians, constantly working to improve 
security arrangements had erected more strands of wire around the cages. 
Anyone making escape attempt had to negotiate three to four strands of wire 
obstacles. One of these was more formidable in height and strength. In extreme 
frustration, Captains Niazi and Afreen attempted to throw an improvised weight 
on electric wires expecting to cause electricity failure thus creating opportunity 
for escape. For doing it, they had to cross four strands of barbed wire which they

114 

did in the early part of one night in full view of other prisoners who helped them 
by engaging the guards into petty talk. But their attempt failed and they had to 
cross back the barbed wire strands causing great anxiety for every one of us about 
their safety. 
Another escape attempt was made on 28 November 1972 when a light fog 
appeared in the early morning on that day. Eight officers that included the 
impatient pair of Niazi and Afreen attempted escape. Working in pairs, they 
crossed the first two strands of wire to enter into adjacent empty space. From 
here they had to cross the high wire posing main obstacle. Niazi and Afreen were 
first ones to cross that obstacle at one point. As they approached the last strand, 
they were suddenly confronted by two Indian guards, an NCO carrying a sub 
machine gun and a sepoy carrying rifle. Despite raising hands and shouting not to 
fire, the Indians opened fire killing Captain Akbar Niazi at the spot. Captain Afreen 
ran sideways between the two strands of wire followed by Indian rifleman firing 
from outside the wire. One had experienced many unusual happenings during 
long struggle in East Pakistan but this was most extraordinary. Afreen, being fired 
at from such a close range, crossed back over the main wire with some difficulty 
but was not hit except a very minor bruise on his thumb. One of the bullets being 
fired at him hit and killed one of our NCOs who was looking out from barracks’ 
window. Indians, alerted by firing came in strength and got hold of all those who 
had crossed over the two strands of wire. Captain Afreen was caught and was 
being taken to the spot where Niazi’s body was lying to be shot when an Indian 
officer ordered to hold him for questioning. This fortuitous intervention again 
saved Afreen’s life.  
Apart from Captains Akbar Niazi and Afreen, the others attempting escape 
included Major Naqvi, a stout, highly spirited officer from the Army Service Corps 
(ASC), Major Latif also from ASC, Major Yousuf 32 Baluch, my course mate from 
PMA and very dear friend, a most pleasant man whose company I enjoyed at 
Kharian for few years spending most of our free time together. Yousuf hailing 
from Haripur, had spent his teen age years in Karachi, having very interesting 
stories to tell about life in Karachi in those days. He thought of an effective way to 
save himself from being roughed up when the Indians got hold of them. As the

115 

Indians got few boxers to give some punches to this group attempting escape, 
Yousuf kept his one hand at his head and kept reciting Quranic verse  ‘Ayat ul 
Kursi’ inaudible to tormentors. While others got their share of punches, he was 
not touched. Remaining in this group were Captains Anwar Alam, Artillery, 
Zulfiqar, 8 Punjab and Parvez Akmal, Engineers. All of them were given 28 days 
rigorous imprisonment and put in small dungeons in solitary confinement for that 
period. After completing punishment they rejoined the camp. Parvez Akmal in 
due course reached the rank of a two star General, holding important 
assignments including about three years as Managing Director of Oil and Gas 
Development Company Limited (OGDCL) enjoying reputation of an honest, 
upright and visionary leader. Married to his sister soon after repatriation from 
India, I have enjoyed a pleasant personal relationship with him during all these 
years. Thus Camp 25 left lasting imprint on my life.  
Some notable visitors who came to visit us in our camp were Mr. Younus Khan 
'special' advisor to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.This man from Charsadda was 
related to our Sarhadi Gandhi, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan. He tried to talk to us on 
relations between our countries but we were not prepared to listen to him and he 
had to leave without giving us his lecture. Another visitor was Major General Shah 
Beg Singh, who being in charge of the Mukti Bahini force was responsible to 
organise, train and launch that force into East Pakistan. He, after retirement, had 
associated himself with Sanat Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale and was killed by Indian 
Army that he had served during storming of the Golden Temple by the Indian 
Army.  
Repatriation of prisoners, started in September 1973 spread over a period of 
eight months, was completed by April 1974. About fifty persons would be taken 
from one camp and equal number from other camps in the area forming a train of 
about three hundred people. A great hype was created in Pakistan by Bhutto’s 
government about its achievement in getting the prisoners released. This 
repatriation was delayed to help Mr Bhutto in consolidating his hold in New 
Pakistan and it was deliberately and unnecessarily spread over eight months. This 
was part of grand deception to project that a very large number of Army persons 
were made prisoners that took great effort on Bhutto’s part to bring them home.

116 

With lot of fanfare arranged at Wahga border, these prisoners would be received 
and after brief questioning for a couple of days at Lahore sent on leave for two 
months.  After expiry of leave, they would assemble at one of the reassembly 
camps established at Kharian and Quetta. They would be interrogated for their 
stay in India and also asked to record their accounts of actions in East Pakistan. 
After about six weeks they would be posted to different units of their groups 
because their own units were yet to reform, being re-raised in 1975 after a gap of 
one year on completion of the repatriation. The rank structure and service 
brackets laid down for units being re-raised made sure that the personnel of 
original fighting units could not get together.  
When I was posted back to 34 Punjab on its re-raising in June 1975, I found that 
only about thirty people from the unit who were serving in East Pakistan were 
posted back. Rest got scattered all over Pakistan in different units and had no 
chance to serve together again. Some of them had been sent home with alacrity. 
The policy was that anyone asking for release should not be given time to 
reconsider his decision and should be packed off very next day of his making the 
request. A special term, ‘returnees’ had been coined for us. Sarcastic comments 
from men like ‘you have come back after giving away half of the country’ were 
enough for an already traumatized ‘returnee’ to ask for release. There was no 
arrangement for providing psychological assistance, so essential to cope with 
changed environments. General Tikka Khan, future Secretary General of Z A 
Bhutto’s Pakistan People Party was head of the Army supervising return of the 
prisoners, covering lies and implementing devious plans of his master. Pakistan 
Army lost some of its best experienced war veterans, tested and tried during a 
prolonged war, due to deliberate mishandling intended to get rid of them. On my 
return to 34 Punjab, I learnt that Sepoy Durez and Sepoy Akram of my Company 
that I have mentioned earlier were posted to different units and had gone home 
on pre mature retirement.  
The main characters who had staged this tragic drama causing large number of 
deaths and destruction, met violent deaths. While General Yahya remained in 
confinement before his death, Mr. Z A Bhutto was hanged by his chosen 
subordinate after being kept in prison’s death cell for quite some time increasing

117 

his agony. One of his sons, Shah Nawaz, died in mysterious circumstances in 
France. The whole family had gathered there and all of them were present in the 
house where they found Shah Nawaz dead in a room. Bhutto’s elder son Murtaza 
was killed by police in front of his house in Karachi when his sister Benazir was 
prime minister of Pakistan. Benazir, twice removed from the office of prime 
minister on charges of corruption, got killed causing so many deaths first in 
Karachi blast which she survived and then in Rawalpindi when she was aspiring to 
assume power once more. In Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujib was brutally murdered by 
his own Army along with his entire family except one daughter in his Dacca home. 
In India, Mrs Indira Gandhi had to bear the pain of her son Sanjey’s death in a 
plane crash, and then she herself as prime minister was murdered by her own 
guards. Later her other son Rajiv, as prime minister while visiting Tamil Nadu 
province, was assassinated in a blast by a female suicide bomber.  
Some people in Pakistan keep demanding official apology from the Government 
of Pakistan to the people of Bangladesh for atrocities committed by Pakistan 
Army in 1971. Such demands reinforce the lies created and propagated by 
Pakistan’s enemies. At one time Mr. Imran Khan, our cricketer hero of yester 
years also asked for similar apology. In his statement he said that while in England 
in 1971 he was ‘told’ by his friends about the atrocities of Pakistan Army but 
when he went to Bangladesh in 1989 he experienced love and affection of 
Bangladeshis. That is the reality. One must believe what one experiences and not 
necessarily what one is told. If anyone is interested to know about atrocities 
committed during 1971, he should start with finding out the number of non 
Bengalis living in East Pakistan on 1 Jan 1971, how many were left after one year 
i.e. on 01 Jan 1972 and what happened to the rest. Pakistan Army, tasked to 
restore normalcy, was too disciplined a force to have committed atrocities. In her 
book titled ‘DEAD RECKONING, Memories of the 1971 Bangladesh War’ published 
in 2011 Dr. Sarmila Bose, a Bengali Hindu scholar has explored the facts by 
adopting credible research methodology. Earlier in one of her articles titled “The 
Courageous Pakistan Army Stand on the Eastern Front: An Untold Story of 1971 
Indo-Pak War” (annex ‘D’) she exposed falsity of Indo-Bangladesh narrative. In her 
book she refutes that narrative completely and most convincingly.

118 

Main points of the appalling tragedy could be summarised as: 
 Bengal was a different country in all respects. Its language, culture and the 
distance, over one thousand miles of hostile India’s territory separating it 
from West Pakistan, were important factors in creation of Bangladesh.  
 The decision to dismember Pakistan, however, was not taken by Bengalis. 
The decision was taken and implemented by West Pakistani rulers of 
Pakistan. 
 The people of Bengal had gone more than half way to remain part of united 
Pakistan. In the first constitution adopted in 1956 after deliberations spread 
over a period of about nine years since inception of Pakistan, Bengalis 
accepted the arrangement of parity despite being more in numbers.  
 The constitutions of Pakistan (of 1956 and 1962) did not provide workable 
arrangements between the two wings to keep the country united in which 
both wings could enjoy considerable freedom in internal matters and in 
distribution of resources. Despite that even if differences could not be 
bridged creating the crisis of that magnitude, then there was always a 
peaceful way to part company through a negotiated settlement if the 
leadership was sincere with the interests of the State and the people of 
Pakistan.  
 Although 1970 Elections gave clear overall majority to Sheikh Mujib’s 
Awami League, 160 seats out of total 300 seats, he could not form the 
government. Mr. Z A Bhutto whose newly formed Party, the PPP had won 
81 seats mainly from Punjab and Sind, stopped his party members from 
attending the National Assembly Session called at Dacca on 3 March 1971, 
and threatened other members from West Pakistan with physical violence 
(breaking their legs) preventing them to do so. This act of refusing to attend 
National Assembly session created the crisis which led to break up of 
Pakistan. This was deliberate step according to the scheme for 
dismemberment of Pakistan as it became evident later.

119 

 Apart from many other factors, a major cause why West Pakistan’s ruling 
elite could not afford majority of East Pakistani legislators in the national 
Parliament was the system of land management. Soon after independence 
East Pakistan assembly had passed a bill that abolished Zamindari system 
after which the lands of the state were under the federal government.This 
bill, The East Bengal State Acquisition and Tenancy Act of 1950 (also known 
as the East Pakistan Estate Acquisition Act 1950), drafted on 31 March 1948 
was passed on 16 May 1951. India adopted a similar law in 1953. In West 
Pakistan such reforms were never carried out. A Bengali dominated 
parliament was threat to feudalism prevailing in national politics and 
governance. 
 Elections were held in December 1970/ January 1971 and after 
considerable delay Assembly session was called for 03 March 1971. The 
elections were initially scheduled in Oct 1970 but were postponed due to 
cyclone which badly affected coastal areas in East Pakistan. Delay in holding 
elections caused unrest and further delay in calling Assembly session after 
the elections resulted in large scale agitation and disturbances in East 
Pakistan. This turmoil turned into lawlessness, anarchy and loss of State 
writ in the province, particularly when the Assembly session scheduled on 3 
March at Dacca was called off without giving fresh date.  
 Calling off Assembly Session without giving fresh date by the President, 
General 
Yahya 
Khan, 
supposedly 
made 
after 
developing 
some 
understanding with Z A Bhutto at Larkana, makes Yahya Khan solely 
responsible for subsequent events leading to break up of Pakistan. Had he 
stuck to his decision on holding the assembly session irrespective of 
Bhutto’s stance of attending or not attending the session, the events could 
have taken different turn.  
 After yet another costly delay, military action to overcome virtual anarchy 
was taken on 25 March 1971, starting in Dacca and later expanded to other 
areas as the troops arrived from West Pakistan to restore order. This action 
resulted in open rebellion. Agitation turning into anarchy was followed by 
open rebellion in distinct phases.

120 

 It was a political problem for which military action was no solution. The 
military commander in East Pakistan, Lieutenant General Sahibzada Yaqoob 
Khan refused to undertake the operation. He was removed and replaced by 
Lieutenant General Tikka Khan who was willing to act on orders. 
 In East Pakistan there was one Infantry Division comprising four brigades, 
instead of normal three brigades of Pakistan Army. Authorized strength of a 
Division in those times was about fifteen thousand all ranks. Seven infantry 
battalions of this Division were from the East Bengal Regiment (EBR) who 
joined the rebels. EBR Training Centre located at Chittagong had about 
twothousand people who revolted. About thirteen thousand men of the 
para military East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) had also revolted. Bengali soldiers 
who were part of other units, substantial in numbers had to be disarmed, 
downgrading effectiveness of units located in East Pakistan at the start of 
the crisis.  
 Troops of the Division were scattered all over East Pakistan confined to 
their locations since the start of non-cooperation movement in 1st week of 
February 1971. Their supplies had been cut off and they were virtually 
prisoners living in great tension and hardship. At Rangpur an officer of 29 
Cavalry with escort of Bengali troops of his unit was sent to get some fresh 
rations from Bazar for the unit. He was killed by the mob, his escort 
deprived of weapons returned to unit. 
  When military action was ordered, the troops from Dacca Cantonment 
started with indiscriminate firing in the city of Dacca on night 25/26 March 
1971. This caused unnecessary casualties. Over three hundred people were 
reported killed, about half of them in the Dacca University campus. The 
General Officers, Tikka Khan and Khadim Raja responsible for this action 
were relieved of command; their place taken over by Amir Abdullah Khan 
Niazi and M Rahim Khan respectively. However later, when Bhutto came to 
power Tikka Khan and Khadim Raja were rewarded in his ‘new’ Pakistan, 
making Tikka Khan the Army Chief and after retirement Secretary General 
of his Party. Khadim Raja was given diplomatic assignments.

