211 

nationalistic feelings were so strong that DMK gave up the separate Dravida 
nation demand altogether. India also managed to get substantial material support 
from the western powers led by US who were eager to get ingress into this vast 
country. 
After Nehru’s death in 1964, when our disputes with India were well on the way 
to resolution, Pakistan got into skirmishes with India in Rann of Kach area in lower 
Sind during the month of April 1965. As mentioned above this was followed by 
sending infiltrators in the Indian Occupied Kashmir which resulted in September 
1965 War with India. This war was initiated by the machinations of rabidly 
ambitious Mr Z A Bhutto, the Foreign Minister in Ayub Khan’s cabinet who was 
working to weaken and remove Ayub Khan in his efforts to gain power; aim that 
he ultimately achieved after another war with India in 1971 and separation of 
East Pakistan. The outcome of our wars helped India to overcome internal 
problems suppressing resistance to manageable levels. India also used brute force 
with impunity to suppress discontent by killing thousands of its own people. As 
narrated by the Indians in their casual talk during our stay as prisoners of war in 
India (1972-4), about five to six thousand people had been killed in one of the 
state agitating during that period, an average in dissenting regions/states. Later 
the scale of killing went up; about twenty five thousands in Punjab and nearly one 
hundred thousand in Kashmir.  
Jawar Lal Nehru ruled India for seventeen years. After a gap of some years his 
daughter Indira Gandhi assumed power in India. During her rule Pakistan was 
dismembered, the eastern part becoming Bangladesh when the Indian forces 
invaded East Pakistan in December 1971. She met violent death at the hands of 
her own guards. Her son Rajiv Gandhi, following her as prime minister also met 
similar fate, meeting a brutal death while holding the throne. The dynastic rule of 
Nehru family for a long duration gave India the much needed political stability for 
some decades.  
It was after 1996 general elections in India, that the Indians could not form a 
government at the Centre as no political party could get even single majority in 
the parliament. The coalition of political parties cobbled together could not stay 
together for long. As a result another general election was announced to be held

212 

in February 1998. This election again produced same result as no stable 
government could be formed and the country had to go once again into general 
elections to be held in Sep-Oct 1999.  
Holding general elections in India is not an easy exercise considering the size of 
population, geographical expanse and enormity of effort. The need for going into 
elections after about every eighteen months without positive results was grave 
political crisis for India.  
Here again Pakistan came to India’s rescue by launching the Kargil misadventure 
in 1999, a few months before general election in India. General Pervez Musharraf, 
the Pakistani Army Chief without permission from the Government, not even 
consulting senior commanders ordered occupation of some vacant Indian posts 
on the mountain peaks overlooking Kargil in occupied Kashmir. These peaks were 
occupied by Indian troops during summers and vacated during winters as their 
normal seasonal routine. The skirmishes brought both countries to the brink of an 
all out war. The war hysteria created by India helped them in overcoming internal 
discords. Mr. Atal Behari Vajpayee, who had been ousted earlier just after 13 days 
as Prime Minister, again formed the government and could now complete his full 
tenure.Their system was back on the rails. General Musharraf’s ‘inspiration’ or 
was it direction from outside powers becomes clear when we see his role as 
facilitator in US invasion of Afghanistan and Pakistan (Af-Pak theater of their 
operations) followed by invasion of Iraq and creating turmoil in Muslim world. A 
stable India was need of the invaders. For Pakistan, as a result of Kargil’s after 
effects the civilian elected government with two third majority headed by Mr. 
Nawaz Sharif was replaced by Musharraf’s rule for over eight years causing severe 
damage to Pakistan’s progress as a democratic country. While the Kargil episode 
destabilised and weakened Pakistan morally, materially and diplomatically, it 
helped India to manage its internal discord thus resuming the road to political 
stability and economic progress. 
The results of General elections in India held during 2014 are an interesting study.  
In a country with population of well over one billion people of different 
nationalities, languages, religions, use of money and means of modern 
communications have manipulated electoral results to desired ends. After about

213 

twenty five years i.e. after assassination of Rajiv Gandhi in 1989 a single Party, the 
Hindu fundamentalist Bhartaia Janata Party (BJP) has been brought into position 
of forming government at the Centre without need of seeking coalitions. In a year 
long election campaign involving unprecedentedly large amounts of money Mr 
Naredera Modi, projected as a strong leader has been brought to power in India 
by global capitalist to serve their interests.  Mr Modi, the longest serving Chief 
Minister of Gujrat State i.e. since 2001 till these elections, is responsible for 
genocide of Muslims in Gujrat’s capital Ahmadabad in 2002. Muslims in India and 
other minority religious groups are apprehensive of his Hindu extremist 
credentials, a cause of real concern. Recent incidents of communal tensions, ban 
on cow slaughter causing deaths of Muslims at the hands of Hindu mobs are 
ominous signs pointing towards more violence and unrest in a large nuclear 
armed country. 
It is evident that the Zionist driven Capitalism juggernaut to control the world is 
rolling on, the Indian tycoons now important players as partners of the Global 
Capitalists cabal.  Will India overcome its divisive fissures and progress as a strong 
united country or revert back to 1996 situation is the question that will be 
answered in coming years. 
Had there been no war in 1965 between India and Pakistan, there was strong 
possibility of India being fragmented into its natural divisions that have existed 
since thousands of years. That war initiated by some characters holding important 
positions in Pakistan was followed by events that led to break up of Pakistan in 
1971. Since confrontation with Pakistan has helped India to manage and 
overcome its internal problems it is imperative for Pakistan to adopt policies and 
take measure to ensure that India cannot use external threat card from Pakistan 
any more.  India’s propensity and practice to ‘invent’ events blaming Pakistan of 
terrorist attacks that gave it excuse for mobilising and moving forces on the 
borders more than once during the past must be vigorously exposed through 
forceful diplomatic efforts and effective media campaigns. 
India’s nuclear explosion on Pakistan’s borders in 1974 forced Pakistan to adopt 
nuclear weapons option turning South Asia into a high risk region, a serious threat 
to regional peace. Pakistan’s proposes to establish a Strategic Restraint Regime in

214 

South Asia. That is only possible if India gets fragmented into its natural parts. 
About thirty States in the Indian sub-continent will be more concerned about 
catering to essential needs of their population than nurturing hegemonic 
ambitions to dominate the region.  If the Global Capitalists who are managing the 
Global Village can be made to understand that fragmented India is better playing 
field for them, India could revert to its natural divisions that have existed since 
ages. 
India is a geographical term and not a country. Its unity is artificial and deceptive. 
Pakistan has helped India to overcome serious internal crises by initiating war of 
1965 and launching Kargil misadventure. That must not happen again. India 
should be allowed to fragment into its natural parts instead of its public being 
enslaved by use of brute force to keep it united as one State.

215 

The Stranglehold 
United States of America (USA or simply US) is vast country with abundant 
resources and a vibrant, enterprising population gathered from all over the world 
during last few centuries since this country was accidentally found by the 
Europeans.  The country is being run under a unique system nowhere practiced in 
any other country of the world. Money supply to the US government is controlled 
by the Federal Reserve, a private Bank owned by small elite who have forcefully 
guarded this control. US Presidents like Abraham Lincoln, James A Garfield, 
William McKinley and John F Kennedy who tried to get the country out of their 
stranglehold were physically eliminated. The Capitalist elite, which can be termed 
as ‘Global Capitalists Establishment (GCE)’, the owners of banks, oil and gas 
companies, armament industries and other global mega businesses have effective 
control over decision making by the US government.These decisions are meant to 
create more money by acquiring and controlling material resources of the world 
even if it needs to waging wars. To serve their needs, US forces have been used 
during last one hundred years all over the world including two world wars.  
Occupation of Afghanistan and Iraq are recent examples. ‘Occupy Wall Street’ 
Movement started in September 2011 manifests frustration of US citizens against 
large multinational corporation’s influence over decision making in the US but 
their voices remains feeble and ineffective.  
Having used the US power for over a century, the GCE are shifting their 
operations into China and India, the two countries with major concentration of 
human population. Exploiting US strength to maximum advantage, they are now 
into fresh pastures to pursue their interests. The US administration and its spy 
agency work as the tools of global capitalists interests. The US government is thus 
involved in shaping events to benefit their masters. 
The pattern adopted by US, working for capitalist's interests to control resources 
in different regions of the world is to place chosen men at the helm of affairs in 
countries of their interests. The US administration thus gains very deep, all 
pervasive influence in the target countries which they cultivate through overt and 
covert means. In his book ‘Confession of an Economic Hit Man’ published in 
November 2004 and his interviews John Perkins has explained the methodology

216 

adopted to control ruling elites of the target countries which otherwise is no 
secret as we can see in our own country.  
US Influence over Pakistan’s Policies 
As Pakistan emerged on the world map soon after culmination of the Second 
World War, the pre war pattern of global controls by imperialist forces was 
changing into a bipolar world. While the Soviet Union expanded its influence in 
Eastern Europe and some African and Asian countries, USA replaced the British in 
assuming leading role in other parts of the world. Communist China was another 
force aligned with the Communist bloc. As the US, after Second World War was 
striving to contain Communist threat, the newly established state of Pakistan 
landed into its fold against spread of Communist influence in the region. 
Pakistan’s geographic position was most important to contain the Communist 
bloc, its western wing being in the proximity of China and Russia and the eastern 
wing located in the South East Asian region under threat of the Chinese influence.  
The first Pakistani Prime Minister Mr. Liaqat Ali Khan chose to visit distant USA 
instead of availing invitation from the USSR. It was a step in wrong direction that 
proved fatal to our existence in 1971. Prime Minister Liaqat was assassinated on 
16 October 1951 in Rawalpindi when he was about to address a public meeting. 
His murder case remains unresolved to this day. After him thebureaucrats like 
Ghulam Muhammad and Iskandar Mirza assumed control of the country. They 
developed deep links with US government functionaries to the extent of 
contracting matrimonial relationships, the US Ambassador’s daughter marrying a 
son of Mr. Iskandar Mirza in 1954. Ghulam Muhammad, the Governor General 
was a paralyzed man whose spoken words could only be interpreted by his British 
female secretary and accordingly passed on as orders according to her 
understanding.  
Pakistan’s interests were fundamentally at odds with those of the US interests. 
Pakistan’s geographical location was important for regional linkages to promote 
trade and commerce between Eurasian landmass and Indian sub continent 
whereas US policies were to block and isolate USSR and China. By following 
American policies in the region the Pakistani rulers caused great damage to

217 

Pakistan’s interests. The US influence and controls made Pakistan a weak and 
pliable State causing its dismemberment when the country started making 
progress at unprecedented pace in early sixties.  
After removal of Ayub Khan in 1969 and dismemberment of Pakistan in 1971 
under General Yahya’s Khan’s short, destructive rule of about two years, the 
persons following him contributed their share that has brought the country to 
itspresent abysmal state. 
Zulfikar Ali (ZA) Bhutto 
Pakistan was well on road to rapid progress in early sixties after having overcome 
teething problems of earlier years. The 1965 War with India derailed that 
progress putting Pakistan into a tailspin from which it never recovered. The 
initiator of this derailment was Mr. Z A Bhutto who influenced events in the short 
history of this country in most negative way. Born in Bombay and educated in US, 
he came to Karachi after Pakistan came into being and started cultivating contacts 
with rulers. Sharp, handsome and articulate, he soon succeeded in courting 
favour with Mr. Iskandar Mirza who inducted him into the cabinet as minister, 
where he survived and progressed during Ayub Khan’s rule. His burning ambition 
was to rule a country irrespective of its size. 
American intelligence agency CIA, the main tool of capitalist interests works on 
talented people who undertake their studies in the US. This includes armed forces 
personnel who attend courses in US institutions as brought out by Lieutenant 
General Shahid Aziz in his recently published memoirs in Urdu ‘Yeh Khamoshi Kab 
Tak’. They use such persons to pursue their global agenda. Mr. Z A Bhutto was 
one such man with unbounded ambition, gifted with ability to agitate and arouse 
masses. Since he could not foresee his success in united Pakistan because Bengal 
having larger population where he could not get ingress, he worked to weaken 
Pakistan and ultimately to dismember it creating space for himself in a part of 
Pakistan. His first target was to remove Ayub Khan from power. Acting on a lesson 
from Kutalia’s Earthshastra that if the minister wants his ruler to be weakened he 
should get the state into war with the neighbouring state, Mr. Bhutto was prime 
mover in initiating armed conflict with India in 1965 as narrated in some detail in

218 

earlier chapters. He was the man who remained with the President General Yahya 
Khan in Dacca till the orders to take military action were issued on 25 March 
1971. He moved out of Dacca after the President had left, seeing that the action 
by the Army had started on the night of 25 March 1971 that would lead to break 
up of Pakistan.  
As Foreign Minister he would stay in CIA facilities in Switzerland during his visits 
abroad. Tasked to attend UN proceedproceeding during the 1971 war, he broke 
his journey in Switzerland. Here while his delegation stayed in a hotel, he himself 
stayed for two days in the CIA’s castle, away in the mountains on the excuse of 
being indisposed. Here, he waited for the progress of Indian forces moving 
towards Dacca about which the CIA could provide him precise information. He 
moved to New York at his leisure and stormed out of Security Council proceedings 
which were suggesting ceasefire. He made sure that ceasefire is not agreed to and 
the troops in East Pakistan are made to surrender.  
Z A Bhutto ultimately became ruler of a dismembered Pakistan which was once a 
strong, prosperous, liberal and peaceful country enjoying great prestige in the 
comity of nations as the largest Muslim country of the world.  
After taking over the country Z A Bhutto destroyed a vibrant and thriving industry 
by nationalising it, weakened the civil services by introducing parallel induction of 
Party workers in the civil services. Overall he created an atmosphere of fear and 
intimidation through a special force created for the purpose. He was the first 
Pakistani ruler to open account in Swiss banks for stashing away money taken as 
donations from foreign countries on different excuses. A despicable characterin 
his personal life, a few shades uglier than his predecessor Yahya Khan, he 
indulged in immoral conduct with vengeance that was attributed to his 
background, the details then in circulation being unprintable. Despite his decisive 
role in breakup of Pakistan he is eulogized as a great hero by a section of Pakistani 
population, some beneficiaries of his corrupting the systems and the others 
mostly poor and downtrodden people who got exploited by a false slogan 
believing that instead of ALLAH rewarding their own efforts, a man could provide 
them food, clothing and shelter (‘Roti, Kapra aur Makan’ the Bhutto’s slogan to 
attract voters during elections). His followers credit him with starting Nuclear

219 

Weapon programme conveniently ignoring that after India exploded nuclear 
device at Pokharan near Pakistan’s borders in 1974, any ruler in Pakistan was 
bound to go for nuclear option. Pakistan’s Atomic Energy Commission was 
working since 1956 when Bhutto was still a non entity. India forced Pakistan to go 
for nuclear option. There was no other choice for Pakistan. 
Z A Bhutto was removed from the political scene and physically eliminated when 
no longer required as is the fate of such persons working for the powerful forces. 
His descendants and followers continue to plunder the country, the Party rightly 
being called Pakistan Plundering Party. For those who continue to refer to Z A 
Bhutto as a great leader should reflect upon the fact that if zenith of leadership is 
to be hanged by a subordinate, leadership needs fresh definition. 
General Zia ul Haq 
Mr. Bhutto’s successor, General Zia ul Haq also worked for US interests. When he 
was elevated to the slot of Army Chief by Prime Minister Z A Bhutto, it came as 
complete surprise. He was at seventh position in order of seniority. The general 
expectation in the Army was that either General Akbar or Majid Malik would be 
the next Army Chief considering their seniority and merit. But Zia, an unknown 
figure in the Army was most unexpected. Earlier in 1970 when seconded to 
Jordan in the rank of Brigadier, he participated in Jordanian operations to dislodge 
the Palestinians from Jordan. Major General Nawazish, the mission leader in 
Jordan gave adverse report that could end his career in Brigadier’s rank but he 
was saved by Guide’s Cavalry seniors Colonel Pir Abdullah Shah and General Gul 
Hassan in quashing the report. Gul Hassan was another scandalous personality 
who later helped Z A Bhutto in assuming power.  
Ziaul Haq ruled the country for about eleven years. During this period the USSR 
invaded and occupied Afghanistan in December 1979, a few months after Iranian 
Revolution led by Imam Khomeini replacing Shah of Iran in April that year. 
Resistance against Russian occupation was organized using Pakistan’s tribal areas 
as bases. The US and rulers of some Arab countries provided support with 
weapons and funds to help Afghan resistance movement. Young men from other 
Muslim countries like Osama bin Laden from a very rich family of Saudi Arabia

220 

also joined ‘Mujahideen’ fighting against the Russians who were forced to vacate 
Afghanistan after about ten years of their occupation, paying very heavy price as 
this war resulted in disintegration of the USSR. General Zia was disposed of on 17 
August 1988 when his very safe and stable American made military aircraft, a C-
130 crashed near Bahawalpur. He died along with the American Ambassador and 
a number of senior military officers including General Akhtar Abdul Rahman the 
ex ISI boss responsible to conduct the war against Russians.  
Pakistan, under firm rule of General Ziaul haq blunted USSR’s thrust towards 
Arabian Sea that could have further disintegrated Pakistan by Russian occupation 
of Balochistan where the Russians had their agents working since decades. This 
was a major achievement. However for want of sound policies and plans during 
his long rule, the internal situation of the country worsened in terms of sectarian 
tensions, spread of narcotics and illegal sophisticated weapons. Over five million 
Afghans crossed over to Pakistan, some of them were provided shelter in the 
camps established for them but there was no control of their movement. This 
caused enormous multifaceted problems which continue to aggravate our 
internal security situation to this day.  
Ten Years of Musical Chairs 
After Zia’s death Pakistan went through political instability as no civilian 
government could complete their normal tenure. Benazir’s and Nawaz Sharif’s 
governments were removed twice in turn on charges of corruption and misrule in 
a decade of civilian rule. The American and Saudi Ambassadors were deeply 
involved in making and breaking the governments.  
While my assessment of Mr Nawaz Sharif as a leader follows in succeeding 
paragraphs, about late Benazir Bhutto less said the better. Her actions to 
sabotage national interests like increased Indian involvement and ethnic cleansing 
from Sindh as mentioned in a previous chapter and her husband’s collecting 
commissions in deals at the State’s expense were obvious reasons for removal of 
her government. Her judgment of people is manifest in her selecting Asif Ali 
Zardari as her husband. Before marriage Asif Zardari was involved in petty 
financial crimes to make a living. To escape arrest in some cases, he left Pakistan.

