321 

Annex D 
DR. SARMILA BOSE ON THE COURAGEOUS PAKISTAN ARMY’S STAND ON THE 
EASTERN FRONT: AN UNTOLD STORY OF 1971 INDO-PAK WAR15 
THERE is much for Pakistan to come to terms with what happened in 1971. But 
the answers don’t lie in unthinking vilification of the fighting men who performed 
so well in the war against such heavy odds in defense of the national policy. 
Rather, in failing to honour them, the nation dishonours itself. 
My introduction to international politics was 1971, as a schoolgirl in Calcutta. 
Many images from that year are still etched in my mind, but the culminating one 
was the photo on Ramna racecourse of two men sitting at a table — the smart, 
turbaned Sikh, ‘our’ war-hero, Jagjit Singh Aurora, and the large man in a beret, A 
A K Niazi, commander of the other side, signing the instrument of surrender. 
Nearly a generation later, a chance interview for the BBC (British Broadcasting 
Corporation) with Lt Gen. Aurora took me back to 1971. The interview was not 
about 1971, but about injustices suffered by Sikhs at the hands of the state 
General Aurora had served. I thought he was a bigger hero for what he had to say 
then. That view was reinforced as I read — with incredulity — the disparaging 
remarks by other Indian officers about him, and each other, in their books. If this 
is what happened to the winning commander, I wondered what had happened to 
the other man in the photo. The result was a revelation. 
It turns out that General Niazi has been my ‘enemy’ since the Second World War. 
As Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose and his Indian National Army fought on the Burma 
front in 1943-45 in their quest for India’s freedom, Niazi was fighting on the other 
side, for the British Indian Army, under the overall command of General (later 
Field Marshal) William Joseph Slim. Slim and his 14th Army halted the advance of 
the INA and the Japanese at the Imphal campaign and turned the course of the 
war. 

15 http://archives.dailytimes.com.pk/editorial/24-Nov-2003/op-ed-the-courageous-pak-army-stand-on-
the-eastern-front-sarmila-bose

322 

In the process of inflicting military defeat upon my ancestor, Niazi’s performance 
was so exceptional that the British awarded him an on-the-spot Military Cross for 
action on the Assam-Burma front in June 1944. On another occasion they wanted 
to award a DSO, but he was too junior, so a Mention in Despatches was recorded. 
In the original record of his MC signed by his commanding officers all the way up 
to Slim, which I obtained from the British Ministry of Defence, the British 
commanders describe Niazi’s gallantry in detail: “He organized the attack with 
such skill that his leading platoon succeeded in achieving complete surprise over 
the enemy.” They speak of how he personally led his men, the ‘great skill and 
coolness’ under fire with which he changed tactics with changing circumstances, 
created diversionary attacks, extricated his wounded, defeated the enemy and 
withdrew his men by section, remaining personally at the rear in every case. 
The British honoured Niazi for “personal leadership, bravery and complete 
disregard for his own personal safety.” On 15 December 1944 the Viceroy Lord 
Wavell flew to Imphal and in the presence of Lord Mountbatten knighted Slim and 
his corps commanders Stopford, Scoones and Christison. Only two ‘Indian’ officers 
were chosen to be decorated by the Viceroy at that ceremony — ‘Tiger’ Niazi was 
one of them. 
In 1971 Niazi was a highly decorated Pakistani general, twice receiving the Hilal-e-
Jurat. He was sent to East Pakistan in April 1971 — part of a sorry tradition in 
South Asia of political rulers attempting to find military solutions to political 
problems. By then Tikka Khan had already launched the crackdown of 25 March 
for which he has been known to Bengalis as the ‘butcher of Bengal’ ever since. 
The population of East Bengal was completely hostile and Pakistan condemned 
around the world. 
Authoritative scholarly analyses of 1971 are rare. The best work is Richard Sisson 
and Leo Rose’s War and Secession. 
Robert Jackson, fellow of All Soul’s College, Oxford, wrote an account shortly after 
the events. Most of the principal participants did not write about it, a notable 
exception being Gen. Niazi’s recent memoirs (1998).Some Indian officers have

323 

written books of uneven quality — they make for an embarrassing read for what 
the Indians have to say about one another. 
However, a consistent picture emerges from the more objective accounts of the 
war. Sisson and Rose describe how India started assisting Bengali rebels since 
April, but “the Mukti Bahini had not been able to prevent the Pakistani army from 
regaining control over all the major urban centers on the East Pakistani-Indian 
border and even establishing a tenuous authority in most of the rural areas.” 
From July to October there was direct involvement of Indian military personnel. 
“…mid-October to 20 November… Indian artillery was used much more 
extensively in support …and Indian military forces, including tanks and air power 
on a few occasions, were also used…Indian units were withdrawn to Indian 
territory once their objectives had been brought under the control of the Mukti 
Bahini — though at times this was only for short periods, as, to the irritation of 
the Indians, the Mukti Bahini forces rarely held their ground when the Pakistani 
army launched a counterattack.” 
Clearly, the Pakistani army regained East Pakistan for their masters in Islamabad 
by April-May, creating an opportunity for a political settlement, and held off both 
Bengali guerrillas and their Indian supporters till November, buying more time — 
time and opportunity that Pakistan’s rulers and politicians failed to utilise. 
Contrary to Indian reports, full-scale war between India and Pakistan started in 
East Bengal on 21 November, making it a four-week war rather than a ‘lightning 
campaign’. Sisson and Rose state bluntly: “After the night of 21 November…Indian 
forces did not withdraw. From 21 to 25 November several Indian army 
divisions…launched simultaneous military actions on all of the key border regions 
of East Pakistan, and from all directions, with both armored and air support.” 
Indian officers like Sukhwant Singh and Lachhman Singh write quite openly in 
their books about India invading East Pakistani territory in November, which they 
knew was ‘an act of war’. 
None of the outside scholars expected the Eastern garrison to withstand a full 
Indian invasion. On the contrary, Pakistan’s longstanding strategy was “the

324 

defense of the east is in the west”. Jackson writes, “Pakistani forces had largely 
withdrawn from scattered border-protection duties into cleverly fortified 
defensive positions at the major centres inside the frontiers, where they held all 
the major ‘place names’ against Mukti Bahini attacks, and blocked the routes of 
entry from India…” 
Sisson and Rose point out the incongruity of Islamabad tolerating India’s invasion 
of East Pakistani territory in November. On 30 November Niazi received a 
message from General Hamid stating, “The whole nation is proud of you and you 
have their full support.” The same day Islamabad decided to launch an attack in 
the West on 2 December, later postponed to 3 December, after a two-week wait, 
but did not inform the Eastern command about it. According to Jackson, the 
Western offensive was frustrated by 10 December. 
Though futile, the Western offensive allowed India to openly invade the East, with 
overwhelming advantages. “ …despite all these advantages, the war did not go as 
smoothly and easily for the Indian army…”, but Sisson and Rose come to the 
balanced judgment that “The Pakistanis fought hard and well; the Indian army 
won an impressive victory.” Even Indian officers concede the personal bravery of 
Niazi and the spirited fight put up by the Pakistanis in the East. That the troops 
fought so well against such overwhelming odds is a credit both to them, and to 
their commanders, for an army does not fight well in the absence of good 
leadership. 
However, as Jackson put it, “…India’s success was inevitable from the moment the 
general war broke out — unless diplomatic intervention could frustrate it.” As is 
well known, Pakistan failed to secure military or diplomatic intervention. Sisson 
and Rose also say, “The outcome of the conflict on the eastern front after 6 
December was not in doubt, as the Indian military had all the advantages.” On 14 
December Niazi received the following message from Yahya Khan: “You have 
fought a heroic battle against overwhelming odds. The nation is proud of you 
…You have now reached a stage where further resistance is no longer humanly 
possible nor will it serve any useful purpose… You should now take all necessary 
measures to stop the fighting and preserve the lives of armed forces personnel,

325 

all those from West Pakistan and all loyal elements…” Sisson and Rose naturally 
describe this message as “implying that the armed forces in East Pakistan should 
surrender”. 
No matter how traumatic the outcome of 1971 for Pakistan, the Eastern 
command did not create the conflict, nor were they responsible for the failure of 
the political and diplomatic process. Sent to do the dirty work of the political 
manoeuvrers, the fighting men seem to have performed remarkably well against 
overwhelming odds. It is shocking therefore to discover that they were not 
received with honour by their nation on their return. Their commander, Niazi, 
appears to have been singled out, along with one aide, to be punished arbitrarily 
with dismissal and denial of pension, without being given the basic right to defend 
himself through a court-martial, which he asked for. 
The commission set up allegedly to examine what had happened in 1971 was too 
flawed in its terms of reference and report to have any international credibility. 
However, even its recommendations of holding public trials and courtmartials 
were ignored. There is much for Pakistan to come to terms with what happened 
in 1971. But the answers don’t lie in unthinking vilification of the fighting men 
who performed so well in the war against such heavy odds in defence of the 
national policy. Rather, in failing to honour them, the nation dishonours itself. 
Author: Daughter of Sisir Kumar and Karishna Bose, Sarmila Bose belongs to a 
distinguished family of Bengal. She is granddaughter of Sarat Chandra Bose, elder 
brother of Subhash Chandra Bose (Neta Ji) ex-President of All India Congress and 
founder of Indian National Army against the British, ruling India.

