91 

Panjbibi 
After spending sometime in 4 FF area, patrolling  places which had not been 
visited by the troops earlier like Dhupchanchia, I was ordered by the Brigade to 
relieve 8 Baluch Company at Panjbibi, the railway station south of Hilli. I was to 
leave one composite platoon comprising two recoilless rifles detachments, two 
machine gun detachments and four LMG detachments to strengthen 4 FF 
defensive positions. Three more recoilless detachments were added to reinforce 
these positions as soon as the Indian attacks started on Hilli on 22 Nov 1971.  At 
this time the deployment of 205 Brigade was, Brigade HQ at Bogra, 4 FF in area 
Hilli covering the shortest approach to main Rangpur – Bogra Road, 8 Baluch 
located in area Jaipur Hat and 13 FF in area Patnitola. 32 Baluch joined the 
Brigade after declaration of war and was used to fight the Indians moving on 
Rangpur - Bogra road. The Brigade was covering a vast area in its 
counterinsurgency role as well as covering the most threatened approach in case 
of Indian attack.

92 

I took over the area of responsibility from 8 Baluch Company commanded by 
Major Mujtaba spanning border area of over fifty kilometers. To cover the area in 
counter insurgency role with the aim of denying insurgents any sanctuary for 
carrying out sabotage activities, three posts were established along the border. 
One post was manned by EPCAF Company covering a track coming to Panjbibi 
from the west. This Company was commanded by Captain (later Brigadier) Badar 
Munir, (Armoured Corps). He was replaced by Captain Muhammad Aashiq, 
(Punjab Regiment). North of it another post was established by a Platoon 
commanded by Lieutenant M Saeed Tariq to cover the gap between Hilli and 
EPCAF post. This platoon was later shifted to astride the railway line north of 
Panjbibi. South of EPCAF post a party of sixteen civilian Bengali volunteers were 
given the responsibility to establish a post. They were provided with old 3.3 rifles. 
Although they did not get any other benefit like pay or rations or any other facility 
yet they did commendable job by not allowing any intrusion into their area.  
Another Platoon commanded by Captain Muhammad Afreen was employed to 
carry out patrolling and additional tasks assigned by the Brigade which were 
frequent like going for a raid in the area of other units thus supplementing their 
strength. Company HQ was located in the Panjbibi village. 
Panjbibi is situated south of Hilli on both sides of the railway line running north to 
south in the north-western part of East Pakistan. Like other large villages, Panjbibi 
had a weekly bazaar called ‘HAT’ in local language. It was very interesting to see 
barter trade going on in the bazaar, large gathering of people and haggling on 
prices, the day full of vibrant activity. The Bazaar was organised on an open piece 
of land on one side of the village. Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani’s first wife 
belonged to this place. I called on his brother’s in law, very decent peopleliving in 
joint family compound. Maulana Bhashani who relocated to India after start of 
Army operation on 25 March, was a coulourful character known to have one wife 
in each city, although an exaggeration but reflecting upon polygamous nature of 
Mao-lana, the title some people used for him because of his leaning towards 
Chinese Communist Party. Once asked to suggest solutions to the problems he 
was agitating for, his reply was that finding solutions was Governments job; his 
job was to organize protests and agitation.

93 

Most vital factor in keeping the area peaceful was public support cultivated 
through our conduct in dealing with the population, not interfering in functioning 
of local administration. One day when I was travelling towards EPCAF border post 
on the ‘Katcha’ track, two civilian young men waived to stop me before I could 
reach the place they were standing. On reaching them, they pointed to freshly 
dug earth on the track. As we removed the earth from surface, we found an anti 
tank mine placed there. Bara Babu, the Police officer in charge of the area was 
informed. Within two days he found the men who had planted that mine. They 
were locals who had remained in refugee camp across the border in India and 
were cultivated to perform acts of sabotage. The civilian population wanted to 
live in peace and was against any activity which could disturb peace in the area. 
The Police played very important role in having their informer system in the 
villages in place to detect any unusual activity. 
One afternoon while I was returning from a routine visit of EPCAF post to my 
Company HQ, I heard firing in vicinity of our post manned by civilians some 
distance south of EPCAF post. Travelling in a small jeep which carried only four 
persons, Captain Afreen was driving whereas driver and another soldier carrying 
light machine gun were sitting behind. Rest of us carried our rifles. We 
immediately turned south on dirt tracks to reach the post and found that firing 
had stopped, our civilian party having repulsed a Mukti Bahini raid coming from 
across the border. We formed two groups one led by me and the other by Captain 
Afreen and pursued miscreants who ran back into India. We could see a large 
crowd of civilians sitting across border watching the show. These posts were 
about fifteen to twenty kilometers away from my Company HQ and I used to 
frequently travel in the area without any apprehension of threat from civil 
population. We were not facing any hostility from general population of East 
Pakistan. It was a myth created and propagated in the world media. 
At Panjbibi, a reception camp was established to receive people who wanted to 
come back from camps on Indian side of the border. Such camps had been 
established all along the border at suitable places where returning people were 
registered and provided with some food and clothing before being sent to their 
homes. At our camp about a dozen people would be received daily. As elsewhere

94 

mentioned, people in Indian camps wanted to come back because they wanted to 
harvest crops knowing by then that they had nothing to fear from the Army. But 
the Indians forcibly detained them with the assurance that if nothing happened 
till December they would be allowed to go back. It was on 3rd December when 
guards were removed from their detention camp that they came across in bulk.  I 
had got some leaflets printed in Bengali language urging people who had gone 
across to India at the beginning of Army operations out of fear to return home. 
These leaflets were sent to the camps opposite our area through our Bengali 
volunteers who were working with us. Such measures and the general peaceful 
atmosphere in the area encouraged displaced persons to return home. 
Since the month of June, Indians were using artillery fire on our border posts all 
along the border. This was used to help Mukti Bahini persons in crossing the 
borders. From our side there was no response to this firing as we were already 
spread thin on ground because of lack of adequate resources. After spending 
these months in a state of perpetual tension when we felt that situation was 
under control, the country side peaceful except few acts of sabotage confined to 
the border areas, Indians started their next move with the Indian Army 
undertaking ground operations across the international borders. 
Indian attack on Hilli started on 21/22 November 1971, on the day of Eid. The 
Indians first attacked positions around Hilli railway station. 4 FF had prepared 
defensive positions covering Hilli-Ghoraghat approach, about three kilometers 
away from the border on a small nullah, creating an artificial obstacle by raising a 
bund. The trenches were very well sited covering the approaches on that axis. 
General Niazi, Commander Eastern Command, was so impressed with the well 
sited positions that he ordered unit commanders of other formations to visit 4 FF 
to see their defenses. However, shortly before start of Indian attack, command of 
brigade had changed. Brigadier Hassan had been replaced by Brigadier Tajammal 
Husain Malik, an energetic and courageous man who had been awarded for 
gallantry as unit commander in 1965 War. He did not allow 4 FF to occupy the 
prepared positions without giving a fight from outposts along the borders. The 
unit fought from those positions with unmatched valour causing heavy casualties 
to the Indians. In the process they lost some very good officers and JCOs,

95 

including Major Muhammad Akram who was awarded Nishan-e-Haider 
posthumously for his gallant fight. Source of strength and inspiration to his 
command, Major Akram was a mature and brave man unruffled in the tumult of 
fighting. I had met him on my arrival in their area when his company was 
deployed at the Hilli railway station. Later his company was shifted a little north 
and Major Julian Peter’s company placed at Hilli. During the intense fighting 
Major Akram tried to approach an Indian tank with a 40mm anti tank rocket 
launcher but before he could hit the tank, he was spotted and engaged. He 
embraced ‘Shahadat’, the ultimate sacrifice one can offer in line of duty.  
My composite platoon comprising five recoilless rifle detachments, two machine 
gun and four light machine gun detachments was deployed to strengthen 4 FF 
defensive positions which contributed enormously in fighting their battle with 
remarkable resilience. The platoon was commanded by Subedar Aziz Khan, a 
mature and courageous JCO. During the fighting I received a message from the 
Brigade that Havildar Haq Nawaz of my Company, a detachment commander of 
one of the recoilless rifles had embraced ‘Shahadat’ (martyrdom) after he had 
destroyed one enemy tank. As the fighting was going on, I took a jeep and drove 
from Panjbibi to Hilli railway station post taking a circuitous route to avoid enemy 
fire but still received a volley of artillery fire which luckily landed a few yards away 
from my moving jeep. At Hilli post I met Major Julian Peter, (later Major General) 
the company commander, Subedar Aziz Khan and the men of my company 
deployed there. I saw three enemy tanks destroyed in front of that position. One 
of these had been destroyed by Havildar Haq Nawaz and another by Sepoy Shah 
Mehmood of my company from a well sited position. After spending some time 
with them I returned to my post at Panjbibi. 
When the War was formally declared by Pakistan on 3 December, a message was 
received from the Brigade that Pakistan Army had captured Jammu by afternoon 
of 3rd December. We forgot about our own travails and everyone was filled with 
great joy to hear such good news. Alas; the joy was short lived as the news was 
false resulting in greater disappointment.  Earlier, since the months of August we 
had heard rumours that people in GHQ considered these three Divisions in East 
Pakistan as written off. At that time we took this as a joke but it proved true. The

96 

ruling junta, a coterie of callous, insensitive Generals in connivance with Z A 
Bhutto seemed bent upon break up of Pakistan in a humiliating manner. 
As fighting in Hilli area increased in intensity after declaration of War, the Brigade 
Commander wanted me to exert pressure on Indians from the southern side.  To 
reinforce Lieutenant Saeed Tariq’s platoon deployed north of Panjbibi, I deployed 
Captain Afreen’s Platoon further north, just south of Hilli to bring effective fire on 
the Indians attacking Hilli. The Indians abandoned their effort to attack Hilli and 
shifted their focus further north towards Badhuria. Captain Afreen’s Platoon was 
then withdrawn to organize a raid inside India in the rear of Indian troops in 
contact with 4 FF positions. With great audacity this raid was conducted in area 
Balurghat, a few miles deep into India resulting in killing of fourteen Indian 
soldiers caught asleep during night. On our side there was one person, Lance Naik 
Ajaib Shah wounded. The party safely withdrew back to own positions. For some 
time I had two artillery field guns placed at Panjbibi. To cause some damage in the 
rear areas of the advancing Indians, I sent these guns to the EPCAF border post 
from where they could target Balurghat area well in depth of Indian forward line. 
These guns were soon taken away from my area. 
The Indian Air force was targeting our positions unhindered as the lone PAF 
squadron deployed at Dacca had been made ineffective by continuous bombing 
of Dacca air field. On their first day of attack on my positions, Havildar Ajun Khan 
from Lieutenant Saeed Tariq’s Platoon embraced ‘Shahadat’. A bomb landed on 
his trench located on the railway line causing a deep crater burying Ajun Khan 
under a heap of earth. A pair of Indian fighter aircrafts made a routine of 
targeting my unoccupied trenches around Panjbibi three times during day. These 
trenches had been prepared to be occupied on withdrawal of my men deployed 
forward on the posts and were occupied on night 11/12 December. The Indian 
aircrafts would come in the morning apparently after consuming their breakfast, 
then by noon before their lunch and during late afternoon before sunset. In one 
of their sortie they used some incendiary bomb, instantly burning a large 
sugarcane field. One afternoon as I was returning from visit of the EPCAF post, the 
two aircraft came strafing for my single jeep moving on the track. The jeep 
driver’s presence of mind in getting the jeep off track into woods in time saved us.

97 

Our efforts to engage these aircrafts with our machine guns did not prove 
effective. 
As the Indians did not make any progress on Hilli-Ghoraghat track, they tried to 
move on a parallel track further north.  On this track a company of 8 Baluch, 
commanded by Major Ashraf was deployed in a small village called Badhuria. As 
fighting intensified, Brigade Commander, Brig Tajammal ordered a company from 
13 FF deployed towards south in Patnitola area, to reinforce Badhuria positions. 
The company had to pass through Panjbibi, where they halted for a short while. 
The company commander Major Sabir Kamal Meyer had just returned from leave 
in Spain, having married the daughter of our Ambassador, Major General (retired) 
Bilgirami. After honeymoon in paradise like environments of Spain, he obviously 
felt the conditions on the battle field most depressing. A suave and stylish officer, 
he left a very good impression. On 8 December, tragic news of his Shahadat was 
most saddening. He himself fired a recoilless rifle round to hit a tank but received 
a volley of tank fire from Indian tank squadron opposite his position. His JCO 
Subedar Sher Afzal, positioned next to him also embraced ‘Shahadat’ in the 
process and the weapon destroyed.  
When the Indians got stuck on this route also due to fierce resistance at Badhuria, 
they tried yet another track further north. It was on this track that I had been 
tasked by Brigadier Hassan in August to take up position in case of the Indian 
attack. However because of change of command and my company getting 
deployed elsewhere as explained, this track was left unoccupied. Brigadier 
Tajammal, when told that the Indian armour was moving astride the track north 
of 4 FF positions, responded that it was not through his area of responsibility that 
the Indians were moving. He was wrong in that because his predecessor had 
assigned my company to cover that area. The Indians kept moving on that 
approach unopposed and finally emerged at Pirganj (different town from one 
mentioned earlier) on road Rangpur-Bogra. As the Indians were adjusting their 
positions, by dusk a convoy of jeeps carrying Major General Nazar Hussain Shah, 
(GOC 16 Div) Brigadier Tajammal (Commander 205 Bde) and others travelling 
from Rangpur to Bogra, arrived at Pirganj. The surprise encounter startled both 
parties. The GOC, a bulky man had some difficulty in dismounting from the jeep

98 

but despite that the party was quickly provided shelter by the local civilians, 
hiding them from the searching Indians. Only one jeep could turn back that 
reached Rangpur to tell the tale. The civilians who provided shelter to the General 
and his party, arranged for their safe passage to Bogra during the night on a 
different route. 
On reaching Bogra, Brigadier Tajammal’s response to deal with this situation was 
ordering 32 Baloch to evict Indians from that area. When CO 32 Baloch tried to 
tell him that an infantry battalion could not evict tanks from the area, he was 
rebuked. The CO Lieutenant Colonel Raja Sultan conveyed these orders to his 
officers who also showed reservation in undertaking the mission. After some 
discussion the CO told them that he was moving as ordered, the officers and men 
then followed.  In the ensuing battle in Pirganj area, CO lost his life and the unit 
suffered over thirty dead, besides many persons wounded. Next morning the 
Indians started advance towards Bogra. 32 Baloch took up delaying positions at 
two different places between Pirganj and Bogra but each time they were 
bypassed, the Indians going behind their positions. 
There was no Lord Tennyson to describe 32 Baluch's attack on Indian Armour 
Regiment that could eternalize obeying suicidal order and not to reason why. CO 
Raja Sultan lost his life along with over thirty men in one go, the overall casualties 
over one hundred in ensuing battle the next day. The unit was 'ordered' to clear 
the area from Indian armour by Brig Tajammal Malik. It was not wrong passing of 
order but the order itself was wrong.  
In the words of  French Marshal Pierre Bosquet on The Charge of the Light Brigade 
of British light cavalry led by Lord Cardigan against Russian forces during the 
Battle of Balaclava on 25 October 1854 in the Crimean War "It is magnificent, but 
it is not war." He continued, in a rarely quoted phrase "it is madness." There could 
not be more apt description of Brigadier Tajammal’s act on the night of 8 
December 1971.  
Brigadier Tajammal had his tactical headquarters (Tac HQ) in 4 FF area. When 
Indians started moving from Pirganj astride main road towards Bogra, they 
decided to clear 4 FF position from the rear. The GOC told Brigadier Tajammal to

99 

relocate 4 FF to face Indians at a place called Mahaasthan north of Bogra. This 
message was carried by CO 8 Baloch, Lieutenant Colonel Mirza Moazzam Ali Beg 
who, passing through my position at Panjbibi told me about it. A short while 
afterwards he came back with the reply from Brigadier Tajammal that he would 
not relocate 4 FF, as his Brigade had stopped the advance of an Indian Corps and 
that the Indians behind 4 FF positions could be bagged. It was most unrealistic 
assessment of the situation. The Indian 33 Corps was operating against 16 
Division covering North Bengal Sector and could not be stopped by just blocking 
one approach. 
On early morning of 11 December, Brigade Commander with his Tac HQ arrived at 
my Company HQ. I was told that Indians had started moving towards 4 FF 
positions from their rear. In the process they had ejected Brigade Tac HQ and 
artillery gun positions supporting the unit. He told me that he was establishing his 
Tac HQ at my location and that, I accompanied by Major Muhammad Anis Ahmad, 
Engineers, his outgoing Brigade Major(BM), should contact Commanding Officer 
(CO) 4 FF to find out his latest situation. He told us that we should change into 
local dress while proceeding towards 4 FF positions. Major Anis, the first Pakistani 
award winner from the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, UK told me to forget 
about donning ‘Dhotis’ the local Bengali dress and instead to proceed as we were, 
in uniforms. Both of us moved towards Hilli along the railway line. I had a post on 
the railway track manned by Lieutenant Mohammad Saeed Tariq from where 4 FF 
positions were visible. From this post we sent a young Bengali volunteer with a 
written message from Major Anis to Lieutenant Colonel Akhlaq Abbasi, CO 4 FF, 
asking about the latest situation. The Bengali young man started his move taking 
suitable cover to avoid detection and fire. This was a slow process and we kept 
waiting for his return till about 3 p.m. As we were observing the happenings 
towards north in 4 FF area, my runner (called ‘batman’ during peacetime) Sepoy 
Raza told me on field telephone that Brigade people had left and the new BM, 
Major (later Brigadier) Mazhar ul Haq, Baloch Regiment, had left a message asking 
me to take care of myself. I had known Major Mazhar from Kharian days as our 
units were located in the same block. He was a very cheerful and energetic 
officer. I did not understand what it meant and was rather surprised at the move

100 

of Brigade Tac HQ. After waiting for considerable time, Major Anis wanted to 
leave to find out where the Brigade Commander had gone. 
We came back to my company HQ and as we were having a cup of tea, our 
Bengali friend reached back with a beautifully handwritten message from 
Lieutenant Colonel Akhlaq Abbasi. Its essence was that till the ammunition lasted, 
he would be holding on. Major Anis very carefully put that small piece of paper in 
his pocket and left the place to rejoin Brigade HQ that had gone towards Bogra via 
Jaipurhat where 8 Baloch, with its Battalion HQ and two companies was located. 
The Brigade Commander ordered the unit to withdraw from Jaipurhat and take up 
position at Khetlal, about ten kilometres from Jaipurhat towards Bogra.  
After darkness on night 11/12 December, troops of 4 FF stared withdrawing from 
their positions, moving through my location towards Bogra. This movement 
continued throughout the night. By morning of 12 December 1971, 4 FF positions 
had been vacated. Indians having failed to make any progress from the front had 
bypassed these positions and landed up in their rear. Paucity of troops to man all 
approaches caused this unfavourable development. A total of three under 
strength Divisions totalling about thirty thousand troops could not defend the 
whole country, particularly when these were deployed in penny packets for 
counter insurgency operations. To counter the Indian invasion, which had become 
obvious by concentration of Indian forces by October 1971, there was a need to 
redeploy available troops to defend the core area around Dacca according to our 
capacity. Orders to defend every inch of the land, led to dissipation of forces all 
over the country. This lack of clarity at the national level or wilful neglect of 
established principles of war caused defeat in detail.  
On the morning of 12 December, I could see Indian tanks, part of the force which 
had cleared 4 FF positions; about one thousand yards away from my location. 
Expecting their further advance to clear Panjbibi, I recalled my detachments to 
take up positions around the village in trenches which had been prepared earlier 
but had remained unoccupied. By now, my platoon with additional anti tank 
detachments commanded by Subedar Aziz Khan; which had undergone intense 
fighting with 4 FF for almost twenty days, had rejoined the company on night 
11/12 while 4 FF was passing through my position on their move to Bogra. I could

