51 

messing would exceed that limit at times. A strict check was kept by the officer 
detailed as Mess Secretary and further supervised by the second in command of 
the units as their duty. 
The officer’s messes and the officers clubs served drinks from well stocked bars. 
We who had joined in bulk after 1965 War, mostly from the villages were from 
different family backgrounds where in our houses and environments we were not 
exposed to use of spirits. On joining the units we were initiated into drinks by our 
seniors. Some of us started enjoying occasional drinks particularly during the 
week ends. Most favourite place was the garrison club where one had the facility 
to watch a movie screened on a wall out in the open, a game of ‘Tambola’ and a 
bottle of very fine quality Murree Brewery beer in the summers. During winters 
Whiskey and Jinn were in demand. The ‘Aabdaar’, a term no more in use, who 
poured drinks ordered at the bar remained quite busy on the weekends. Liquor 
was freely available throughout the country from particular shops that had the 
license from the government to sell it. Even opium was available from specified 
shops having license to sell till late nineteen fifties. Sale and consumption of 
spirits was banned by Mr. Z A Bhutto in his last days in power to please Mullahs 
expecting to save his rule.  
The routine of officers in an infantry unit started with physical exercise period in 
the morning with the troops. After that we would come back to the mess to 
change into uniforms, have breakfast and rush back for training with the troops 
which lasted till mid morning. After attending the training in unit training areas 
we would come to the company offices located in the residential barracks of 
troops to attend to office routine. At lunch time we would go back to the messes, 
have some rest after lunch and then come back to units for a sports period with 
the troops. This lasted till about sunset after which we would get back to our 
rooms in the mess and prepare for the supper in the mess or dinner/guest nights 
which were quite frequent. These were attended by senior officers of the unit in 
turn basically to ensure propriety and grooming of young officers. All this running 
about during the day was done on rented bicycles. Every unit maintained a cycle 
shop to cater for the needs of the officers and the soldiers alike. Television was

52 

introduced in 1964, a novelty not available at the household level. The life 
therefore was mostly spent outdoors in healthy activities. 
Cinema was main source of entertainment in those days.  There were a number of 
cinemas providing entertainment for the whole families. There were different 
charges for various classes of seats within the cinema halls; front seats being the 
cheapest and galleries at the back costlier. The charges of tickets varied from half 
a rupee to about three rupees at the maximum. Whole families could watch 
movies together because there was no vulgarity in the films like present times. 
Some cinemas screened English films only. In Rawalpindi, Cirose (which is still not 
demolished) Plaza and Odeon screened English films. For watching Indian movies 
people would travel to Kabul when these got banned to be screened in Pakistan 
after 1965 war. Travelling from Kharian to Rawalpindi or Lahore on weekends was 
frequent because it was not expensive, the bus fare being about two and half 
rupees to both cities as Kharian is almost at equal distance from both major cities. 
My roommate Asif Ali Rizvi would make the choice of destination easy. According 
to him as we came out on the G T Road, parking our bicycles at the Petrol Station, 
the first bus in either direction was to be taken to reach Rawalpindi or Lahore. We 
would stay with our fellow officers in the Messes so there was no expense on 
lodging. Expenses on food and watching the films were not much burden on the 
pocket.  
For entertainment of troops, the units would invite singers including singing and 
dancing girls to perform in the open on special occasions like raising days or on 
some other excuse. Aziz Mian Qawwal had been recently introduced into the 
army units and was in great demand. He was once invited by our unit and gave 
mesmerizing performance during good part of the night in our unit lines 
entertaining the troops, one soldier going into trance oblivious of surroundings 
affected by Sufi poetry. On the eve of our departure to East Pakistan, the unit 
arranged a function inviting singer Bilqees Khanum along with a dancing girl from 
Lahore and another bunch of dancing girls from nearby Lalamusa. The soldiers 
would also sing and perform skits particularly targeting the seniors for their 
idiosyncrasies.

53 

I picked up the habit of some reading, starting with the biographies. On weekends 
I would often travel to Rawalpindi and spend a few hours at London Book 
Company in Saddar where now a bakery stands. Books in paperback did not cost 
much, about five rupees for a Penguin Classic. Libraries were also well stocked 
and there was culture of making use of these fine institutions. Reading was a 
pleasure which I enjoyed for a few years till I landed into the turmoil in East 
Pakistan followed by a period of incarceration. After that I lost energy required to 
concentrate on reading books, my reading capacity restricted to magazine and 
newspaper articles.

54 

THE EXPERIENCE 
Part – II 
Move to East Pakistan 
My unit was required to move to East Pakistan in April 1971 to replace 27 Baluch, 
a unit of similar composition, according to orders issued by the General 
Headquarters in their annual movement/rotation plans for the units. I, a Captain 
then, was doing Martial Law Duties as a member of Special Military Court at 
Lyallpur (later renamed Faisalabad). Late one evening I got a message to move 
back as the unit was to move in emergency to East Pakistan. 9 Division from 
Kharian had been ordered to move immediately. Another division, the 16th 
Division from Quetta had also been ordered to move as a consequence of Army 
action of 25 March 1971 to overcome unrest in East Pakistan. Before moving 
these two divisions, there was only one infantry division; the 14th Division of 
Pakistan Army located in East Pakistan. This Division had four brigades instead of 
normal three, each brigade comprising three infantry battalions. Out of the total 
twelve infantry battalions in these brigades, seven battalions were from the East 
Bengal Regiment.9 These units and about thirteen thousand troops of para 
military East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) revolted. Bengali troops in the remaining units’ 
which were up to thirty percent in some of these units had also to be disarmed. 
14 Division was thus virtually ineffective till reinforcements arrived from West 
Pakistan. 
The two divisions moving to East Pakistan were not to take their complete 
elements i.e. Armour Regiments, full complement of Artillery, Engineers, Signal 
and service units etc. Authorised strength of an infantry division was then about 
fifteen thousand persons. Practically these two Divisions moved just with their 

9Seven regular army Bengali infantry battalions of East Bengal Regiments (EBR) were present in East 
Pakistan in March 1971. The 1st EB was in Jessore, attached to the 107th Brigade. The 2nd EB was in 
Joydevpur north of Dacca, attached to the 57th Brigade. The 3rd EB was in Saidpur with the 23rd 
Brigade, and the 4th EB was in Comilla with the 53rd Brigade. The 8th EB was preparing to ship to West 
Pakistan and was at 75% strength in Chittagong. The East Bengal Regimental Center (EBRC) in 
Chittagong housed 2,000 Bengali troops including the newly raised 9th EB. The 10th EB, a training unit, 
was in the Dacca cantonment attached to the 14th Division. Bengali officers commanded the 1st, 2nd 
and the 10th EB, while the rest were under West Pakistani officers.

55 

infantry battalionsby air to reinforce the troops in East Pakistan. Roughly about 
twenty thousand troops were airlifted to reinforce the small garrison trapped in 
East Pakistan. 
Our move started from Kharian by train up to Karachi and then onward by 
Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) to Dacca on a circuitous route passing over 
Ceylon (now Sri Lanka). The Indians had stopped our flights over India earlier by 
staging a drama of hijacking. A Fokker aircraft, nick named Ganga, was brought to 
Lahore by some Kashmiri persons resulting in banning of Pakistan’s flights over 
India thus increasing flight time from two hours to almost seven hours. Mr. Z A 
Bhutto was prompt in embracing the hijackers praising their action.  
It was a most remarkable achievement of our national carrier, the PIA, to move 
these troops in a very short time. The airline staff worked tirelessly far beyond 
their call of duty. We could genuinely take pride in their performance and 
achievement. Otherwise also the PIA was considered one of the best airlines in 
the world. Air Marshal Noor Khan, in his younger days when he was Air 
Commodore worked in his inimitable style to make our airline one of the top ones 
in the world. The motto adopted ‘great people to fly with’ truly reflected their 
status. Noor Khan was replaced by Air Martial Asghar Khan, another outstanding 
professional. The airline lost its position by induction of political workers which 
gradually eroded its efficiency to land it in its present state. Karachi, a city of lights 
in those days was hub of air travel east of Suez. Gulf region airports then did not 
exist.  
I along with my company landed at Dacca Tejgaon Airport by mid day on 6th April, 
the unit’s move being completed by 8th April 1971. In the company I had two 
more officers, Captain Muhammad Afreen and Lieutenant Muhammad Saeed 
Tariq (who embraced SHAHADAT on 13 December 1971 at Panjbibi, District 
Bogra). We were just carrying our personal weapons, their ammunition and a 
spare pair of uniforms in our backpacks. Our heavier equipment and weapons like 
vehicles, recoilless rifles etc were to move by sea from Karachi to Chittagong from 
where these were to be collected later. We could get hold of our equipment after 
the completion of first phase of operations by end May 1971.

56 

It may be difficult to understand for our younger generation, living in the age of 
instant communications that we had no clue about situation in East Pakistan 
before we landed in Dacca. On reaching Karachi, before undertaking air journey 
we got the feelings that something was seriously wrong in that part of our 
country. This information was provided by the people coming back from East 
Pakistan on return flights from Dacca. It gave very harrowing details of atrocities 
being committed by Bengali criminal gangs on non Bengali population because 
the State had lost control and had stopped functioning in that part of the country. 
It was on reaching Dacca that we learnt about the grave situation and some 
details of Army action started on 25 March 1971 to restore State writ in East 
Pakistan.  
Initial Operations - April 1971 
After assembling and doing duties in Dacca for a couple of days, the unit was 
given the task to clear area up to Narsinghdi, a small town north east of Dacca. 
The unit was placed under 14 Division, losing its affiliation with the 9 Division.  
The unit concentrated across a stream by crossing over Demra ferry site in south 
east of the city on 10 April and started its move on the morning of 11th April. It 
was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Hafeez Ur Rahman, Alpha Company 
commanded by Major M Saeed Azam Khan, Bravo Company by Major Khurshid 
Ahmad Mallal, Charlie Company by Captain Nazir Ahmed (author) and Delta 
Company by Captain Nisar Hussain Bukhari. The move towards north started 
along Dacca- Narsinghdi- Bhairab Bazar road with Major Mallal’s company 
leading. We had mustered a few small civilian vehicles including a Volkswagen 
ambulance to make one platoon (about thirty plus strength) mobile. This mobile 
platoon commanded by Captain Mian Bux Baloch led the advance movement, rest 
of the troops following on foot along the road. We also had the support of four 
Artillery guns following behind us under command Major Khurram Jahandur. 
As soon as the leading platoon covered a distance of about three kilometers, it 
came into a well laid ambush from the both sides of the road through trees 
forming a horseshoe pattern.  Leading platoon took up position alongside the 
road to return fire. According to well practiced drill without losing time, the 
following platoon was given code word “Babbar Sher Alpha” by Major Mallal, the

57 

company commander ordering the platoon to come behind rebel’s position 
moving from the right side, keeping a distance of about one thousand yards from 
the rebel’s position.  Alpha in our code word meant move from right and Bravo 
was for move from the left side depending upon the lay of the ground. The 
distance of one thousand yards was considered safe from enemy small arms fire 
even if the move had to be in open without any cover available. Naib Subedar 
Abbas leading his platoon started moving at quick pace, unmindful of the firing 
which he knew could not be effective, to come behind the positions from where 
fire was coming.  

As the rebels realised that they were being encircled, they started gradually 
withdrawing taking advantage of the cover available to them as could be seen 
from decreasing intensity of their fire. Their withdrawal was being covered till last 
by one light machine gun (LMG) position. To tackle this LMG fire, Naik Amanullah 
along with a sepoy (whose name I cannot recollect now) from the platoon trying

58 

to encircle rebels, started crawling towards the position. The area in front of the 
trees from where fire was coming was open and without any cover except for 
slightly raised edges of the fields from where rice crop had been harvested. Naik 
Amanullah reached LMG position from behind and physically got hold of the man 
firing it. In the process he got a bullet in his thigh. Naik Amanullah, was an 
interesting character. He had recently been demoted from Lance Havildar to Naik. 
This had happened to him second time. He would always do some funny thing to 
deserve a demotion soon after he got promotion because of his seniority. He 
rejoined the unit after his wound had healed.  The person who was firing the LMG 
to cover withdrawal of rebels from ambush site was a stout, well built person. 
Despite efforts, he did not speak a word. He did not look like a Bengali.  In all 
probability he was an Indian working with rebels as we learnt of Indian’s physical 
involvement later. During exchange of fire few unoccupied thatched huts caught 
fire, most likely torched by retreating rebels which were later shown as evidence 
of arson against the Army. 
As that position got cleared in about two hours’ time and unit was preparing to 
resume advance, General Officer Commanding (GOC), Major General M Rahim 
Khan landed on the roadside in a small helicopter. He had recently taken over 
command of 14 Division replacing Major General Khadim Hussain Raja.General 
Tikka Khan Commander Eastern Command had also been replaced by Lieutenant 
General Amir Abdullah Khan (AAK) Niazi who assumed command on 10 April 
1971.  
Major General Rahim was briefed by our CO about the situation. The move 
restarted with Alpha Company (Major Saeed Azam) leading. Study of the map 
indicated a possible rebel’s position about five kilometers ahead in areas of two 
road bends. As our leading elements neared first road bend, the CO ordered my 
company to move towards a possible escape route of the enemy and take up 
position to block that route. I quickly moved in that direction and as soon as 
reached the indicated position, fire fight in the road bends area had begun. 
During this firing, the unit called for Artillery fire from the four guns following the 
column. Captain Muhammad Saleem, my course mate from 2nd War Course was 
artillery observer directing the fire. Distance between rebel’s position deployed in

59 

tree lines and our troops on the road was about hundred fifty yards apart. 
Because of miscalculation, all the four shells landed on our own positions. First 
shell landed directly on a LMG being fired by Second Lieutenant Abdul Ghafoor 
killing him instantly. Second shell landed near the CO injuring Subedar Major Alam 
Badshah, the third wounded Captain Saleem, the artillery observer who had 
called for fire and the fourth one also killed and wounded some men. In all, there 
were four dead and five wounded from this volley of our own fire. 
As I reported to the CO on wireless set that I had taken up position as ordered, he 
told me to come behind the enemy positions from a flank. I started to move 
keeping about one thousand yards distance from small arms fire that was 
ineffective, the bullets landing near us which did not stop our move. As my 
company reached behind enemy positions from a flank, darkness of the night had 
taken over.  Firing had stopped and the rebels, taking advantage of the darkness 
and cover available to them from the woods withdrew towards Narsinghdi. I 
established contact with the unit and then learnt of casualties suffered by the unit 
that day. 
Next morning i.e. on 12th April we resumed advance towards Narsinghdi. On 
reaching a small stream we found the road bridge demolished. The troops had to 
wade through water. By afternoon we approached the town where we saw a 
number of people lined up on road, some wearing Jinnah caps and carrying 
Pakistan flags raising slogans ‘Pakistan Zindabad’. They informed that the 
miscreants had fled (Malaun log bhag gia). 
After a day‘s stay at Narsighdi, the unit was ordered to prepare for move further 
north towards Bhairab Bazar where rebels were entrenched across Meghna River 
at Ashuganj rail/road Bridge blocking movement towards Brahmanbaria in the 
east. The position was very difficult to approach and a brigade size operation of 
considerable complexity was reportedly being planned. It was to approach the 
rebel positions from three directions i.e. frontally over the bridge, through the 
river using river craft and from behind the positions landing some Special Services 
Group (SSG) troops using few available helicopters. The operation, however, got 
swiftly completed when SSG troops commanded by the legendry TM, Major Tariq 
Mahmud (later Brigadier who lost his life during a practice para jump in

60 

Gujranwala Cantonment) assaulted the positions from behind after heli-landing at 
dawn. The rebels, suffering heavy casualties, abandoned their trenches and ran 
towards east leaving huge caches of arms in their abandoned positions. 
After spending about two days at Bhairab Bazar, the unit moved over the 
Ashuganj Bridge towards Brahmanbaria. After covering some distance in that 
direction it was ordered to turn back and move north in the direction of 
Kishorganj, as part of the Brigade tasked to clear area up to Mymensingh.  In this 
move there was no opposition encountered but the march to Mymensingh took 
us over a week ending on 23 April. As our Brigade approached from the east, 
another force supported by some tanks had already reached the city from south a 
day earlier as transpired later after some confusion and loss of life. A branch of 
River Brahmaputra running east of city separated the two forces. On reaching the 
river from east our leading troops were fired upon from across the river. The fire 
fight raged for some time when noise of tanks getting started in Mymensingh was 
heard. This rumbling of tanks caused alarm. After frantic efforts to establish 
contact the confusion got cleared. The Division had failed to coordinate the 
movement causing this unfortunate situation resulting in loss of life of two 
soldiers of the leading unit of our Brigade. The reason given was that our Brigade 
was out of communication with the Division. The elderly Brigadier Zulfiqar Khan 
had been marching with us, losing contact due to the distances involved and lack 
of appropriate communication equipment. 
While marching towards Mymensingh, normal routine was to start the move early 
morning and after covering a distance of roughly 30 to 35 kilometers set up camp 
for the night. On first day of our march, main problem confronted was from 
where to procure meals because there was no system of logistics supporting the 
move. When the unit halted for a break at mid day, solution was found in 
searching for rice and cooking utensils from abandoned houses. It took lot of time 
to prepare a meal of boiled rice and some lentils. Later it became a practice to 
prepare meal of boiled rice and meat by slaughtering a goat or even a calf taken 
from the abandoned habitats en route. As our column advanced, the local 
population living in small villages/hutments on the route vacated their houses and 
moved away on sides to avoid contact with the force. As we approached towns

