1 


COLONEL NAZIR AHMED 
Recounting personal experiences of a journey spanning over seven decades, 
beginning at remote rural environments to soldiering during most eventful period 
of Pakistan’s short history; revealing undisclosed facts about causes and 
consequences of Indo-Pakistan Wars(1965,1971,Kargil Episode)and offering a 
common man’s perspective to rediscover the path towards a peaceful and 
prosperous Pakistan 
Revised Edition (2015) 

EAST PAKISTAN – 1971  
DISTORTIONS AND LIES

Copyright © Colonel (Retired) Nazir Ahmed 2015First Published – September 2013

Email:n_ahmed42@hotmail.com

3 


The book is dedicated to Farkhanda, my wife who bore 
with my circumstances with grace and fortitude making 
idyllic home; raising children blessed with exceptional 
abilities and sterling character

4 


List of Contents 


The Experience 

Part- I  

1. 
Prologue 

6 
2. 
Village Life 

10 
3. 
Ayub Khan’s Era 

27 
4. 
Yahya Khan’s Rule 
41 
5. 
Call to Arms 
45 


Part - II 


6. 
Move to East Pakistan 

54 
7. 
Thakurgaon 

66 
8. 
Panjbibi 

91 
9. 
Prisoner of war 
109 


Part - III 

10. 
Back home to a ‘New’ Pakistan 
130 
11. 
South Waziristan  
141 
12. 
Reverting back to Khakis  
145 
13. 
Army Hajj Contingent – 1984 

152 
14. 
Shikarpur and Thereafter 
167 
15. 
Lure of Mountains  
176 
16. 
Retirement and Post Retirement Years 

192 


Opinions 

Part- IV 

17. 
Conflict with India  
207 
18. 
The Stranglehold  
215 
19. 
11 Sep 2001 and its Aftermath  
230 
20. 
Taliban 

235 
21. 
Regional Context  
239

5 

22. 
The Fallacy of Army’s Rule  
243 
23. 
Army’s Challenges and Response 

251 
24. 
Overcoming Unrest in Balochistan 
259 
25. 
The Question of Provinces in Pakistan  
266 
26. 
Local Governments and Community Development  
278 
27. 
Provision of Justice 
284 
28. 
Outline of a New Order  
287 
29. 
Epilogue 
299 


Annexes 

Annex A – List of 34 Punjab Officers in East Pakistan 
301 
Annex B – Excerpts from Statement of Air Marshal Inamul Haque Khan 
304 
Annex C – Order of Battle of Pakistani Troops        

        in East Pakistan - 3 December 1971 
313 
Annex D – Dr. Sarmila Bose – The Courageous Pakistan Army Stand        

        on Eastern Front: An Untold Story of 1971 Indo-Pak War 
321 


Maps and Photographs 

Map 1 – 34 Punjab (R&S) First Day’s Actions 
57 
Map 2 – 34 Punjab (R&S) Clearnace of Bhurangamari Salient 
63 
Map 3 – 34 Punjab (R&S) Area of Responsibility 
67 
Map 4 – 34 Punjab (R&S) During Counter Insurgency Operations 
                and 1971 War 
90 
Map 5 – Charlie Company 34 Punjab (R&S) in Hilli Sector 
91 
Photographs  – Meeting Point of three massive mountain ranges of the 
world and Viewpoint made for the travellers  
186 & 
187 
Photopraphs – Lieutenant Colonel Ahmed Yaman at USAIS, Fort Benning 
197 
Wing Commander Ahmed Adnan, T Bt with his F-16 
198 
Major Ahmed Omar receiving Sword of Honour at RMA 
199 
Photopraphs – 34 Punjab Officers at Thakurgaon - July 1971 
303

6 

Prologue 
No claim of erudition, literary merit or pretence of sagacity prompts me to write 
the following account. The stimulus in undertaking this demanding endeavour is 
to state some facts which would help negate false perceptions about the tragic 
events in erstwhile East Pakistan during that fateful year – 1971. Being one of 
about thirty four thousand armed forces personnel who spent over two years in 
Prisoners Of War (POW) camps in India, I have felt extreme frustration and 
helplessness on vicious lies about proceedings of that tumultuous period resulting 
in breakup of Pakistan, the largest Muslim country of the world. 
While the number of prisoners was exaggerated to a preposterous figure aimed at 
denigrating Pakistan Army, the atrocities attributed to men of the Army are the 
greatest falsehood propagated and pursued even after over forty years of that 
catastrophic event. Every year around 16 December the local press has been 
derisively writing about the disgrace of a military defeat, despite the fact that 
those men, who performed their task beyond the call of duty were abandoned 
with a purpose. The breakup of our country was caused by factors other than the 
result of military operations. It will become evident from events described in this 
narrative that the plan to dismember our country was hatched in West Pakistan 
by those people who did not see their chance of coming to or retaining power in a 
united Pakistan. They used military operation as catalyst to expedite 
implementation of their plan. They got ready support from outside forces with 
India in the lead, instigating, training and launching terrorist groups from their soil 
into East Pakistan, followed by outright invasion to wind up the plan.  
The theme to demonise the contingent of Pakistan Army trapped in East Pakistan 
is fully exposed by Dr Sarmila Bose in her book ‘DEAD RECKONING - Memories of 
the 1971 Bangladesh War’ published in 2011. A research scholar of impeccable 
credentials, her conclusions are result of detailed investigation of events by 
interviewing accusers of murders and atrocities, visiting sites of reported crimes 
to find details from people of those areas and questioning concerned officers of 
Pakistan Army. She has been travelling to Pakistan and Bangladesh in connection 
with her research spanning over a period of some years (2003 to 2006). She 
concludes that the claims of killings attributed to Pakistan Army during 1971 are

7 

grossly exaggerated and accusations of atrocities patently false. In introduction 
chapter of her Book, she laments about Pakistanis on ‘deafening silence from the 
majority of those who had served in East Pakistan’.Obviously with her educational 
and cultural background she does not understand that those of us who served in 
East Pakistan during 1971 are shy with the pen, not inclined to undertake writing 
of our accounts. A few who wrote,including Lieutenant General Amir Abdullah 
Khan Niazi, the commander of Pakistani forces in East Pakistan narrated similar 
facts as by Dr Bose but their version does not get acceptance coming from a 
maligned and defeated party. General Niazi’s book ‘The Betrayal of East Pakistan’ 
published in 1998 gives overall picture of the situation on ground and the 
predicament he was faced with in dealing with callous,unresponsive and 
unconcerned ruling junta of the time. It is revealing study in the backdrop of 
vigorous propagation of fictional narrative for so many years. General Niazi who 
took over command of troops in East Pakistan on 10 April 1971 restored State 
writ in the country by end of April 1971 in just three weeks. Army operations 
under his command were strident and swift, creating enabling conditions for 
resumption of political process but that never happened because it was not 
intended by Yahya-Bhutto combine, with Yahya being in the driving seat.Brigadier 
Karrar Ali Agha’s book ‘Witness to Carnage, 1971’ published in 2011 fills another 
important gap in the records. Brigadier Agha, then a Major posted as staff officer 
in the Headquarters East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) during the period gives graphic 
details of events at different places. He also sheds light on the proceedings of 
negotiations held at Dacca between leadership of Awami League, Pakistan 
People’s Party and General Yahya’s Government.   
My basic motivation to write is to refute the outrageous lie of the grossly 
exaggerated number of prisoners of war. With about 34,000 (thirty four 
thousands) armed forces personnel that include Army, Navy and Air Force and 
another about ten to twelve thousand persons in different categories including 
some civilians, the total number of persons incarcerated in India as prisoners of 
war comes to about forty five thousands. The number of armed forces personnel 
can be easily calculated from the details of formations and units located in East 
Pakistan on 16 December 1971 that I have included as annex. This information 
was available in the form of order of battle given in the Indian publications right

8 

after the war but no effort was made by Pakistani media or academia to find out 
facts. Against reality, a preposterous figure of ninety three thousand prisoners 
was invented and fed to Hamoodur Rehaman Commission creating an impression 
that a large part of Pakistan Army had surrendered to Indians in East Pakistan.  
That is a lie which must be exposed even if so much time has passed. 
I have made an effort to recount what I saw and experienced as an infantry officer 
who traversed through almost whole of North and North West Bengal, a good 
part of it on foot. My unit 34 Punjab, starting its march from Dacca on 11 April 
1971 carried out its assigned tasks in areas Narsinghdi, Bhairab Bazaar, Ashuganj, 
Kishorganj, Mymensingh, Nitrakona, reaching Durgapur on borders with the State 
of Meghalaya in India; then moving towards west, crossing over River 
Brahmaputra/Jumna to Rangpur, clearing areas Nageshwari, Bhurangamari up to 
borders with the State of Assam in India; finally reaching Thakurgaon – Pachagarh 
in the extreme north western corner of the country bordering the State of West 
Bengal in India by June 71. Detached from unit in first week of August, my 
Company operated in areas Hilli, Panchbibi, Patnitola, finally reaching Naogaon 
when the war concluded. A perusal of Bangladesh map will show that this was a 
very long journey and an enormous undertaking. Seeing events at close quarters 
on ground over such a vast area, my observations, taken from a far wider sample 
give a fuller picture, different than the perceptions created and propagated 
during all these years. 
In addition to giving detailed account of events in East Pakistan, the events that I 
witnessed and was a participant of, this account has turned into memoirs starting 
with life at a small village in Pothowar region of Pakistan. It gives glimpses of 
history of Pakistan, described from the perspective of a common man who is 
neither a historian writing from a distance in time and space, giving subtle twists 
to events according to his understanding and interpretations; nor it is written by 
someone in undue haste to build false image, save reputations or mere 
glorification of a side, like some Indian authors who brought out books on the 
conflict within weeks on conclusion of war.  
Apart from misleading the public about real causes of breakup of Pakistan, 
otherwise also some vital facts in our short history got distorted. Realities were

9 

substituted by carefully crafted presumptions, spreading lies through controlled 
media, the state owned Pakistan Television introduced in 1964 and Radio 
Pakistan, turning devils into heroes and vice versa. The present state of all 
pervasive media is recent phenomenon and came much later than those 
momentous events; the two wars with India and dismemberment of Pakistan. My 
narrative thus challenges prevailing perceptions about rulers and exposes lies 
with which they befooled the people.  
My account starts with recounting the atmosphere of serenity and contentment 
in lives of common people of Pakistan before 1965 War, in contrast to growing 
insecurity, uneasiness and agitation of later years caused by dishonest and 
incompetent rulers and policy makers, leading to current chaotic situation that we 
find ourselves in. I have tried to portray some aspects of life one lived in rural 
environments about sixty years back. This part was demanded by my children, 
particularly Ahmad Yaman the eldest, who was keen to record unbelievable 
changes in living conditions and social environments that have taken place in 
these years. My children, who used to visit the village as little boys, would listen 
to the state of affairs prevailing in rural areas not long ago with scepticism and 
disbelief. The changes, particularly in agricultural processes and overall village life 
of comparative isolation and self sustenance have been rapid and fundamental, 
replacing old ways, taking away the romance of rural life. 
First three parts (Parts I, II and III) of the book contain ‘The Experience’ that I went 
through. Counter insurgency operations in erstwhile East Pakistan culminating in 
war with India in 1971 have been chronicled in some detail in Part II where I was a 
participant or a witness. Part IV conveys my opinions on matters of collective 
concern formed while struggling through the journey of life.  

Nazir Ahmed 
Islamabad 
11 March 2016

10 

THE EXPERIENCE 
Part-I 
Village Life 
As I look back at my journey through life, the kaleidoscope starts with the 
momentous event of creation of Pakistan. For a child of about five years, it was 
not possible to comprehend its impact. There was no conflict, fighting, arson, 
looting or unrest of any kind in our area. My village Kufri, (renamed Bilalabad) is 
situated about twelve kilometres away towards west from Talagang, a tehsil 
headquarters then part of Campbellpur /Attock district in the rain fed Pothohar 
region of Pakistan. In that village there were a few Hindu families and one Sikh 
family residing at that time. The Hindu families were more affluent because of 
owning better tracts of land and doing small businesses including money lending. 
As the migration started, the Hindu families gave keys of their houses to 
neighbours with the understanding that they would be coming back after 
sometime when the dust settled. In most cases the neighbors accompanied them 
from the village up to the town of Talagang to bid them farewell. If an Indian ex-
Prime Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh felt nostalgic to invite his class fellow from 
Village Gah, near Chakwal to India after almost sixty years of that event, he must 
have nurtured fond memories of peaceful life in those times in this part of the 
land. Later we heard of killings, mainly in the towns along the railway line running 
from Rawalpindi to Lahore, an unfortunate chapter of our history whatever the 
reasons which caused this madness.  
The cause of partition of Indian sub-continent into two independent countries, 
Pakistan and India however was very clear.  We as children, while walking in the 
street would be shooed away by Hindu women coming across in the street for the 
reason that according to them even a touch to their clothes by Muslims, even if 
they were children would make them ‘Bhrisht’ i.e. unclean.  Houses of Hindus 
were off limits to Muslims. Both communities could not use same utensils for 
eating or drinking. For quite some times after the partition large earthen vessels 
(matkas) in our school remained marked with ‘Hindu’ water and ‘Muslim’ water. 
Even the food was different, the Muslims eating beef that was anathema to

