101 

clearly see that spirit of these men was not affected by the hardships caused 
during intense battle for such a long period of time. Subedar Aziz Khan was the 
same calm and confident man and his subordinates equally cool and unruffled. 
One of them acted with unmatched valour being narrated in succeeding paras. 
Since on the previous day while going towards Bogra, Brigade Commander had 
told 8 Baloch to vacate Jaipurhat to occupy positions on a small nullah in area 
Khetlal, my company was left on its own without any  support from own troops 
who were now about twenty kilometres away from my location. I, being on 
Brigade wireless communication network (using GRC-9 Sets) tried to contact the 
Brigade for fresh orders, but there was no response to my calls. It was only 8 
Baloch who responded with the message that I was to remain in position at 
Panjbibi. The day passed without any activity from the Indian side. The eerie 
silence after deafening noise of battle raging in the area for so many days was 
unusual and depressive.  
On night 12/13 Dec, Lieutenant Mohammad Saeed Tariq, occupying position 
north of village between a nullah and the railway line reported noises of possible 
troops movement some distance away from his positions. Since I had no artillery 
support to engage the enemy, there was no option but to wait for them to 
approach our positions. This was unexpected direction of enemy move because 
Indian troops who had cleared 4 FF positions were on eastern side of the village, 
their tanks visible at a distance. By about 4 A.M. intense artillery fire started on 
my positions. Although my troops and I had gone through enough battle 
inoculation, this was the worst we had to endure. Intense shelling continued for 
about an hour during which the Indian attack came on the positions of Lieutenant 
Saeed Tariq’s platoon. The fire fight continued for about one hour, the Indians 
trying to get closer to our positions. Suddenly there was a lull in the fire fight, 
meaning that first Indian attack was beaten back. Indian artillery fire however 
continued unabated.  After a break of about an hour, Indians resumed their attack 
with greater intensity, overrunning part of the positions of Lieutenant Tariq’s 
platoon. In the process Lieutenant Mohammad Saeed Tariq embraced Shahadat 
and his platoon JCO Naib Subedar Abdul Aziz was injured. I had two JCOs by the 
name of Aziz. One was SubedarAziz Khan commanding No 9 Platoon that had re-

102 

joined the company on night 11/12 December after fighting the battle at Hilli and 
the other Naib Subedar Abdul Aziz, a Platoon JCO with Lieutenant Saeed Tariq.  
Realising that the position had become untenable, I told my men to withdraw, 
covering the withdrawal myself with six men including Subedar Aziz Khan, Naik 
Nawaz and an LMG detachment providing covering fire. Sepoy Raza, my runner, 
pulling my arm from the trench I was standing in, wanted me to come out and 
leave but I told my detachment; the jeep driver, signalman with GRC-9 Set and 
the runner to leave and wait for me outside the village in the south. Our small 
party of six men with one LMG covered the withdrawal of remaining men in the 
Company HQ and cook house area.  By now I had lost communication with EPCAF 
elements under Captain Aashiq deployed on the western side of the village, so I 
almost ran towards their position to find out if they had known about the decision 
to withdraw. As I was moving towards their position, I found my jeep standing in 
middle of the village waiting for me. I shouted at them to move out of the village 
and wait for me as told to them earlier. On reaching EPCAF positions, I found that 
they were in the process of moving out. Becoming satisfied, I started moving back 
and found that the bunker on a crossroad where my jeep was standing only 
minutes ago had been obliterated by artillery fire. It was a close call for my 
detachment, had they not moved few moments earlier on my shouting at them, 
they also would have gone with the bunker. 
After getting out of built-up area of Panjbibi, I collected men of my Company on 
southern edge of the village, and once again tried to contact the Brigade on 
wireless net.  The only response was from 8 Baloch who had nothing to tell me in 
this new situation. Asking my company to wait for me, I drove towards Khetlal to 
physically contact someone responsible to find out what was to be done. As I was 
driving towards Khetlal, via Jaipurhat, I could hear tank movement on a parallel 
track on my eastern side. These were same tanks which had been positioned east 
of Panjbibi and were visible from my positions on 12 December. On reaching 
Khetlal, I found 8 Baloch withdrawing from those positions having been ordered 
to move towards Bogra. I was told that I should join 13 FF in Patnitola area 
towards west, as Indian tanks by now were nearing 8 Baloch positions at Khetlal. 
By the time 8 Baloch column got on track for move, the Indian tank column

103 

reached them, forcing them to disperse and move helter-skelter reaching Bogra in 
disarray. 
I drove back to Panjbibi where my company was waiting for me. I told them about 
the new situation and started moving towards 13 FF positions about 30 
kilometres away towards west, part of the track passing very close to the Indian 
border from where we received fire while passing through that area.  
By late afternoon on 13 December, we reached 13 FF positions on the border in 
Patnitola area. Their CO, Lieutenant Colonel Amir Nawaz Khan and his Adjutant 
Captain Akram Panwar were waiting for my company. Fortunately, a bridge in 
Jaipur Hat area, prepared for demolition, was not blown up by 13 FF Company 
that had crossed it in order to rejoin the unit before me, otherwise I could not 
have reached their positions that day. The next two days were without much 
activity. 13 FF positions had been prepared with great foresight. Bunkers were 
very well sited, covering entire area turning it to an ideal killing ground for enemy 
approaching those positions. However, Indians did not approach these positions 
as their focus was to reach the main communication artery i.e. Rangpur-Bogra 
road. 
Lieutenant Muhammad Saeed Tariq, hailing from Sahiwal City had lost his father 
as a child. He and his sister were brought up by their mother. He was far mature 
than his years, a wise man amongst us. In early June when we had taken over the 
Thakurgaon area from 8 Baloch and my Company was deployed in Ranishankail 
area, Lieutenant Tariq’s assessment was that we had landed up in a Vietnam like 
situation and it would be difficult to get out from here. Captain Afreen and I, due 
to lack of understanding and maturity scolded him on his pessimism but his words 
were prophetic. He would say that if something happened to him, his mother 
would not be able to bear it. He died of bullets fired at close range by Indians. 
When Light Machine Gun (LMG) position on his Platoon’s extreme left stopped 
firing, he first sent his Platoon JCO, Naib Subedar Abdul Aziz to find out. As the 
JCO did not return for some time, he himself moved out of his trench in that 
direction. Ensuing moments are a tale of unmatched courage demonstrated by 
Sepoy Muhammad Durez.  Hailing from some village near Chakwal he had 
rejoined the company on night 11/12 Dec after withdrawal from 4 FF positions.

104 

Seeing that the Indians were closing in on their Platoon HQ trenches, he started a 
jeep standing nearby and drove through fields towards the direction where 
Platoon Commander had gone. As he approached the officer, a hail of bullets hit 
Saeed Tariq.  Instead of caring for his own life and withdrawing, Sepoy Durez put 
Lieutenant Saeed Tariq in the jeep with help of Naib Subedar Abdul Aziz. In the 
process the JCO also got wounded. Despite intense firing from close range, he 
drove the jeep carrying both the injured to my position. I, standing in my trench, 
shouted at him to move straight to 8 Baluch location at Khetlal about twenty 
kilometres back where doctor was available. Lieutenant Saeed Tariq embraced 
Shahadat before reaching 8 Baluch position and was buried at Khetlal. The 
boundless courage and selflessness shown by Sepoy Durez cannot be captured in 
words. 
There were countless incidents of tests of bravery which will take much more 
effort to record. After a prolonged struggle and seemingly hopeless situation, the 
men of Pakistan Army had not lost the nerve which is quite possible in such 
circumstances. Some men who during the peacetime were not rated favourably, 
proved their mettle during this prolonged conflict. One such NCO, Havildar Azam 
from a village, Pira Jangla near Talagang proved to be a most reliable person. 
When given independent tasks, he performed with admirable sense of 
responsibility, courage and competence. 
One unassuming young boy, Sepoy Akram from Shakargargh area performed a 
great act of valour by enabling a patrol surrounded by the Mukti Bahini in border 
area to extricate safely. In 4 FF area, a young artillery officer was sent to a border 
post which had about twenty people, a mixed lot from the army and EPCAF. The 
officer took out a small party to patrol along the border. As the party reached 
open area from where paddy crop had been cut, it was fired upon from three 
sides, fire coming from tree tops. Two men from the party were injured. The 
officer asked for help from the Company Commander located at Charkai. As 
reinforcement party carrying two mortor guns moved towards the border, they 
were intercepted midway at a small place named Chintamin and not allowed to 
proceed ahead.

105 

The patrol leader with his party pinned down decided to wait till night when they 
could undertake withdrawal in cover of darkness. Main impediment in 
withdrawing under fire was taking the wounded out. Here, Sepoy Akram from the 
platoon of my company deployed with 4 FF, who was part of that patrol 
volunteered to perform an act of unmatched courage which saved the party from 
more casualties. He took the two wounded men one by one, carried them on his 
shoulders crawling a distance of about two hundred yards to reach a small cover 
provided by some trees. He had to traverse this distance four times which he did 
with admirable skill to avoid detection. Thus the party was able to extricate from 
that precarious situation where longer stay could have resulted in more 
casualties. 
In one incident when I was asked to reoccupy a post on the border, I along with 
Captain Afreen’s platoon approached that post from a flank. Mukti Bahinis 
persons occupying the post got unnerved and started withdrawing using covering 
fire. When Captain Afreen saw a few men running back towards the border, he 
along with another man started chasing the running enemy. After covering a short 
distance, Afreen because of his speed, found himself chasing the rebels alone. 
One of the rebels carrying light machine gun (LMG) dropped his weapon to run 
faster. Afreen brought that LMG and a few rifles dropped by rebels who ran away 
crossing over into India.  
Captain Afreen from village Guliana, near Kharian Cantonment in Gujrat district 
performed the tasks assigned to him with remarkable combination of courage and 
wisdom. He planned his actions meticulously to cause maximum damage to the 
enemy without incurring casualties to own troops and achieved success in all his 
undertakings with remarkable results. During the operations, at least in three 
actions at different times, he deserved the highest gallantry award. He was 
recommended for an award after raid in Pachagargh area but as mentioned 
earlier none of our citations ever reached Eastern Command. A lively, outspoken 
and witty man, he claimed to have excelled in the game of ‘Kabbaddi’ in his native 
district before joining Army. Nimble in footwork, despite his small frame he never 
lost a point in the game, be it catching the opponent or avoiding being caught. 
Even after spending over two years as POW in India, his Kabbadi skill was

106 

incredible. For some years Kabbadi had been played in the Army and officers were 
allowed to play in the team. After repatriation in 1974, I witnessed his remarkable 
talent in the game during 17 Division final matches at Kharian won by 2 Punjab 
team led by him.  
On 16 December, we received a wireless message that a CEASE FIRE had been 
agreed to between India and Pakistan ending the fighting. By now the Indians in 
Bogra area were in contact with our positions in Bogra city. 13 FF deployed in 
Patnitola was ordered to concentrate at Naogaon near Santahar railway junction, 
about 50 kilometres towards south. CO 13 FF ordered my Company to cover the 
withdrawal. There was a gloomy silence in nearby villages. As I was collecting my 
men and preparing to withdraw my Company in late afternoon, I saw a middle 
aged man coming towards me at brisk pace. I can never forget the way he 
embraced me and cried, saying that he remembered Ayub Khan’s time and that 
this is not what they had wanted (Hum ne yeh to nahin chaha tha). It was very 
emotional moment for both of us knowing that we will not meet again.  
We concentrated at Naogaon, where EPCAF Wing HQ was located. Since no Indian 
troops were nearby, an Indian unit, 22 Marhatta along with their Brigade 
Commander came from Bogra to Naogaon on 21 December. The Indians were 
very nice in their attitude and conduct. They told us that war having ended; we 
will be in transit through India to Pakistan so we could not carry our weapons 
along. Therefore the weapons had to be deposited with them. Being detained in 
India as prisoner of war was not mentioned by Indians nor expected by us.  
My experience with local Bengali population as reflected in few incidents that I 
have mentioned earlier, the Bengali volunteer braving fire to get reply of a 
message from CO 4 FF, the person embracing me and crying at Patnitola, local 
boys warning me of mine laid on the track is entirely different from general 
perception about attitude of Bengalis in this tragic chapter of our history. The 
general population in interior areas, as we witnessed during our contact with the 
people of almost one third part of East Pakistan, did not want turmoil and were 
not involved in any movement for breakup of Pakistan. During our travel from 
Dacca to Bhairab Bazar, Kishoreganj, Mymesingh, Durgapur and then onwards to 
Rangpur, Nageshwari, Bhurangamari and Thakurgaon, a good part of it on foot

107 

and later traversing vast areas of North Bengal during about eight months, we 
found that the general population was cooperative and not hostile towards 
Pakistan Army. They wanted peace. There was no popular insurgency as viciously 
propagated by India. The local population was supportive of the Army’s efforts to 
stop intrusion from India and denying shelter to terrorists launched from India. At 
Panjbibi I was responsible to cover a very vast area along the borders. As narrated 
earlier at one post covering a part of border area, responsibility was given to a 
small group comprising sixteen persons from local Bengali civilians, giving them 
old .303 rifles and ammunition. They, being independent and away from other 
posts, performed their task exceptionally well, not allowing any intrusion from 
that side.  
The protection provided by civilians to General Nazar, Brigadier Tajammal and 
party at Pirganj during thick of war, saving them from searching Indians, amply 
negates the false propaganda of portraying Bengali population against Pakistan 
Army. 
The epic Battle at Hilli is a saga of unparalleled valour by our soldiers who were 
faced to fight a much superior force. Each one of them acquitted himself 
remarkably well. I have mentioned about the spirit of my men who after fighting 
at Hilli rejoined me at Panjbibi. The two Indian tanks destroyed at initial stage of 
the battle at Hilli were by men of my Company deployed in 4 FF positions. From 
my position at Panjbibi, the southern flank of positions at Hilli were being 
protected and supported. Captains Afreen’s actions made the Indians to shift 
their effort away from Hilli towards Badhuria on the northern tracks. 
4 FF was initially reinforced by men of my Company, the ‘Charlie’ Company 34 
Punjab (R&S). Additional troops inducted into the battle in Hilli Sector were; one 
Company from 8 Blauch commanded by Major Ashraf and another Company from 
13 FF commanded by Major Sabir Kamal Mayer at Badhuria. The Brigade 
Commander, Brigadier Tajammal Hussain Malik remained present in the area with 
his Tactical HQ located with 4 FF. One Battery of 80 Field Regiment Artillery 
commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Anis was supporting the battle. Major (later 
Brigadier) Anwar Khattak, Battery Commander with 4 FF was ever available to the 
CO 4 FF Lieutenant Colonel Akhlaq Abbasi (later Brigadier). Both got injured in one

108 

incident were evacuated for a short while and soon rejoined the fight.  When 
Lieutenant Colonel Abbasi was away from the unit recovering from injuries, 
Lieutenant Colonel Mumtaz Malik (later Brigadier) of the same unit serving at HQ 
Eastern Command rushed to join the unit for those few days during fighting. Such 
was the spirit and sense of responsibility of soldiers and officers in those critical 
times.

109 

Prisoner of War 
22 Marhatta accompanied by Brigadier Bhatti, the Indian Brigade Commander, 
came to Naogaon on 21 Dec 1971. They conducted themselves with utmost 
propriety, giving due respect to our officers and men. After staying in Naogaon till 
1st Jan 1972, we were made to move on military trucks to Malda in West Bengal. 
The Indian unit bid us farewell in a very respectable manner. On exchanging notes 
with officers coming from different places into the prisoner camp, the attitude of 
Indians was generally found to be similar at other places. 
Indians took about fifteen days to shift prisoners from different parts of East 
Pakistan, placing them in various cantonments of their three provinces, i.e. Bihar, 
Uttar Pradesh and Madhia Pradesh, by 15 Jan 1972. Taking into account the 
number of forces fielded and considerable attrition in about ten months of 
fighting, the total number of armed forces persons (Army, Navy, and Air Force) 
who surrendered in East Pakistan was about thirty four thousands. In addition to 
that there were about eight to ten thousand other people in different categories 
like Scouts, Police, Mujahids and some civilians with us. A local force, raised to 
replace East Pakistan Rifles; the East Pakistan Civil Armed Forces (EPCAF), 
comprised of locals mainly non Bengalis who rejoined their families as war ended. 
Among civilians, there were only a small number of senior bureaucrats, as junior 
lot was mostly locals. As far as civilian families are concerned there were hardly 
any because they had shifted earlier during the turmoil. Total number of people 
of all categories including some civiliansincarcerated India was about forty five 
thousands and not what has been propagated so far. Although exact number of 
armed forces personnel was available in the Strength Returns sent to GHQ from 
HQ Eastern Command but it was never used to challenge the false figures 
propagated to malign the Army. 
The confusion about the number of prisoners will continue to prevail because Mr 
Z A Bhutto appointed Lieutenant General Gul Hasan as Army Chief who helped 
Bhutto in getting into power. After about three months he was replaced by 
General Tikka Khan. This General had been removed from command for 
mishandling operation in Dacca on 25 March 1971. He remained blackmailed of 
being handed over to Bengalis demanding him for war crimes trial and after

110 

retirement was made Secretary General of Pakistan People’s Party as reward for 
his services to Bhutto.  
The number of armed forces personnel could also be easily worked out from 
Order of Battle of formations and units in East Pakistan as on 3 December 1971 
(annexed with this narrative-Annex C). It is ironic that Pakistani media did not 
bring out facts even after so many years of the tragic events. The stalwarts 
associated with the media, writing scathing columns against the Army were 
blinded by their prejudice, not bothering to give a reality check. Details of 
formations and units could have been taken from numerous Indian publications 
available soon after the war to calculate correct figures and give accurate picture 
about the number of armed forces personnel incarcerated in India. Pakistani 
academia also made failed to find facts. 
While India took just two weeks to pick up these prisoners from different parts of 
East Pakistan and placed them in vast expanse of their cantonments located in 
‘Cow belt’ provinces, their widely publicized repatriation,after keeping them in 
India for a prolonged period, was spread over eight months (September 1973 to 
April 1974). This was by design to give an impression that apparently a very large 
force that failed in combating insurgency and lost the war was made prisoners by 
India. This falsehood of giving exaggerated numbers made prisoners continues to 
stick to this day.  
Our column started from Naogaon on Indian military trucks on 01 Jan 1972 and 
reached Malda, a District Headquarters in West Bengal the same evening. Here 
we found that other units in our sector were also coming in to a temporary camp 
before boarding trains for different destinations in India. Our train was formed 
and before moving, the Indian officer in charge pleaded with us not to attempt 
escapes en route. His main argument was that we were in transit for going to 
Pakistan and any such attempt would be futile. He promised not to close shutters 
of train compartments and not causing us any discomfort. Most of us believed the 
Indians because it seemed so logical. The war having ended, apparently there was 
no need to keep the prisoners in India. Move to Pakistan through India by trains 
also seemed most practical. It was after about three months when we realised 
that we were in for a long time.

