251 

Army’s Challenges and Response 
Having briefly described the reality of rulers and their role, wrongly attributed to 
as ‘Army’s Rule’ during the past, let us briefly recount challenges faced by Army 
and its performance so far.  
Kashmir, 1947-8 
Pakistan Army was in the process of its formation when Kashmir crisis erupted. 
The British General commanding Pakistan Army showed his inability to send the 
Army and it was at much belated stage that some units got inducted to stop 
Indian Army from capturing liberated areas by local people. Some volunteers from 
tribal areas joined the local Kashmiri freedom fighters forming groups called  
‘Lashkars’ using Jhelum valley route to Kashmir. They stopped short of Srinagar 
and lacking required discipline, indulged in looting and other crimes. One such 
Lashkars comprising people mainly from Soon - Sakesar Valley area was stopped 
at Sialkot by the local civil administration, not allowing them to cross over 
towards Jammu where Kashmiri Muslims got killed in large numbers at the hands 
of Dogra forces. Had this force reached Jammu and severed Kashmir’s ground link 
with India, an entirely different situation would have emerged in favour of the 
people of Kashmir.  
The Army units,when ordered went into action in Kashmir and performed their 
assigned tasks successfully. 
Indo-Pakistan War, 1965 
Pakistan Armed Forces are organised to defend territorial integrity of the country. 
They are not constituted to undertake invasions of neighbouring countries, their 
role basically defensive and not offensive. President Ayub Khan understood this 
fact very clearly yet during his period Pakistan drifted into war with much larger 
India under the circumstances described earlier in the narrative. It was Z A 
Bhutto, the then Foreign Minister, who wanted to weaken Ayub Khan’s position 
and ultimately remove him by involving Pakistan Army in fighting with much 
larger forces of India. Pakistan Army despite being outnumbered displayed 
remarkable courage and fighting skills to stop Indian offensive forces in capturing

252 

their objectives. The conspirator’s aim however was achieved. Ayub Khan’s 
position became weak and he was soon forced to leave by organising street 
agitations against him. 
Indo-Pakistan War, 1971 
The events of 1971 related to Army’s operations in some parts of East Pakistan 
have been described in detail in this narrative. It would help readers to 
understand true nature of the tragedy. Results of 1970 general elections were not 
accepted by Bhutto-Yahya duo and the resulting agitation in East Pakistan 
suppressed by using Army. A force called ‘Mukti Bahini’ organised by the Indians 
started their sabotage activities by June 71 in border areas but their reach was 
limited. The general public had not voted for breakup of Pakistan and did not 
support Indian sponsored terrorists in establishing sanctuaries in the interior 
areas. The population of Bengal was not involved in hostile acts against the 
Pakistan Army. Dismemberment of Pakistan was work of rulers in West Pakistan 
who accelerated the process by declaring war on India on 3 Dec 71 against 
specific advice from Chinese leadership as explained in preceding chapters.  
A small force, three under strength divisions totaling about thirty four thousand 
troops, was abandoned in East Pakistan to be captured by the Indians. 
Preposterous allegations were made against this force which performed heroic 
deeds at the individual and unit level against Indians but ultimate result was 
according to the plans of perpetrators of that horrendous crime.   
Siachin – 1984 
In 1984 the Indians occupied Siachin glacier located in vast glaciated areas left 
unmarked on the ‘Line of Control’ in disputed territories of Kashmir, being un-
inhabitable by human beings. Pakistan Army went into action to stop the Indians 
descending into inhabited areas of Baltistan. Operating on heights ranging from 
eighteen thousand to twenty two thousand feet above sea level has caused very 
large casualties to troops because of frequent avalanches, falling into crevices, 
frost bite and other disabilities related to living in abnormal climatic conditions. At 
the initial stage of deployment of troops in emergency, lack of special clothing 
and equipment increased our losses.

253 

Occupation of glaciated areas is a great folly and crime against global 
environment, cause of deep concern frequently voiced by environmentalists at 
global level. Indian intransigence is impediment in reaching an agreement to 
vacate these heights by both sides; a sad reflection on Indian decision making 
process where a high altitude Indian tour operator was able to cause this human 
disaster as explained in the narrative. Viewed from another angle, continued state 
of confrontation with Pakistan posing external threat has helped India to retain its 
integrity as a country. Not resolving disputes with Pakistan, therefore in India’s 
interest. 
Kargil 1999 
General Pervez Musharraf as Army Chief decided to occupy certain posts opposite 
Kargil in disputed area of Kashmir which were vacated during winters by the 
Indians and reoccupied during summers as a routine. From where Musharraf got 
this inspiration to launch his private war is a matter of conjecture. There are 
claims and counter claims as to the extent of this action being known to the 
government or otherwise. However senior officers of the Army, the Corps 
Commanders who form decision making body in formal meetings were kept in the 
dark, the plan known to a few individuals only. The action evoked violent Indian 
response putting the two nuclear armed countries at the brink of all out war. 
External threat helped India to stabilise their political situation, forming stable 
coalition governments which they were finding difficult to form despite repeated 
elections. Here it is suffice to say the Army troops used during the operation 
displayed remarkable courage during fighting despite being left without logistic 
support. 
Operations in FATA, Swat, Malakand – 2004 – 2015 
US occupation of Afghanistan in 2001 pushed Al-Qaida linked fighters belonging 
to some Central Asian and Arab countries into Pakistan’ tribal areas on our 
western borders. Pakistan was forced to send its Army into tribal areas hitherto 
manned by Frontier Corps (FC) that needed to be reinforced. The terrorists gained 
control over tribal areas particularly in North and South Waziristan by eliminating

254 

local elders, the ‘Maliks’ and established sanctuaries luring young boys to carry 
out suicide attacks in Pakistan.   
In 2009, a situation had developed when Islamabad was being threatened to be 
occupied by the so called Taliban according to our adversaries’ game plan against 
Pakistan.  Pakistan Army was tasked to dislodge Taliban terrorists who had 
entrenched themselves in the vast mountainous area of Malakand Division, had 
reached northern end of Tarbela Dam reservoir and were threatening Islamabad. 
Large numbers of religious seminaries in Islamabad were another source of 
supplying manpower to support Taliban in case they could reach the capital. 
Some of their sponsors were gleefully waiting to occupy Islamabad providing 
opportunity to global powers for action to denuclearize Pakistan. There were 
reports of foreign forces ready to undertake the mission, conveniently placed 
across the Gulf. Inside the country, particularly Islamabad and surroundings there 
was large scale presence of organizations like ‘Blackwater’; over four hundred 
houses in Islamabad hired to lodge these groups.  
The situation was grim, the task daunting and consequences of failure 
devastating. The terrorists had taken a few years to come into such threatening 
position. uninterrupted by the provincial government led by sympathizing Mullahs 
and Musharraf led central government who had abdicated their responsibilities; 
allowing some rascals to operate their own radio stations spitting venom and 
terrorizing the public in their occupied areas.  
Armed with clarity of purpose defined by the national parliament reflecting 
national will, the security forces took just about three months to dislodge the 
terrorists from vast mountainous areas by imaginative plans worked out by 
competent generals, executed by the officers and men with unmatched velour. 
No Army of present day world can equal the performance demonstrated by 
Pakistan armed forces that completed this operation in amazingly short time. 
Large scale casualties of young officers signify intensity of fighting, the success 
ensured by the young leaders leading from front. With known capability of 
airlifting one infantry battalion at a time, a three times more force was lifted by 
helicopters to put on heights occupied by the terrorists. Helicopter pilots who 
started their machines before dawn switched these off by almost midnight, the

255 

limit of human endurance stretched too far. Only Pakistanis could do it. This 
operation neutralized our adversaries’ attempt to denuclearize Pakistan for the 
present. Their efforts will continue, demanding constant vigil and counter 
measures to prevent it. 
After completion of operations in Malakand-Swat during summer months of 
2009, the Army carried out an operation in South Waziristan in September 2009 
that successfully eliminated most of the human bomb factories, reducing 
incidents of suicide attacks. The terrorists shifted to other places in to continue 
their operations for some years till another major operation was launched in 2014 
in North Waziristan, Khyber and some other areas.   
The Army deployed on the western borders is doing hard fighting against 
desperate terrorists with suicidal mind set entrenched in difficult mountainous 
terrain for so many years by now. These operations, if documented, will be 
valuable lessons in small unit actions and counter insurgency operations in worst 
possible environments. The spirit, audacity and skill in dealing with situations 
shown by the Pakistan’s security forces have thwarted diabolical plans of the 
global powers to denuclearise, pulverise and dismantle Pakistan. Their efforts 
however continue that demand appropriate counter measures, a continuous 
work. 
Ongoing Operations – ‘Operation Zarb e Azb’ 
On 16 December 2014 a group of terrorists entered Army Public School Peshawar 
and went on killing spree resulting in death of about one hundred and fifty 
children and the teaching staff.  It sent shock waves throughout the Pakistan 
jolting the political elite to action. As emergent measure, a compressive National 
Action Plan was formulated by the government in consultation with all major 
political parties’ leadership. The Army started its much stalled operation in North 
Waziristan and Khyber Agencies going into areas considered inaccessible since 
ages. Pakistan Air Force made signal contribution in targeting terrorist’s hideouts 
along Pak- Afghan border to help the Army in clearing and occupying the areas. 
The operation is still in progress aimed at elimination of terrorism menace from 
the country for good. Operations in Balochistan, urban areas of Karachi and rest

256 

of the country are being conducted jointly by the law enforcing agencies. Terror 
financing, a major factor in sustaining terrorism is also being addressed to. The 
success of operation however will depend on the will of political leadership.  
A major impediment in dealing with terrorism is present judicial system that does 
not punish theterrorist’s for want of required evidence. There is need to 
restructure judiciary that stops being criminal friendly, provides justice so 
essential for a peaceful living in the society and can contribute to winning the war 
against terrorism imposed on Pakistan.   
Army’s Strength  
Pakistan Army, being a volunteer Army draws the best Pakistani young men in 
each category of its ranks. The Army has overcome its initial imbalance in 
induction of manpower, now having representation from all areas of Pakistan. 
Structure of the Army, rather the armed forces is built upon the principle that 
everyone in chain of command obeys order of the ‘chair’ irrespective of the man 
occupying it. This is the cardinal factor without which no force can retain its 
cohesiveness. Pakistan armed forces remain a disciplined force by obeying orders 
of the command and have a robust internal accountability system which remains 
largely intact, recovering from some malpractices creeping in during the period of 
Zia and Musharraf’s rule. The crucial element in maintaining an effective fighting 
force, however, is the public support which despite focused and sustained smear 
campaigns, Pakistan Armed Forces enjoy. Without public support the forces 
cannot perform their assigned tasks successfully. 
Centre of Gravity  
Pakistan Armed Forces remain ‘Centre of Gravity’ of the country for mainly two 
reasons. The first reason is our location in a volatile and disturbed region with a 
rectangular geographical configuration forming long borders with the 
neighbouring countries. This necessitates maintaining strong, well trained armed 
forces. The numerical strength of forces is determined keeping in view the 
strength and capabilities of the armed forces maintained by neighbouring 
countries. Pakistan is forced to maintain credible deterrence against possible 
aggression, a defensive posture not designed or organized to undertake invasion

257 

of its neighbours. The second major reason which burdens the Army with extra 
commitments is that other State institutions have failed to develop to a standard, 
capable of meeting their responsibilities. Bureaucracy, the backbone of 
administration is politicised, the economy despite enormous potential remains in 
tatters, judiciary has failed in providing justice to the society, the parliamentarians 
remain slaves of the party leaders and the political class has not produced a single 
statesman.  
Because of this situation, the Army instead of being the ‘last line of defence’ is 
immediately inducted to deal with sudden calamities like natural disasters 
because the organisations formed to deal with such situations have failed to take 
up their responsibilities. The public looks towards Army in helping them in 
matters which are basic responsibility of the local and provincial governments like 
maintaining law and order. Calls by the public for involving Army to deal with 
killings of persons from Hazara community in Quetta (2013) and situation in 
Karachi where the political parties forming the government patronise armed 
gangs for target killings and other crimes puts increased strain on the Army 
already stretched thin on ground. Our enemies have successfully created a 
situation where our Army has got committed into fighting within our own 
country. Relentless efforts to demoralise and degrade its fighting abilities are 
being made through various means including a strong section of media spreading 
hopelessness and despair.  
It is a universal fact that in every country there is an Army, if not its own, from 
some other country. It is because of strength and fighting abilities of our Armed 
Forces, drawn from the best of young Pakistani volunteers that our country has 
been saved from meeting the fate of Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, Egypt, Yemen and 
Syria during the present times of great turmoil in the region. The people of 
Pakistan have to remain vigilant. They must not get influenced by our enemies’ 
focused efforts to erode fighting potential of our armed forces by negative 
propaganda in demonising the Army. Otherwise we may be condemned to bear 
presence of foreign forces on our soil, as we have seen in our neighbourhood and 
the consequences of such calamity.

258 

The stages of rise and fall of nations is encapsulated by Allama Muhmmad Iqbal in 
his verse which roughly means that nations start their rise when their people are 
used to hard life, are courageous in facing dangers, adept in using weapons, 
gradually degenerating to a stage when, getting used to luxuries of life they are 
left to play with musical instruments instead of weapons. 
       “Aa Tujh Ko Bataon Main Taqdeer e Ummam Kia Hai? 
        Shamshir o Sinan Awal, Taous o Rubab Aaakhir” 
Our ruling class seems to have almost reached the bottom of pit.The academics 
and intellectuals are derisive and scornful in their attitude towards the armed 
forces. The general public of Pakistan however has not yet degenerated to the 
last irredeemable stage. The challenges and threats posed to Pakistan reinforce 
resolve of the common people of Pakistan to fight back. That resolve, given right 
direction, is the real strength of Pakistan’s chances of survival and progress as a 
nation.

259 

Overcoming Unrest in Balochistan 
Balochistan, about 45% landmass of Pakistan, area wise its largest province is 
sparsely populated. Only about 6 million people are living in its vast expanses 
because of peculiar geographical conditions although population statistics 
continue to be contested by the two major groups, the Pushtuns and Balochs for 
obvious interests. Broad distribution of population is that the Pushtuns are living 
in the northern and eastern parts contiguous to the tribal areas of Khyber 
Pukhtunkhaw (KPK) extending west from South Waziristan Agency. Other parts of 
the province are inhabited by Balochs, Barohis, Nowsherwanis (ancient Medes 
from Iranian plateau) Jats and Makrani people. Quetta city is mainly inhabited by 
Pushtuns, a group of Hazara tribe and settlers from other parts of the country. 
Some Baloch families have also moved in western part of Quetta valley during 
early seventies.  
There is lot of ethnic, linguistic and cultural diversity amongst the people living in 
the Province that is inappropriately named if ethnicity is taken as basis of naming 
provinces. The Balochs in Balochistan are much lesser in number than people of 
other ethnic groups.  In fact Balochs in Sindh and Southern Punjab are more in 
numbers that those residing in areas that are part of Balochistan. 
The Province experienced occasional unrest in parts of it since 1948. History of 
this unrest starts with Khan of Kalat’s brother, Mr. Abdul Karim Khan’s 
disagreement with his brother’s decision to accede to Pakistan. It remained 
confined to a small area around Kalat and died down soon without affecting other 
areas or tribes. During the early seventies, parts of Marri and Mengal tribes 
following their ‘Sardars’; Mr. Khair Bux Marri and Atta ullah Mengal created 
unrest in their respective areas when Mr. Z A Bhutto came to power in what was 
left of Pakistan after the 1971 war with India.  An Army operation was launched in 
1973-4 by Mr. Bhutto’s government in Marri tribes’ area and around Wadh – 
Khuzdar where a part of Mengal tribe was creating unrest. The situation was soon 
brought under control. The Province enjoyed peace for a few decades till the US 
landed in Afghanistan. Since then we are faced with unrest spreading to most 
parts of the Baloch inhabited areas of the Province.

260 

Considering the alarming law and order situation in Baloch inhabited areas of the 
Province and particularly Quettain recent years, those of us who saw very 
peaceful and pleasant environments are at loss to understand why the situation 
was allowed to deteriorate to such an extent. My association with the Province 
spans over a period of eight years at different intervals in three decades; from the 
sixties to late eighties. I first visited Quetta in early Sep 1960. At that time it was a 
small, well laid out clean city. The cantonment was spread out in eastern part of 
the valley and the city, re-laid after devastating 1935 earthquake, occupied center 
of the valley. Main market of the city was Qandhari Bazaar, the famous fruit 
market at one end of the Bazaar. Bicycles were main means of movement. 
Immaculately turned out men mainly Pushtuns attired in their traditional dress 
with Kullah/turbans and waistcoats moved about in the city on their decorated 
‘Raleigh’ and ‘Humber’ brand bicycles. The population in the city was Pushtuns, 
Hazaras and the settlers from Punjab and other parts of pre partition India who 
came at the time of laying the railway network by the British during the last 
decades of the nineteenth century. There was no Baloch population in the city 
except houses of some tribal ‘Sardars’. The Baloch tribal families were brought to 
Quetta when Sardar Atta ullah Mengal became Chief Minister of the Province in 
early nineteen seventies.  
My next visits to attend courses at the Infantry School were in 1967 and 1969 
both times during the pleasant summers. There was no provision of fans in the 
living rooms nor were these needed. It is much later, during late eighties that the 
weather changed to necessitate not only fans but air conditioners. Jinnah Street 
had a couple of cafes, some drug stores and general stores.  A Chinese restaurant 
located at the end of cantonment limits was mainly frequented by the army 
officers and their families doing courses at the Staff College and Infantry School. 
One could see a few large American Convertible cars with their open hoods being 
driven by sons of some tribal chiefs while Sardar Ata ullah Mengal, Nawab Akbar 
Bugti and Sardar Khair Bux Marri would be seen strolling in the cool afternoons on 
the pavement of Jinnah Street. Nawab Akbar Bugti was tall and handsome, a very 
impressive man. Quetta was a very peaceful city with efficient police and hardly 
any crime

