141 

South Waziristan 
By early autumn 1976, I reached Wana via Dera Ismail Khan, Tank, Jandola and 
Sarwakai. Wana is located in a wide fertile valley with pleasant summers and cold 
winters. The South Waziristan Scouts (SWS) camp was spread over a vast area.  
Enclosed in its about five-feet high walls were offices, barracks for troops, Officers 
Mess, officers’ family accommodation, some family quarters for the troops and 
horse stables etc. Life in Scouts was much different than the regular Army. The 
dress was baggy trousers and long shirt of a special rough cloth of dark grey 
colour known as ‘militia’. Because of this dress the whole force is called ‘militia’ 
by general public. The footwear was of local design, a ‘chappal’ of brown colour 
and the headgear a beret in normal use. For ceremonial occasions a very colourful 
‘Pugree’, starched cloth woven around a cap in particular way, was worn. The 
organizational structure was made up of Wings comprising different platoons. 
These platoons were formed on tribal basis. Each platoon had its Tribe (Qoum) 
Commander responsible for the administration and discipline of his platoon. If 
someone lost a rifle or some piece of equipment, the Platoon Commander was 
responsible to make good that loss on the principle of collective responsibility. 
Thus the job of officers posted from Army for about two years was mainly in 
operational role. Overall it was a very effective force. 
The SWS Officers Mess had a small library containing some old books. One of the 
books I found was ‘Seven Pillars of Wisdom’ donated by its author, T E Lawrence, 
the famous Lawrence of Arabia. He was employed by British intelligence to 
instigate Sharif Hussain ruling Hijaz to revolt against the Ottoman Caliph during 
First World War, consequently redrawing the map of Middle East. That signed 
copy of his book was presented by him to the Mess library when he visited the 
Mess. After completion of his mission in Middle East, he had been sent to these 
tribal areas with a different identity as Corporal T E Shaw serving with the Royal 
Indian Air Force. The library also had a set of Thousand and One Nights (Alif Laila) 
comprising many volumes translated by Sir Richard Burton, a soldier, adventurer, 
orientalist who served in Sindh during the period of invasion of Sindh by Charles 
Napier in mid nineteenth century.  He had also compiled a report giving very

142 

graphic details of activity in some areas of Karachi that are declared ‘out of 
bounds’ for troops. 
Governance in the tribal areas was based on a very simple structure. Overall in 
charge of the Agency was the Political Agent (PA), an officer of the central 
government carefully selected for his experience, maturity and suitability, to 
manage the unruly tribes. He worked through tribal elders known as Maliks 
representing their sub tribes. The affairs were decided in meetings known as Jirga 
of these tribal Maliks presided over by the PA. He had his assistants to help in 
administration and the Levis Force, enrolled from local tribesmen, performed 
normal police functions. Scouts were a backup force for the PA to enforce his 
decisions when use of such force became indispensable. 
I served with the Scouts for a short period of about three months. Before joining 
them I had appeared in the Staff Course Entrance Examination. Its result was 
announced in late October or November and having qualified I was required to 
join the course at Quetta by mid December 1976. During this brief period my stay 
with SWS a significant event was the visit of Prime Minister Mr. Z A Bhutto to the 
Agency. He had started his tour of the tribal areas from the north, most 
inauspiciously. The Assistant Political Agent overseeing his 
reception 
arrangements at the helipad got killed in a bomb blast on the first day of his 
extended tour. In South Waziristan, coming from the north, he was first to land at 
Ladha, in the heart of Mehsudribe’s territory, have lunch there and then move to 
Wana for night stay. At both places he was to address selected group of people. 
As Second-in-Command of the SWS, I along with five platoons of Scouts was to 
provide security at Ladha. A couple of days before the event I moved to Ladha 
Fort located on the edge of a flat area. This small strongly built fort during British 
period overlooked a fertile valley below to the east and had a low ridge running 
west of the flat area. In mountainous terrains, such pieces of flat land are few. 
The fort was occupied by a small detachment of Scouts for its care and 
maintenance.  
On the morning of the appointed day lot of people started gathering on the ridge 
overlooking helipad area and the venue for lunch. Although political staff had 
conveyed that no one will carry weapons and only invited people will come to the

143 

lunch arranged in an open ground outside the fort, all of them were armed 
against instructions. Scouts deployed on the ridge tried to stop them leading to 
exchange of heated arguments and some scuffles. Here the Political Agent, Mr. 
Abdullah, astutely intervened and made the tribesmen to agree that only those 
invited may come down to the venue after depositing their weapons with Scouts 
deployed at the ridgeline while rest of the people were to remain seated on the 
ridge if they did not want to go back home. It was a very tense situation but 
admirably well handled by the PA, a wise and courageous man well respected for 
his honesty and simple living. He later rose to higher ranks in bureaucracy working 
as Chief Secretary of the Frontier Province (NWFP), now KPK.  
Around noon two large helicopters arrived at the helipad. Mr. Abdullah, the PA 
and I received Mr. Bhutto and brought him to the lunch site where tables and 
chairs had been laid out under a Shamiana. Mr Bhutto made a brief address to the 
invitees, had a chat with few people and in quite a relaxed mood had his lunch 
followed by deep puffs at his cigar. Major General (retired) Naseerullah Khan 
Babar, the Governor was nudging him to depart but he took his time to enjoy his 
cigar.  After he left the place, tribesmen watching the proceedings from the ridge, 
could not be controlled anymore by Scouts. They rushed to lunch site raising very 
loud shrieks and took away whatever was left of the meal along with some 
utensils. My troops packed up and returned to Wana by the evening. 
Before Mr. Bhutto’s arrival the instruction given to us about one of his 
idiosyncrasies was that in his presence no one will stand with his back turned 
towards Mr. Bhutto for up to at least one hundred yards because he gets annoyed 
otherwise. Here his behaviour was akin to despotic Kings of old times and 
certainly not of one claiming to work for poor people of Pakistan.  
At Wana, the dinner arranged in open ground in southeast corner of Wana Camp 
started with a bang. As soon as Mr. Bhutto got out of his room moving towards 
the venue for dinner, a rebel group started firing towards the camp from nearby 
hills. It was promptly retaliated from our towers and posts in the area and it soon 
subsided. Although it was no real threat but it created quite a stir, underscoring 
that things were not normal in the Agency. It was learnt that firing had been done 
by brother of Maulvi Noor Muhammad, leading a small group who had taken to 
the hills against incarceration of Maulvi Noor Muhammad. This person had

144 

entrenched himself as a prayer-leader in a mosque in the Bazar outside the Camp 
and was causing trouble by his instigative sermons against the administration 
during congregational prayers. When he was considered too troublesome, for 
making the locals his ardent followers, the whole bazaar was demolished after 
proper warnings and time given to vacate the area. Noor Muhammad was tried 
and as per the decision of Jirga, he was sentenced to ten years of imprisonment. 
His brother, with a small band had become an outlaw thereafter. 
Mr. Bhutto left Wana next morning and we resumed our normal routine after 
some excitement generated by the visit. The Commandant, Lieutenant Colonel 
Faqir Gul Khattak, an artillery officer was a mysterious character. He was a soft 
spoken person but exceptionally vindictive. To avenge some earlier grudge 
against one of the Wing Commanders commanding Sarwakai Wing, Major Allah 
Bakhsh Piracha, he constituted an inquiry on very frivolous charges like the officer 
not attending parade on time, using official jeep for fishing trips to a nearby 
stream etc. The Commandant spent good part of a day consulting a JCO and a 
Sepoy from that Wing in his office making up the story based upon which that 
Sepoy gave an application against the officer. I was detailed to conduct an inquiry. 
Seeing the charges, I suggested to the Commandant to call the officer and ask him 
about these charges which he may otherwise admit and there may be no need of 
any inquiry. He was reluctant to do that initially. Anyway, Allah Bakhsh was called 
to explain his position. Although it did not merit inquiry, I was told to move to 
Sarwakai along with other members to conduct the inquiry. It was during 
proceedings of this inquiry at Sarwakai Fort that I was given the good news of 
being selected for the staff course. I was filled with joy in finding an escape from 
such intrigues. Of course our findings cleared the officer from all charges and I left 
without meeting the Commandant who was on his usual extended tour of 
Peshawar. 
Since my services were seconded to Scouts, a force of Ministry of Interior, orders 
were received for my posting to 9 Punjab located at Quetta. I had to report to 9 
Punjab from where I would be given movement orders to join Command and Staff 
College Quetta.

145 

Reverting Back to Khakis 
Quetta 
I reached Quetta by second week of December 1976 and reported to 9 Punjab 
where I remained for a few days before joining the course starting 16 December 
1976. This course is the first filter separating officers who have to progress in their 
careers or otherwise. First is the entrance examination held every year to select a 
specified number of officers from the 8-12 years’ service bracket. Those who go 
through the course are graded in different shades which are taken as a yardstick 
for their further postings to career or non career appointments affecting their 
further progress in the army. I did the course without exerting much despite 
frequent advice of some of my peers. At the end I was posted to the best 
operational appointment for a Major in the Army, Brigade Major of an infantry 
brigade. Overall it was a good time well spent in enjoying the facilities which the 
College provided. Families also remained engaged in different activities and the 
weekly cinema screening some good films. Giving evening motorcycle ride to little 
Yaman, my son, was another pleasurable activity which I would enjoy even at the 
cost of studies which otherwise I wanted an excuse to avoid. 
Sialkot 
After completing the staff course at Command and Staff College Quetta, I joined 
104 Brigade at Sialkot as Brigade Major (BM) in January 1978. The Brigade was 
being commanded by Brigadier Javed Majid, an Armoured Corps officer (20 
Lancers). When postings were announced in the main hall of the college by 
Military Secretary Branch representative, I was told by some of my peers that I 
was in for a big trouble. They informed me that Brigadier Javed Majid had put 
four officers, Platoon Commanders at PMA, on adverse report when he was a 
Battalion Commander at the Academy, a very unusual happening. That he was 
very demanding, arrogant and a harsh person. On joining the Brigade at Sialkot I 
told the Commander about my lack of experience in staff duties having remained 
away from normal routine since 1971. Contrary to what I was told, he was very 
patient to guide me initially about the ongoing work, after which I made sure that 
he does not find any cause of concern or complaint. Other two staff officers of the

146 

Brigade were, Major Javed Iqbal, Punjab/Sind my platoon mate from PMA as 
Deputy Assistant Adjutant and Quarter Master General (DAA&QMG) and Captain 
Sajjad Akram, Baluch, General Staff Officer Grade-III (GSO-3) who rose to the 
exalted rank of Lieutenant General in the Army. This young officer was sharp, 
energetic and assertive to the extent that staff of Brigade units felt uncomfortable 
in dealing with him. The level of trouble can be gauged when in an eighteen-
paged redress of grievances against Brigade Commander by Lieutenant Colonel 
Salahuddin CO 44 FF, half of the pages contained references to GSO-3 as a cause 
of complaint. However, in senior ranks I found the officer to be a forceful and 
successful commander.  
Brigadier Javed Majid was an officer of the old school, that class which was 
becoming rare even in those days when Army was still not afflicted with viruses 
introduced by General Zial ul Haq who had started his misrule just recently i.e. in 
1977. The Brigadier, a clear headed, smart, sharp and exceptionally confident 
person was an epitome of a model army officer. He would come to the office in 
his own car, an old Volkswagen and would use the official vehicle, mainly jeep 
when visiting units on official duties. He would not use any extra manpower in his 
house. If his batman went on leave for some days he would not ask for his relief, 
doing without a batman for that period. On his posting out from Brigade at the 
end of 1978, I asked him for his needs for the packing etc. He told me to give him 
one man from Brigade HQ, not getting any help from under command units. One 
evening, as I visited him at his house, he was engaged in packing a hold-all with 
help of the person provided to him, pressing the hold-all from one side with his 
knee. A stylish, well groomed officer from a respectable family, he had no 
inhibitions in doing physical work himself unlike most others. I had the chance of 
serving with this team for one year i.e.1978 after which there were changes due 
to normal postings on completion of tenures. 
Brigadier Javed Majid was replaced by Brigadier Nafees Ahmad, an artillery officer 
who unfortunately died due to a heatstroke during a march back to cantonment 
on conclusion of summer collective training in 1979. He had been in command for 
just about six months. A refined, decent and well groomed officer, he had served 
on the best career appointments including a stint at the Staff College as Directing

147 

Staff. During about six week’s summer collective training near Sialkot, he was 
exposed to heat which he did not seem to have suffered earlier. The accumulative 
effect of those six weeks of exposure resulted in his getting a heatstroke while 
marching in company of the GOC, Major General Shah Rafi Alam leading a column 
of 28 AK, a unit in our Brigade. It was late evening when during march Captain 
Ayub Uppal, GSO-3 accompanying Brigadier Nafees noticed signs of attack and 
called for an ambulance. He became unconscious while en route to CMH and died 
by next morning. His tragic and unexpected death left a very depressing effect 
from which I recovered after considerable period of time.  
Major Javed Iqbal, who was a great company, platoon mate and friend from PMA, 
was replaced by Major Abdul Qayyum Qureshi, AK. Captain Sajjad Akram was 
replaced by Captain Ayub Uppal, Baluch, another very fine officer, diligent and 
methodical in his work. After the demise of Brigadier Nafees, Lieutenant Colonel 
Zafar Dogar, CO 44 FF became acting Commander. He had transformed 44 FF 
from a lethargic, inefficient set up to a very efficient unit within a very short span 
of time. I once asked him as to how he had done that? His recipe was to go 
around the whole area of the unit first thing in the morning, pulling up people for 
any lapse on their part. He was man full of energy and enthusiasm. Alas he also 
died later due to a heart attack while commanding a Brigade at Landikotal.  
Service in the Brigade with three different commanders was a valuable 
experience and a very pleasant one. In September 1979, I was posted back to 34 
Punjab at Okara. 
Back to Okara 
When I rejoined the unit at Okara after my tenure at Sialkot with 104 Brigade, 34 
Punjab was being commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Abdul Hameed, popularly 
known as Hameed Jan. The unit was performing border duties at Sulemanki 
Headwork where during winters it was a very enjoyable stay. As the CO, still a 
bachelor, was fond of ‘shikar’, we would spend lot of time in duck shooting over 
the vast reservoir of water attracting lot of migratory birds. I saw a flock of 
'Surkhabs' for the first time. The officer in charge of Rangers Wing located at the 
Headwork was also a keen ‘shikari’. The area around the headwork was kept as 
game reserve for senior officers and guests of the Ranger officer.

148 

On coming back to Okara Cantonment, I got leave during summers of 1980 for a 
trip to Northern Areas where Major (later Major General) Parvez Akmal, my 
brother-in-law was posted. Along with my family I reached Gilgit. Pervez had 
arranged our trip to Hunza which on first sight was a disappointment because my 
concept of beautiful mountains lay in their being lush green while in these high 
mountains the sight was entirely different. The mountains were devoid of 
vegetation and the valleys had trees like poplar which do not provide much 
aesthetic satisfaction when you have seen better forests like those in Murree and 
Galiat. I took some time to appreciate the beauty of snow on the mountains like 
Rakaposhi and other peaks. Nonetheless, it was a pleasant change from the hot 
weather of Okara.  
On promotion to the rank of a Lieutenant Colonel in September 1980, I took over 
command of 34 Punjab. It was a singular honour to command a unit which one 
had joined as a young officer and had fought counter insurgency operations in 
East Pakistan and 1971 War. Being a Reconnaissance and Support (R&S) unit, it 
was part of Divisional Troops and not under any brigade like standard infantry 
battalions. 14 Division, re-raised at Okara, was then being commanded by Major 
General Tassawar Hussain Shah, an Armoured Corps officer. While I had settled 
down in command and the unit was coming into a well knit and efficient set up, 
orders for move to Quetta were received.  
Quetta – for a longer stay  
The unit moved to Quetta, as part of 16 Division re-raised at Quetta, by a special 
military train travelling at leisure given least priority by Railways in their 
movement plans. Some of our families were also travelling with us, the children 
enjoying the journey, observing hustle and bustle at the railway stations and 
seeing exotic places like the Lansdowne Bridge on Indus connecting Rohri and 
Sukker, and dark tunnels through Bolan Pass. On reaching Quetta, the unit was 
lodged in dilapidated barracks of Cooli Camp. The officers’ accommodation was 
most inadequate causing administrative difficulties. 
The Division was being commanded by Major General Fahim Haider Rizvi, who 
had commanded 32 Punjab in East Pakistan during the 1971 war. He was a very

149 

hardworking and diligent officer who would stretch things to undesirable limits 
most of the times. His honesty and hard work came to fruition after retirement 
when he was employed to head the Army Welfare Trust (AWT). Starting from 
scratch with very limited means, he made the Trust into a large profitable 
organisation. 
At Quetta, the unit got into routine training as part of the Division in a possible 
offensive role. Training area for field exercises extended from the field firing 
ranges north of Samungli to across Ghazaband Pass in the north and towards 
Shiekh Wasil – Kanak towards west from the field firing ranges. Across Ghazaband 
Pass a wide valley between two mountain ranges provided ideal ground for joint 
exercise with the armour regiment of the Division, then 20 Lancers, commanded 
by Lieutenant Colonel Jamshed. On conclusion of one such exercise it was a great 
spectacle to watch 44 tanks of 20 Lancers rushing through the wide valley in a 
simultaneous dash to assigned objective. Even in those days there were 
instructions not to go near the large village of Gulistan, the ancestral place of late 
Abdul Samad Achakzai and his clan.  
During this period of command of 34 Punjab at Quetta I was once detailed as 
President of a Special Military Court constituted to try a high profile murder case.  
A man had been killed in the Bazaar of Dalbandin town in broad daylight. His case 
was brought to the notice of President General Zia ul Haq during his visit to 
Dalbandin who directed that the case to be tried by a military court. The Court 
comprised of three persons. Besides myself, there was one Major Khalid Usmani, 
Signals from the Army and one civilian Magistrate, Mr. Jogizai. The accused was 
being defended by an able lawyer Mr. Munawwar Mirza who later served as 
Advocate General of Baluchistan and then as a judge in the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan. The government side was represented by Mr. Sardar Dur-e-Yemen a 
senior police prosecutor. As the proceedings progressed, evidence against the 
accused was inconsequential despite the fact that the man had been murdered in 
broad daylight in a bazaar with dozens of the people present. Only one person 
came out with statement that he had seen the man stabbing the deceased but 
stabbing man’s back was towards him (the witness) and face towards the other 
side. On such evidence no court would give a sentence to the accused because

150 

the prevailing law gives befit of doubt to the accused. In this case doubt was 
created by the witness in stating that the man’s back was towards him so he could 
not see the face. The accused was given life imprisonment as the three of us 
constituting Court did not agree on death penalty that was mandatory according 
to law for a court comprising three persons. The decision, before promulgation 
was sent to the convening authority, the Corps Headquarters in this case for 
approval as required. It came back for revision as the sentence given was not to 
the liking of convening authority. They were expecting death sentence. The 
proceedings were sent back again without change in sentence because the three 
of us still could not agree on changing the sentence. As a result I and Major Khalid 
were awarded punishment ‘severe displeasure’, and the court dissolved. 
Sentence to the accused in cases had to be according to requirement of the 
convening authority otherwise could not be announced and promulgated. 
My brush with the judicial system left me deeply distressed over its inherent flaws 
and flagrant manipulation by its practitioners who flout the whole system in 
favour of criminals using its many loopholes. 
Another earlier encounter had only served to reinforce this recent experience 
when in 1970, during General Yahya’s Martial Law period I was a member of a 
Special Military Court. Our court convened at Lyallpur (now Faisalabad) was to try 
a horrible case of rape. Some policemen of the Khurrianwala Police Station had 
raped a girl in the premises of the Police Station. The case was thoroughly 
publicised in the national newspapers and was thus given to the military court. As 
the hearing progressed we found that there was no evidence except one 
unconvincing witness. His statement was that while he was sitting behind a fence, 
he heard cries of the girl being raped in the open space marked for offering 
prayers in the Police Station. Even the affected girl remained quite when called to 
the Court. The Court’s President, my CO, Lieutenant Colonel Hafeezur Rahman, 
facing a dilemma, decided to take the court to girl’s house to ascertain the truth. 
There the poor girl came out with the story of how she was taken to the Police 
Station and raped by five policemen throughout the night. Our Court 
recommended fourteen years Rigorous Imprisonment to each policeman and sent 
the proceedings to the convening authority for confirmation as per rules. We

