121 

 After action in Dacca, two Infantry Divisions less their heavier elements like 
the armour regiments, artillery and some other integral elements were 
flown from West Pakistan to undertake further operations. Basically 
infantry units of these two Divisions were flown in to reinforce depleted 
East Pakistan garrison. The total came to roughly about twenty thousand 
persons. On arrival of fresh troops, these were organised into columns and 
despatched in different directions to clear areas up to the borders.  
 The initial phase of operation starting from Dacca to reach the borders on 
different directions was completed by fourth week of April 1971. In this 
phase, all the columns starting from Dacca were opposed by well sited 
ambushes at successive positions. This pattern suggested Indian 
involvement in planning and presence of some of their men physically 
supporting the rebels comprising units of East Bengal Regiment (EBR) and 
the men from the para military East Pakistan Rifles (EPR). 
 The pace of movement of troops moving outwards from Dacca was 
severely restricted due to blowing up of bridges and culverts on numerous 
streams on the routes. Vehicles were not available to expedite movement 
nor could be used due to the obstacles thus created. It was marching on 
foot right up to the borders which took time.This phase ended by last week 
of April 1971 with few pockets left that were cleared later. 
 During the period between January and April 1971 when there was no State 
control in the province, atrocities and massacre of non Bengali population 
was committed by criminal gangs at massive scale in different parts of the 
country. Hundreds of thousands of people were brutally killed, the women 
molested before being killed. 
 Allegations of this kind of mass murder and molestation of women were 
soon levelled against the Army which is the greatest falsehood; the main 
point of vicious propaganda campaign by Indians during the conflict. As 
would be evident from the narrative, the worst case of causing civilians 
death by Army was at the start of Army action in Dacca. After that the Army

122 

did not find those people who needed to be killed as they escaped to India 
retreating before the Army’s movement towards borders.  
 The civil population along the routes of movement of Army’s marching 
columns moving from Dacca towards borders avoided contact with Army 
except when a town was reached. In the towns, people came out on the 
roads waving Pakistani flags and informed that the miscreants had left the 
place "Malaoon log bhag gia”.The people involved in mass killings and rape 
of non Bengalis safely reached India, keeping about twelve hour time gap 
from the Army columns marching towards borders. The general population 
was not opposing the Army that could evoke violent response. 
 After reaching the borders, express orders constantly hammered were to 
"restore normalcy". Formations and units were given vast areas of 
responsibility to restore peace and normal conditions. The period from end 
of April up to June passed peacefully. Focus of the Army during this period 
was to restore confidence of the population to resume normal activity. 
 By the month of June, rebels, organised by Indians into a force called Mukti 
Fauj (Bahini) started their sabotage activity, planting mines on the tracks, 
blowing up small bridges/ culverts in areas close to the borders. Also by this 
time Indians started shelling our posts in the border areas. 
 Rebels operations did not escalate to a scale which could disrupt normal 
activity of the civilian population. The common people were not supportive 
of rebels’ seeing that the Army was not interfering in their routine affairs 
and was striving to restore peaceful living conditions.  
 The people of East Pakistan had voted for Awami League who promised to 
get them maximum autonomy based on a six point formula. The people 
had not voted for breakup of Pakistan. While a small segment of population 
was actively engaged in fighting Pakistan Army, a large number of Bengali 
young men were working as volunteers with the Army to counter sabotage 
activities by rebels and to deny them sanctuaries.

123 

 Movement in an area afflicted with insurgency environments needs special 
arrangements like moving in groups to deal with possible attacks and 
ambushes. No such need was ever felt throughout the period after 
clearance of opposition in the initial phase ending by last week of April 
1971. Till end of the war we could move in single vehicles never fearing or 
facing any threat from the population.  Even during war, the civilians saved 
Major General Nazar Hussain Shah, GOC 16 Div, and his party from being 
captured by Indians. 
 Our main concern was to ensure that rebels/ Mukti Bahini were denied 
establishing sanctuaries within our respective areas of responsibilities. To 
that end there was constant effort to reach out to the people, hold 
meetings and reassure the population that they had support of troops 
against any threat or intimidation from rebels. Because of these efforts, 
which kept us on the move most of the time, rebel activity was confined to 
areas near the borders in acts like laying mines on Katcha tracks, blowing 
up small culverts etc. Main threat while moving in the area was from land 
mines laid by rebels on tracks along borders. 
 By end April 1971, government writ had been restored in East Pakistan, 
creating conditions for resuming political process. Unfortunately the 
Government of Pakistan under General Yahya Khan was in a state of 
paralysis and had no intention to solve the problem. People around him like 
Z A Bhutto who saw no chance of coming to power in united Pakistan were 
working for breakup of the country to secure chance of ruling left over part 
of Pakistan. 
 Rumours or ‘langar gup’ since August 1971 was that GHQ considered these 
three Divisions in East Pakistan as written off. It was taken as a joke by 
naive junior officers like us but it proved true. 
 On declaration of war by Pakistan on 3 December, news was deliberately 
spread through command channels that Pakistan Army had captured 
Jammu. This joyful news proved wrong resulting in greater disappointment. 
Such cheap tactics by callous rulers caused unnecessary frustration.

124 

 Indian invasion came from three directions i.e. west, east and north. From 
south, the sea was completely dominated by Indians and the ports of East 
Pakistan effectively blockaded. General A A K Niazi, the commander of 
troops in East Pakistan acted on orders of GHQ to defend every inch of 
land, a most unrealistic directive. This directive did not allow him to deploy 
available troops to counter invasion which had become very clear when 
Indian troops had completed their concentrations on three sides of the 
borders by October 1971. 
 Disobeying orders is a dilemma at the time of crises. I have two examples 
which will elaborate the point. During war Chittagong was to be defended 
as fortress by withdrawing troops deployed in the sector in counter 
insurgency role. Special Service Group (SSG) troops deployed in Chittagong 
Hill Tracts area had a chance to cross over to Burma when they were 
ordered to come back to Chittagong for fortress defence. These highly 
trained troops are not meant to be used for static defences. In our POW 
Camp No 25, Major Mohammad Saeed (later DIG Police) a famous 
commando would repent on not availingthe chance of escaping to 
Burma.He blamed his fellow company commander Major Mohammad Iqbal 
(later Brigadier, Punjab Regt) on persuading him to obey the command.  
Conforming to norms of service, Lieutenant Colonel Hanif Malik, 
commanding the SSG troops followed orders given by Brigadier Atta Malik, 
getting his troops to fall back to Chittagong. Conversely Major Asif Ali Rizvi 
of my unit posted to EPCAF at Cox’s Bazar on the border with Burma 
crossed over to Burma when he felt isolated from Chittagong. He reached 
Pakistan and was awarded with gallantry award of Tamgha-e-Jurrat (TJ). 
Later, when POWs came back, Brigadier Atta made it a point that the 
officer be punished for disobeying orders to reach Chittagong and so Major 
Rizvi was deprived of the award. 
 In hindsight one can say that a man of General Niazi’s rank should have 
taken decisions according to the situation confronting him, particularly 
when nobody at GHQ was listening to him and his problems. Nevertheless 
the way he was singled out, demonized, punished and deprived of earned

125 

pension was part of the plot to put entire blame on him and the Army by 
Mr Bhutto and his team. The man who had restored State’s control over 
the country in just three weeks of taking command of troops in April 1971, 
creating conditions to resume political process was held responsible for 
horrendous crimes of Yahya –Bhutto combine, who were the real culprits.  
 The Indian invasion came through our deployment for the counter 
insurgency operations, our troops scattered in penny packets all over East 
Pakistan. Like water flows through terrain avoiding high ground, the 
Indians, containing our positions where confronted, bypassed these 
positions and reached undefended Dacca. Eastern Command plans to fight 
from ‘strong points’ and ‘fortresses’ did not materialise as readjustment of 
positions to occupy and convert towns and cities into defensive positions 
could not be carried out. 
 The Indians had complete mastery of the skies which facilitated their move 
to a great extent.  
 Indians mostly avoided fighting to clear defensive positions wherever they 
came across, bypassing such positions to continue with their move. 
Wherever they tried to fight through the defensive positions, they suffered 
heavy casualties and failed to overcome resistance. I have given example of 
34 Punjab positions south of Birganj on Thakurgaon – Dinajpur road and 
that of fighting in the area of 205 Brigade in Hilli sector which I know of and 
was a participant.  
 The doctrine that defence of East Pakistan laid in West Pakistan never 
materialised. The offensive planned from West Pakistan to capture vital 
space in Indian Punjab, thus relieving pressure on East Pakistan was never 
launched. 
 Had the positions of available troops in East Pakistan been adjusted to 
counter Indian invasion, Dacca could have been strongly defended by 
taking up positions north of it between the two rivers. Besides that, 
Chittagong area could also be effectively defended because of its layout, its 
long border with Burma and the mountainous tribal areas inhabited by

126 

friendly tribes. In this scenario the extended line of communications of 
Indians reaching to contact our defences could be severely disrupted by the 
Bengali young men working with the Army as volunteers. Such a situation 
would have resulted in a totally different outcome. 
 Chittagong area could still be part of Pakistan if bulk of non Bengali 
population, now languishing in slums of Dacca for so long, was shifted to 
the area in the months of September to November 1971. With friendly 
tribes and common Bengali people not supporting break up of Pakistan, this 
was a viable option even if rest of East Pakistan had to become Bangladesh. 
But men at the helm of affairs even at Eastern Command lacked that vision. 
 On 16 December 1971 the message received on wireless nets by the units 
scattered all over the country, was that of ceasefire. The units were told to 
concentrate at specified locations. 
 As we concentrated at different locations after the 'ceasefire' we were told  
that since we will be in transit for move to Pakistan through India we were 
to hand over our weapons to Indian Army. It was after sometime in Indian 
camps that we realised that we were in for a long time. 
 The Indians treated us with utmost propriety till we landed inside India in 
their camps, a calculated step on their part to complete move without 
trouble. After reaching their camps, they were mean and ruthless, killing 
anyone trying to escape as it happened in Camp 25. 
 Mr. Bhutto along with his delegation stormed out of UN Security Council 
session instead of discussing a Polish Resolution which asked for ceasefire 
and transfer of power to elected representatives in East Pakistan. He had 
delayed his arrival in New York to attend crucial Security Council 
proceedings by two days when he stayed in CIA headquarters in 
Switzerland being 'indisposed'. He delayed his move to New York, waiting 
for progress of Indian troops closing in on undefended Dacca. 
 Polish Resolution would have averted surrender and its consequences but 
Bhutto was not sure of his position when orderly transfer of power to

127 

Bangladesh by a political settlement was done by Yahya’s government. 
Bhutto wanted to ensure surrender of troops in East Pakistan to get Yahya 
dislodged from power making room for him.  
 In his article published in Criterion Quarterly (April-June 2012 issue) Mr. A G 
Noorani observed that had the Security Council resolution come into force, 
it would have resulted in the withdrawal of troops to the status quo ante 
bellum, not a single prisoner of war would have been taken, there would 
have been no surrender of Pakistani troops to the Indian command, there 
would have been no Shimla Accord, and the Ceasefire Line in Kashmir 
would have stayed put. Similar views were expressed by Sardar Sherbaz 
Khan Mazari in his book ‘A Journey to Disillusionment’ as well in the May 
25, 1974 issue of a Karachi based weekly Outlook.  
 Bhutto’s dramatic walkout from Security Council was welcomed with a sigh 
of relief in New Delhi. In their study titled ‘War and Secession: Pakistan, 
India and the Creation of Bangladesh’ professors Richard Sisson and Leo E. 
Rose wrote: “Several key figures in India could not understand why Pakistan 
did not readily agree to the proposal, since it would have left India in a 
most difficult and compromising position.”  
 Earlier in November just before the War, Mr Bhutto led a delegation to 
China where the Chinese Prime Minister Mr Chou En Lai, after detailed 
deliberations spreading over two days and in consultation with Chairman 
Mao Tze Tung gave specific line of action for Pakistan in these words,  
"DO NOT PRECIPITATE WAR AS THE WORLD OPINION IS TURNING 
AGAINST INDIA. IF NECESSARY, TRADE TERRITORY FOR TIME." 
 Mr. Bhutto in his briefing to President Yahya Khan after the visit did not 
convey this specific advice by the Chinese leaders. (Details in Air Marshal 
Inamul Haq Khan's account at annex B). Pakistan did the opposite to 
escalate conflict by declaring war with India, launching air raids on 3 
December 1971. 
 Total strength of the prisoners of all categories including civilians was about 
forty five thousands. About thirty four thousand were from the Pakistan

128 

Army, Navy and Air Force, the rest from the civil armed forces i.e. three 
wings of Scouts, four Rangers Wings, some Mujahids, Policemen and very 
few civilians.  Amongst the Army troops there were only about twenty two 
thousands infantry soldiers who were to do actual fighting against 
insurgents and the invading Indians, supported by the remaining elements. 
The Order of Battle of Pakistani forces in East Pakistan as on 3 December 
1971 is given at the end of this narrative (Annex C).   
 The figure of ninety three thousands prisoners of war was concocted to 
malign, degrade and vilify Pakistan Army. The prisoners were kept in India 
till Mr Bhutto could consolidate his hold on his New Pakistan. General Gul 
Hassan who helped in bringing Mr Bhutto to power did not contest these 
figures. His successor Tikka Khan also towed the line as he remained 
intimidated by Bhutto to be handed over for war crimes trial demanded by 
Bangladesh in the list of 195 persons. Tikka Khan was succeeded by Zia ul 
Haq, another character working for global powers who ruled for a long time 
to obscure the picture of past events. 
 Repatriation of Pakistani POWs was deliberately spread over about eight 
months whereas Indians had only taken two weeks to collect these troops 
from all over East Pakistan to place them in various camps over vastly 
spread areas. Repatriation was arranged in a manner which gave the 
impression that a very large force had surrendered to the Indians. It was 
also ensured that the personnel of those units who served in East Pakistan 
could not get together and rise in revolt knowing what Mr Bhutto had done 
to Pakistan. 
 Repatriation of prisoners was trumpeted to be a very big achievement of 
Mr Bhutto to deceive the people. But those of us affected knew and some 
thought of doing something to get him. They were apprehended and 
punished through a court martial conducted by Major General Zia ul Haq 
(later President). After Bhutto was hanged by Zia, reportedly one of those 
punished told Zia that this was what they wanted earlier and that Zia had 
realised it late.

129 

 To cover up the tragedy, a commission headed by Justice Hamood Ur 
Rahman was formed with limited mandate. Like all commissions, it served 
Bhutto’s purpose by assuaging public sentiment at the time. Statements 
recorded by the Commission were in conflict with facts narrated by 
prisoners on their repatriation after over two years. Their statements 
exposed Bhutto’s role, hence the Commission’s proceeding were never 
made public. By then Bhutto was firmly in power. 
 Mr Yuri Bezmenov, a former agent of USSR’s spy agency, the KGB, in his 
interview gave details of the plan for breakup of Pakistan, creating Mukti 
Bahini gangs; admitting that there was no popular Bengali uprising but an 
orchestrated terrorist subversive plan by Indian spy agency, RAW and KGB. 
According to him Pakistan was dismembered due to a massive conspiracy 
by India, Russia and the US where terrorist gangs were used for subversion 
to stage a rebellion. According to him the traitors who sided with the KGB 
and RAW were to be killed in the end once their usefulness was over. This 
interview is available at12; 
Yuri Bezmenov - Soviet Subversion of Western Society 7/9 
 Dismemberment of Pakistan, once the largest Muslim country of the world 
which made rapid economic and overall progress in a very short period of 
time and enjoyed great prestige in the comity of nations is a very tragic 
story. The break up was orchestrated by global powers through India 
supporting Mujeeb, Bhutto and their accomplices. Even now the common 
people in remaining Pakistan continue to suffer at the hand of rulers, who 
are pawns of global corporate interests, crippling country’s economy, 
threatening our survival as a state.  

12 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NY4al5PyeNE&feature=youtu.b

130 

THE EXPERIENCE 
Part – III 
Back Home to a ‘New’ Pakistan 
The process of repatriation of prisoners started in September 1973 and was 
spread over a period of eight months concluding in April 1974. Prisoners were 
picked up from different camps to form a train for repatriation on a certain date. 
Announcements of names of prisoners who were to be part of next train taking 
the prisoners home was keenly awaited. Not being included was cause of 
disappointment and I felt this many times as my name came in the second last 
train in April 1974. Our journey was planned in a manner that travel through 
Indian Punjab was during night reaching Attari by early morning. The train 
compartment’s windows were also kept shut so that we could not see the 
countryside during day part of the journey. De-training at Attari and move to 
Wahga border post was arranged in the mornings. Elaborate reception 
arrangements were laid out at Wahga by Pakistan Army, Corps Commander 
Lahore receiving returning prisoners.   
I landed on the soil of ‘New’ Pakistan one morning in second week of April 1974. 
On crossing the border I got strange feelings of being in a different world. After 
having suffered hardships and humiliation for so long, a sudden change of being 
liberated and welcomed was rather difficult to absorb. After spending about three 
days at reception camp in Lahore Cantonment I, like others, was given leave for 
two months. On reaching home in the village, people there and from surrounding 
areas kept visiting to congratulate on my safe return. They seemed genuinely 
happy and showed lot of love and affection. This continued for a couple of days.  
All those who returned home were given very affectionate welcome, people 
gathering at bus stands hours before expected arrival of returning prisoners. The 
respect and affection shown by people of the area may seem strange to readers 
of younger generations, fed with false picture of the tragic happenings by rulers 
of ‘New’ Pakistan. Despite false propaganda against the troops trapped in East 
Pakistan people at that time understood the role played by rulers who had put a 
small force in an untenable position. In spite of acts of unparalleled gallantry at

