61 

the people came out on the road with Pakistan’s flags. This was to assure the 
troops that there was no need to take any hostile action. Bulk of the population 
from these towns en route had also left to safer areas in the interior avoiding 
contact with the forces because of uncertainty and fear caused by Army action in 
Dacca.  
While marching towards Mymensingh, the unit stayed for a day at Kishorganj, a 
small town connected with Dacca on the railway network. Here for the first time 
since we started from Narsinghdi, we got some ration supplies through 
improvised transportation on the railway track by the efforts of our 
quartermaster, Captain Shafiq Sarwar Malik. Leaving one company (Delta, 
commanded by Major Nisar Bukhari) at Kishorganj, the unit resumed onward 
march towards Mymensingh. 
On reaching Mymensingh we came to know of the mass killings of the non 
Bengalis in that city. Residents of a colony of non Bengalis (Biharis) had been 
killed to the last soul. Some people had taken refuge in the main mosque but they 
were also killed. Here the Commanding Officer, made responsible to restore 
order, held meeting with the Deputy Commissioner and the Superintendent of 
Police, a daily routine to review the situation. Since on arrival of troops the rebels 
had left the place withdrawing to India, there was no more trouble in the area.  
Normal activity by civil administration was resumed as the Army reached the 
areas where anarchy had prevailed for few months that caused atrocities and 
killings of the non Bengali population in the district particularly the city of 
Mymensingh. 
Here, we came under command another brigade, commanded by Brig Noor 
Ahmad Hussain. The unit was tasked to secure area up to Durgapur bordering 
Indian State of Meghalaya towards north. Two companies, Alpha and Bravo under 
the Second in Command (2IC), Major Muhammad Hafeez Raja secured the area 
without any resistance. 
The unit stayed in Mymensingh/Durgapur area for about a month before it was 
ordered to move to Bogra in North Bengal, crossing River Jumna. By this time 
railway system had been largely restored and the unit moved by train to

62 

Bahadurabad Ghat on river bank. The vast river was crossed by means of a large 
ferry; rather a small ship which took more than one hour to cross the great 
waterway. On reaching the other bank we were informed that instead of Bogra 
we were to proceed to Rangpur in the north.  
On reaching Rangpur, coming under command 23 Brigade, the unit was tasked to 
clear the area of Bhurangamari across Dharla River. This large salient with its base 
on the river was surrounded by India from three sides. One Captain Nawazish, a 
Bengali officer had established rebels position across river, covering the main 
route and other possible crossings. He had started conducting raids on our thinly 
held positions manned by 25 Punjab.  
For planning the operation to clear that area, Brigade Commander, Brigadier 
Abdullah Malik (later Major General) accompanied by CO 29 Cavalry, took our CO 
and the company commanders to the area held by 25 Punjab. Briefing had been 
arranged in the Company Headquarters of Major Khalid (25 Punjab) who gave a 
rather grim picture of the situation. After his briefing, plan given by CO 29 Cavalry, 
Lieutenant Colonel Sagheer Hussain Syed (later Lieutenant General) included 
crossing the river frontally with four amphibious tanks (the only ones available in 
East Pakistan) and a crossing from a different site by about fifty men of 34 Punjab, 
thus bagging the rebels. On this our CO showed reservations on use of such a 
small force to capture a large, well entrenched enemy occupying position 
stretching over about three to four kilometers on the river astride main route. 
Lieutenant Colonel Saghir made a remark that if they (34 Punjab) could not do it, 
he would do it with his own troops. On this a very unpleasant exchange of words 
took place, Major Khursheed Mallal taking on the Colonel with some harsh words 
in a nasty tone. That ended the meeting. Although our CO interjected to reduce 
tension but damage was done. Abdullah Malik, visibly annoyed ordered that the 
unit should plan and carry out the operation as they like. Sagheer Syed then 
showed inability to provide the amphibious tanks. 
Major Khurshid Mallal who caused this unpleasant situation had earned some 
reputation of being an abrasive person. A ‘Gallian’ who joined 2 Punjab after 
passing from the Academy soon got himself inducted in the Special Services 
Group (the SSG). While travelling with his platoon for some duty in Sindh, he

63 

created a rumpus at Hyderabad Railway Station in which the Station Master got 
seriously hurt. Expelled from SSG, he joined an infantry battalion where he had 
verbal dual with the CO on parade ground. Placed on ‘Adverse Report’ he joined 
34 Punjab at Kharian. Here, given the importance by appointing him as Adjutant, a 
key appointment of the unit, his positive side overtook his weaknesses. He proved 
a most responsible, competent and hardworking officer. Every day, we the 
younger lot would not want to even talk to him because of his harsh attitude and 
ticking off on minor faults during duty hours. But off duty hours he would be 
jovial, exuberant, reaching out to get everyone out for fun, a most likable 
companion. On demand from us his juniors, his blue coloured Vaxhaul, the only 
car in our bachelor quarters, used to make frequent evening trips to Lalamusa for 
watching the dancing girls singing and dancing in their famous abodes. It was not 
considered any crime then.

64 

Crossing of Dharla River to proceed further towards Nageshwari and 
Bhurangamari was attempted during next night from the place earlier suggested 
by Sagheer Syed but it was obviously occupied as was expected. The unit had to 
launch a frontal assault wading through water to reach the enemy positions. 
During this operation the unit lost two men. After securing enemy position on 
river bank, the unit started advance to clear area up to borders which took 
another three days. Brigadier Abdullah Malik was so annoyed with the unit due to 
above mentioned incident involving Sagheer Syed that when informed about the 
unit securing far banks of Dharla River by his Brigade Major Abdul Haq Mirza he 
remarked that ‘tell the unit that this operation is failure from my side’.  
After clearing that area, 34 Punjab was ordered to relieve 8 Baluch at Thakurgaon 
in the extreme northwest, handing over Bhurangamari sector to 25 Punjab. 
Starting from Dacca, the unit had changed many formations and ultimately landed 
at a place where it had to fight its final battle. It had covered great distances 
overcoming opposition in clearing vast areas from rebels, a feat unmatched by 
any other unit operating in East Pakistan during that period. 
When we were at Mymensingh, the CO (Hafeez Ur Rahman) ordered Captain 
Muhammad Afreen of my Company to proceed to Dacca/Chittagong and other 
places and bring mechanical transport of the unit which had reached by ship at 
Chittagong and some of the vehicles particularly recoilless rifles mounted on jeeps 
had been distributed to different units spread all over. Captain Muhammad Jamil 
had arrived with the unit’s equipment and stores but he could not manage to 
move the equipment upwards. In fact he had no clue as to where the unit was 
located because of the continuous movement up to that time as I have narrated. 
When Captain Afreen was leaving, he overheard CO telling Major Mallal that we 
could write off this officer. In his assessment the officer would take months to 
recollect the distributed vehicles from different places because of severely 
disrupted communication network and disturbed conditions. When Captain 
Afreen, with his indomitable will, unbounded courage and superb improvisation 
abilities brought all the vehicles, equipment and stores in less than a month’s 
time while we had reached Rangpur; the CO was surprised on this outstanding 
feat of the officer. Later he would remark that if this officer had been part of the

65 

British Army operating in such like situation, a book making absorbing reading 
could have come out on the problems confronted by him and methods adopted 
to overcome those problems in completing this task. The officer deserved to be 
awarded for his achievement but we in 34 Punjab were working with different 
mindset; oblivious of self interest, struggling to overcome difficulties in most 
extraordinary conditions prevailing at the time in East Pakistan.

66 

Thakurgaon 
On reaching Thakurgaon in June 1971, the unit relieved 8 Baluch which was to go 
elsewhere; leaving one company commanded by Captain Akbar Niazi at 
Pachagarh. The area of responsibility spanned about one hundred and fifty 
kilometers of border with India. The unit, with strength of about six hundred men 
was responsible for the Thakurgaon sub division of Dinajpur District tasked to 
maintain law and order and restore normal living conditions for the disturbed 
civilian population besides looking after the borders. This was seemingly 
impossible task. A part of the sub division, a finger like area projecting towards 
Nepal in the north west named Titulia, had not been cleared from the rebels 
because it was difficult to hold, being a thin strip in firing range of Indians from 
both flanks.  In the deployment made by CO, three companies in addition to 8 
Baluch Company were placed along the borders and the remaining one company 
placed at Thakurgaon. My company was deployed along the border with India 
covering about sixty kilometers length of the border. Company Headquarters(HQ) 
with one platoon was located at a place named Rani Shankail, one platoon 
commanded by Captain Muhammad Afreen placed at Nek Mard and the third 
platoon commanded by Lieutenant Muhammad Saeed Tariq at Pirganj (there 
were more than one towns of this name). ‘A’ Company commanded by Major M 
Saeed Azam Khan was deployed towards north of my positions in area Balidangi – 
Ruhea and ‘D’ Company (Major Bukhari) further north and east to cover the area 
of responsibility given to the unit.  
We started patrolling the area and contacting people in the villages to restore 
their confidence, helping them to overcome fear caused by the events of last few 
months. This area had remained comparatively peaceful being away from the 
major cities. During the period of lawlessness when there was no government 
control all over East Pakistan in the months of Feb, March and April, the non 
Bengalis had been killed in large numbers all over the country. Here at Rani 
Shankail we found a small group of Pathans who had survived the ordeal. Their 
business was money lending and they were in the area to collect their dues. They 
had survived because this area had not been affected by the hatred rampant in 
other areas particularly large cities.

67 

The period from June till August was comparatively peaceful with few incidents by 
rebels, the Mukti Bahini conducting a few raids, including one on my Company HQ 
during one night and planting mines, coming from across the border.  

The fact that rebels could not establish any sanctuary in the Thakurgaon sub 
division was due to untiring struggle of the officers and men of our unit. The 
efforts were spearheaded by the new CO, Lieutenant Colonel (later Brigadier) 
Amir Muhammad Khan, one of the pioneers of Special Services Group (SSG) who 
had replaced Hafeezur Rhaman in July, the later going to Command and Staff 
College Quetta as Directing Staff, a prestigious career assignment. Colonel Amir 
was nicknamed Governor by the unit officers because of his name, cast, style and 
manner resembling the redoubtable Malik Amir Muhammad Khan, Nawab of 
Kalabagh, ex Governor of West Pakistan during earlier part of Ayub Khan’ era. 
Colonel Amir, a courageous man was ideally suited in inspiring his command for 
the task assigned to the unit that was responsible for restoring and maintaining

68 

peace in a very vast area, countering Indian sponsored terrorism and finally 
fighting the Indians. At all stages his towering personality was source of strength, 
contributing to successful outcome of the assigned tasks. 
The ‘Governor’ would get hold of Maulvi Tameez ud Din, a local Jamaat Islami 
Amir almost every morning and start his tour of the area addressing people 
covering different villages according to a systematic plan. His focus was to explain 
to the people as to what caused this tragedy and that the army was for their 
service and was there to help them. His efforts and that of rest of the officers and 
men succeeded in denying sanctuaries to Mukti Bahini formed by Indians in the 
vast area of our responsibility. Their attempts remained confined to cross border 
activity mainly in laying mines on different tracks in the area near borders which 
caused some casualties to our officers and men. In our efforts to reach out to the 
people in our areas of responsibility, workers of Jamaat Islami were great help in 
organizing meetings with the villagers to restore their confidence, remove fear 
and seek help in denying rebel sanctuaries. They were most reliable, honest and 
truthful people who later suffered political victimization and continue to do so at 
the hands of Sheikh Mujib’s followers.   
During one such patrolling mission along the border Lieutenant Abdul Waheed 
embraced Shahadat due to Indian mortar fire. Naib Subedar Abbas got his leg 
amputated due to mine laid on a track. The CO’s priority was so focused on 
continuous touring the area that one day when Commander Eastern Command 
Lieutenant General AmirAbdullah Khan (A A K) Niazi landed at the Battalion 
Headquarters at Thakurgaon; the CO was out on his normal tour. There was some 
lack of coordination between the Brigade Headquarters and the unit, as our 
Adjutant, Captain Javed Anwar Cheema claimed ignorance about the visit while 
Brigade Major Abdul Haq Mirza insisted that he had informed the unit Adjutant 
on telephone. Such incidents further aggravated relations between the unit and 
its immediate higher formation. This was one factor because of which no one 
from our unit got any gallantry award because the citations for awards forwarded 
to Brigade were not processed as it transpired later; although performance of the 
officers in some actions merited highest gallantry awards.

69 

About awards, Lieutenant Colonel Hafeez Ur Rahman, the CO till mid July 1971 did 
not initiate any recommendation. It was suggested to the CO to initiate citations 
for awards for the first day’s actions. On that day we had two encounters and 
cleared the opposition in a very short time in most audacious manner. In those 
actions we had suffered nine casualties including one officer being martyred. The 
CO’s response was that we were being paid for the job and should not claim 
awards for fighting against rebels. This was faulty logic because the bullets fired 
by rebels were equally lethal and acts of bravery merited recognition. 
After change of command, the new CO sent some recommendations including 
that of Captain Muhammad Afreen for an action in Pachagarh area but because of 
unsporting attitude from the Brigade Headquarters as alluded to from the 
incidents mentioned earlier, these recommendations were not processed. Later 
when the gallantry awards were announced after few months, a large number of 
people from other units had been bestowed with gallantry awards. As the awards 
were announced, I got in touch with Major (later Lieutenant Colonel) Muhammad 
Safdar (popularly known as ‘ginger’, a Khattak from Shaidu near Nowshera) of my 
unit who was posted at Headquarters Eastern Command as staff officer dealing 
with the awards. I asked him as to why 34 Punjab had not received any awards 
having lost two officers by then and having achieved some most spectacular 
successes in operations. He informed that Eastern Command had not received 
any citation/recommendation about any one from 34 Punjab.  
The only gallantry award received by the unit was Tamgha e Jurrat (TJ) to Havildar 
Muhammad Sharif (retired as Honorary Captain) after repatriation from the 
Indian POW camps in 1974.  One of our anti tank platoon had been placed under 
command 27 Brigade deployed in Brahman Baria area opposite Indian State of 
Tripura in the East. This platoon was commanded by the burly Captain Mian Bux, 
a Chandio Baloch from Sindh. Brigadier Saadullah, on repatriation made a special 
effort to initiate Havildar Sharif’s citation and got him this award for an action 
during battle near Aashuganj Bridge on Meghna River in December 1971. 
Brigadier Saadullah was a very reputed officer for his courage, character and 
competence. His Brigade while withdrawing from Brahmanbaria towards Bhairab 
Bazaar was being closely followed by advancing Indians from east.  On reaching

70 

Meghna River, the Brigadier with a small force carried out a rear guard action to 
facilitate his Brigade in crossing the great water obstacle. In this he used Anti Tank 
Platoon of 34 Punjab, Havildar Sharif being one of the detachment commanders. 
This action caused the Indians to recoil, leaving tanks in running condition. Troops 
of the Brigade could thus cross over the River without interference from Indians. 
Brigadier Saadullah was impressed by performance of Havildar Sharif in this 
action and after repatriation he ensured that the NCO was awarded.  
Havildar Sharif’s case is interesting. He was our Officer’s Mess NCO working for 
quite some time in that appointment very efficiently. While at Thakurgaon, he 
was removed from that task because he was getting meat free of cost but 
charging the Mess a nominal amount knowing that the officers would not tolerate 
getting anything free of cost from the public. The Officer in Charge of the messing 
while checking found that the rates of meat were very low so he probed to find 
the facts. This caused Sharif’s removal from mess duty to a task which earned him 
his award.  
With our experience about gallantry awards, it is evident that distribution of 
gallantry awards depends on personal whims of individuals. Deserving men are 
mostly left out and those seeking favours with good writing skills who can paint 
better picture to the distant higher headquarters are awarded. To eliminate 
chances of this injustice we must do away with the gallantry awards. Instead, the 
families of those who sacrifice their lives must be supported by the State to live a 
life of comfort and dignity, being provided with adequate resources 
commensurate with their social standing. Similarly those who become disabled 
should also get required support to live the life with maximum facilitation and 
ease. This will eliminate the causes of concocting false stories by those seeking 
glory through questionable means. This will also put the men going into action at 
mental peace knowing that their families are assured of support in any 
eventuality.  
To continue with the narrative, my company remained deployed along the vast 
stretch of border for over a month after which it was relieved by B Company 
(Major Khurshid Mallal) as another task was awaiting me. During this deployment 
period every day was full of surprises and adventure. A few days after arrival at

