221 

He came back with help from Brigadier Amir Muhammad Khan, my CO in East 
Pakistan who was posted at important position in Karachi. Later Brigadier Amir’s 
brother Brigadier Ghulam Abbas who was at Nawab Shah commanding 34 Punjab 
during 1984-5 would recall about the conditions Asif Zardari’s was in, an 
insignificant non entity mired in petty affairs. By choosing him as her spouse, 
Benazir Bhutto, aspiring to rule Pakistan failed to make prudent decision on such 
vital personal matter. Or maybe she wanted it that way. 
Benazir and Zardari duo put Pakistan into deep crises through their shady deals at 
the cost of country’s interests. Changing the ratio of electricity generation from 
cheap hydro power to expensive imported furnace oil through Independent 
Power projects (IPPs), presumably extracting huge amounts as kickbacks was one 
such action by the duo that has put Pakistan in deep economic crises. The terms 
decided unduly favoured private power producers, the State paying huge 
amounts to these companies as capacity charges as well as very high rates per 
unit that deprived the country of affordable energy.  
General Pervez Musharraf 
In 1999, General Musharraf removed the prime minister and took over 
government declaring martial law. During his about eight year’s rule the 
Americans occupied Afghanistan. Musharraf provided them all the facilities they 
asked for like air bases, air corridors and logistic support through the country 
using road network from Karachi port to Afghanistan.  
Earlier in 1999 as Army Chief he had launched Kargil operation without consulting 
even the Corps Commanders. This operation helped the Indians to overcome 
grave political crisis, enabling them to form stable government which they were 
unable to do since 1996 even after repeated elections. The results of this 
operation in Pakistan were disastrous as the civilian government was replaced by 
Musharraf’s dictatorial rule. Kargil strengthened India and eroded Pakistan’s 
image as a stable nuclear state weakening its position in the world as subsequent 
events unfolded. 
It may not be mere coincidence that before momentous events of the Iranian 
Revolution and Russian occupation of Afghanistan in 1979 General Zia ul Haq had

222 

been placed in position. Similarly before the US invasion of Afghanistan in 2011, 
General Musharraf had taken over the country removing the civilian government. 
Placing their men in control of Pakistan before predictable changes, the US 
indulged in playing its game successfully in this region. Zia, with religious 
pretensions was chosen to confront the Godless Russians. Later on Musharraf, a 
‘liberal’, was engaged to facilitate US in dismantling Mujahideen networks after 
removing religious ‘Taliban’ government in Kabul. 
After Musharraf 
After Musharraf, Mr. Asif Ali Zardari and his group came to power through a 
formula, the National Reconciliation Ordinance (NRO) worked out by the US in 
consultation with UK and some Arab rulers. The appointments were finalized at 
and announced from the US embassy in Islamabad. The best qualifications of the 
new rulers were their being convicted on crimes of financial misappropriation and 
dishonest practices. Mr. Asif Ali Zardari, the President of Pakistan had been 
convicted by a Swiss Court for financial crime and Mr. Yusuf Raza Gilani, the Prime 
Minister had spent a few years in jail after conviction on charges of enrolling 
people in government service against rules. Our political class endorsed these 
appointments unanimously, putting the best amongst them at the top positions. 
In their five years term completed in 2013, Zardari group has robbed the country 
of prosperity and the common citizen of whatever comfort one enjoyed earlier. 
Severe shortages of electricity and gas resulted in closing of industries. The 
elaborate rail network almost stopped functioning, the national airline near 
collapse and other state enterprises under heavy debts and defaults. The rulers 
plundered the country unabashedly accumulating and increasing their assets in 
foreign countries. It is the culture of People’s Party as evidenced during their two 
earlier short tenures led by late Benazir Bhutto to make quick buck, get booted 
out and exploit that sentiment of their being victims who could not deliver 
because of being removed before completing their terms. Zardar’s government 
did its best to get forced out of power so that they could again go to the public as 
victims but the forces that brought this team into power allowed them to 
continue their rule, putting the country in oxygen tent, at the mercy of 
international financial institutions.

223 

The Present Setup 
A family actively involved in mega businesses working with international partners 
and also ruling a country is lethal combination against resources of that country 
and its people. As result of general elections held in May 2013, Mr. Mian 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif has formed government at the Centre replacing 
Pakistan People’s Party and its Allie’s Government. Sharif family is actively 
involved in business in Pakistan as well in other countries. Their method to run 
the government is also on the pattern of dynastic rule. No country in today’s 
world claiming some kind of democratic credentials will be ruled by a man as 
head of the national government, his brother as head of a province large enough 
to contain more than half of the country’s population, and a daughter’s father- in- 
law as finance minister. To top it all, other important portfolios have been given 
to a particular clan from Lahore and surroundings. Even the dictators in Pakistan 
could not match such arrangement. 
About Nawaz Sharif, my observations although from short encounters in late 
nineteen eighties remain unchanged; rather get reinforced due to his conduct 
during later years. On 6 September 1985, when he had taken over as Chief 
Minister of Punjab few months back, he was to lay floral wreath at the monument 
of Major Aziz Bhatti, Shaheed, Nishan- e- Haider at BRB Canal east of Lahore. I 
was to host him on that short military function. Before his arrival, a car load of his 
cronies arrived. From their conversation in exchanging notes I could make out 
that each of them had made a few Crore rupees in some deals in those few 
months of their being close to the new Chief Minister. (Crore rupees was a very 
big amount in those days). Nawaz Sharif arrived and was straightaway conducted 
to lay wreath, a short ceremony, over in about fifteen minute’s time.  Those 
cronies got closer to him when he was leaving. He was barely audible while 
talking to them, giving impression of an insecure person, unsure about himself 
and his position.  On another occasion he was brought along to Lahore Garrison 
Golf Club by the President, General M Zia ul Haq who took him around the course 
trying to teach him golf. My unit, 27 Punjab was responsible to develop the newly 
laid golf course, and I, as Secretary of the Club was to remain closer to them. I was 
amazed at the patience of General Zia ul Haq who made Nawaz Sharif hit the balls

224 

a number of times from one spot before moving forward to take next shot. I could 
not make out what was real purpose of undertaking such seemingly useless 
exercise by the President. Being in the profession of dealing with men, my 
observation was that Nawaz Sharif was a dumb person, easy to exploit, a perilous 
weakness in a person leading government of a nuclear armed country. 
Jokes invented, although not true, reflect the bent of mind of target persons. In 
the backdrop of reports of getting huge kickbacks and commissions in mega 
projects by the ruling elite, a famous joke invented some years back goes as 
follows. On inauguration ceremony of a major road completed with lot of fanfare, 
a sycophant suggested that the chief guest performing opening ceremony should 
be given the title of ‘Sher Shah Suri Sani’ (Sher Shah Suri, the Second). Curious, 
the chief guest asked, “Who was Sher Shah Suri?” When he was told that Sher 
Shah Suri was a King of India who laid the Grand Trunk Road covering his Kingdom 
from Peshawar to Bengal spanning thousands of kilometers; spontaneous 
remarks attributed to the chief guest were that “He must have made lot of 
money”.  
Nawaz Sharif was picked up during General Zia ul Haq’s rule when Lieutenant 
General Ghulam Gilani Khan who had been heading the Inter-Services Intelligence 
Agency (ISI) during Z A Bhutto’s period was Governor of Punjab. When Mian 
Muhammad Sharif, a business man from Lahore was approached to get his family 
into political field, he spared Nawaz Sharif to be inducted into politics being of no 
use to him in running his business. Shahbaz Sharif joined his brother later to use 
political positions in expanding their businesses by robbing banks and state 
resources. They have become enormously rich with properties and businesses in 
UK, Saudi Arabia and other places. On Mr Nawaz Sharif becoming prime minister 
of Pakistan, someone asked Mian Sharif to cap their business activities. Mian 
Sharif reportedly told the interlocutor that for them the time of doing business 
had come now. 
Mr Shahbaz Sharif is projected as man of action doing great service to the people 
of Punjab. It is a big farce. A close look at his actions reveals that in initial years of 
his becoming Chief Minister, his elder brother being the Prime Minister, Shahbaz 
did bring improvement in functioning of the provincial government. That was

225 

made possible by his harsh attitude towards the government servants, insulting 
them in public and threatening them of punishments. But that approach, good 
enough to run a small private factory cannot be applied to State institutions for 
long. Leaders are supposed to inspire people, not scare them. He can hardly be 
placed in the category of a leader and has lost his charm long time back specially 
when he put his sons into business of robbing the poor people. Before getting 
into poultry business, prices of chicken were around fifty to sixty rupees per 
kilogram which suddenly jumped to one hundred and fifty rupees per kilogram 
when Hamza Shahbaz Sharif came into business with his controlled sheds. His 
other son’s ventures have increased prices of milk in the market. This is apart 
from what they are doing at mega ventures in collaboration with international 
players.  
The law and order situation and Punjab government’s writ can be easily judged 
from the fact that the day Benazir was murdered in Rawalpindi on 27 October 
2007; a number of persons moving with Nawaz Sharif’s convoy were killed on 
Islamabad Highway where a posse of Kalashnikov carrying criminals is stationed at 
Khokhar Hotel right in Rawalpindi suburbs. Nothing happened to Khokhars. 
Emboldened to gross limits, one of this land grabbing mafia boss killed a woman 
in presence of police provided for her protection on a small piece of her land 
under litigation. Still nothing moved till recently when Chaudhry Nisar Ali as 
Minister of Interior has intervened to settle score with Malik Riaz of Bahria Town 
who is in cahoots with Khokhars in land grabbing ventures. People of Punjab are 
at the mercy of criminals and mafia bosses after Shahbaz Sharif’s long rule over 
the province. In June 2014 fourteen persons including a pregnant woman was 
killed and over eighty people injured when Shahbaz Sharif’s controlled Punjab 
Police opened fire on unarmed supporters of Dr Tahirul Qadri in Model Town 
Lahore in broad day light. Nothing happened to perpetrators of the crime. The 
governance systems have been effectively converted to serve personal whims of 
rulers and mafia bosses, not working to serve the ordinary citizen. 
No country in today’s world claiming some kind of democratic credentials will be 
ruled by a business family, distributing various portfolios within the family and a 
select group from within their clan.

226 

Imran Khan  
Another person who has emerged on the political scene during the general 
elections held in May 2013 is Mr. Imran Khan. After remaining in political 
wilderness for about sixteen years, his party Tehrik-e-Insaf suddenly got a very 
enthusiastic response from the public. On the day of polls, people old and young 
who had never bothered to vote earlier got out of their homes early in the 
morning to polling stations. New voters particularly in the cities mostly cast their 
votes for Imran Khan’s party who claimed to bring about fundamental changes in 
the system of governance, provision of justice and involving people to make 
decisions by empowering the local governments. After 2013 general electionshis 
Party has formed government in the province of Khyber Pakhtun Khaw (KPK) and 
has enough seats in the National Assembly to act as effective opposition.  
The reasons for sudden surge in Imran Khan’s political fortunes which became 
evident when his political meeting in Lahore held on 30 Oct 2011 got 
unprecedented response were due to five years misrule of Zardari group at the 
Centre and Sharif brothers in Punjab.People were highly scared of their retaining 
power if they did not get out voting against them. Zardari’s Party was chanting 
fearful slogans like “Next turn, again Zardari” (Translated in Urdu it is much more 
frightening ‘AGLI BARI, PHIR ZARDARI’). It was fear of Zardari’s Party and Sharifs, 
not merely love for Imran Khan that his Party got so many votes.  
However serious deficiencies have come to light in the capacity of political 
decision making by Imran Khan and his Party. Imran Khan did not seem to have 
faith in strength of his programme for change that could draw votes. Instead he 
went for inducting electable into the Party as candidates for the elections 2013.  
Elections 2013 
On 11 May 2013 General Elections were held in Pakistan that became 
controversial due to accusations of massive rigging by almost all political parties 
except Pakistan Muslim league (Nawaz Group) that assumed power at the Centre 
retaining government in Punjab as well. Asif Zardari led Pakistan People’s Party 
formed Government in Sindh, its strength reduced to rural areas of Sindh. 
Mutahidda Qaumi Movement (MQM) retained its position in urban areas of

227 

Karachi and Hyderabad joining Sindh Government initially but soon both Parties 
fell apart. Pakistan Tehrik e Insaaf (PTI) formed government is KPK with support 
from Jamat e Islami. In Balochistan the nationalist parties formed the government 
with Dr Abdul Malik as Chief Minister, to be replaced after two and a half years by 
a PML (N) man according to an agreement between the concerned parties.   
Sit-in (Dharna) at Islamabad 
Simmering discontent against the rigged elections surfaced in a massive agitation 
organized by Imran Khan’s Party in the form of sit-in (Dharna) opposite 
Parliament building in Islamabad that lasted for over four months during summers 
of 2014. The sit in was joined by Dr Tahir ul Qadri with his followers. Dr Qadri, a 
religious scholar based in Canada gave a strong call for change outlining his 
programme that addresses some basic issues and need of restructuring the 
present administrative and judicial systems. Before he arrived in Pakistan from 
Canada, Just a few weeks before sit- in at Islamabad, Punjab Police opened fire on 
his unarmed followers outside his house in Model Town Lahore killing about 
fourteen persons including a pregnant woman and injuring about eighty people. 
This was done in broad day light, the event covered by the TV channels, senior 
police officers present on the scene and embracing a character called ‘Gullu But’ 
who with a stick undertook the operation of breaking cars windscreens and 
damaging the vehicles parked outside Dr Qadri’s home. The sit-in ended when 
terrorists attack in Peshawar caused death to about one hundred and fifty staff 
and students forcing the county’s political leadership to get together to deal with 
the terrorists menace in earnest.   
Imran Khan, due to his charisma and appeal to the masses is a man on the 
country’s political scene who has the potential to lead our nation back to path of 
progress and stability if he understands his limitations and can correct course. He 
has some very able persons from different fields ready to work with him. He 
needs to organize his party making best use of available assets. His success would 
lie in taking bold decisions on some fundamental issues like restructuring judicial 
system, delegating power, resources and responsibilities to the local 
governments, taking up question of replacing present unequal provinces with 
smaller almost equal size administrative units, integrating tribal areas into

228 

mainstream, water resources management plans, harnessing hydro power 
potential for affordable energy etc. 
So far, Imran Khan does not have a clear program and implementing 
methodologies. Despite his glitzy antics he has failed to convert his massive public 
support into electoral strength. He has to reinvent himself. He should exploit his 
strength in giving vision and motivating people, leaving implementation to a 
dedicated team. If he continues to behave like a celebrity and does not undertake 
serious work on organization of the party and its programme, he will be massive 
failure, a tragic end of hopes of so many people who want him to succeed. 
At the Brink 
Continuous rule by corrupt rulers have brought our resource rich country to a 
state where bulk of its population is living below poverty line. The country has 
been almost paralysed due to extreme shortage of electricity created due to 
policies adopted during last so many years. Planning a wrong energy mix by 
Benazir Bhutto’s government put our country on wrong path in meeting its 
energy needs. Her government signed fourteen agreements in one go during her 
second tenure for installation of independent power projects (IPPs) based on 
imported furnace oil and natural gas. The terms of these agreements were most 
detrimental to Pakistan’s interests. Whereas one unit of electricity was being 
produced by our Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA) from hydro 
sources at the rate of less than one rupee, the agreements with private 
companies were made at the rates going up to fifteen rupees per unit. Other 
terms like even if the project did not produce electricity, government was to make 
payments for a certain generation capacity of the plant. Thus IPPs had no 
compulsion to generate electricity as they would get state funds even without it. 
Although overall installed capacity for generating electricity was more than needs, 
shortage of electricity was created by keeping a good part of the IPP plants idle 
putting the public to extreme hardship. The excuse of shortage was used to make 
fresh deals. The sharply increased cost of available energy severely reduced 
industrial production making it uncompetitive in the international markets 
because of increased cost of production, forcing most of the industries to close 
down resulting in large scale unemployment.

229 

Developing hydro power by effective management of water resources that had 
multiple benefits like controlling floods, bringing more lands under irrigation 
system particularly deserts has great potential in providing cheap electricity. But 
this aspect was completely ignored politicizing projects like Kalabagh Dam that 
was easiest and cheapest to build and had been planned some decades earlier.  
Similarly utilising indigenous coal resources to produce energy was also 
completely disregarded. Domestic oil and gas exploration was stalled, some areas 
in Balochistan made unsafe for working of exploration companies. Substantial 
quantities of natural gas available in the existing fields were also not added into 
the system. All this was in the interest of international oil cartels and the 
government’s new plans for making agreements like the infamous Rental Power 
Projects, importing liquefied gas from abroad and other such ventures, making 
deals that provided hefty commissions easily stashed away in foreign banks.  
In the last days of Zardari government gas pipeline agreement with Iran was 
signed at much higher rates. India opted out of the project mainly because of 
higher price of gas being demanded. Unless these rates are reduced, our future 
domestic production of gas will also not balance the gas rates. It seems a repeat 
of the IPPs agreements signed by Peoples Party governments which they made 
some decades earlier. 
Enormous amounts of loans were taken from international financial institutions 
as well as domestic banking sector during these five years, more than 
accumulated amount taken during the past. There is nothing on ground to show 
where these huge funds have been spent. It appears that these are paper 
transactions to put Pakistan into permanent slavery. The country is spending 
almost half of its annual budget in paying interest to these institutions. Global 
Capitalist’s interference and bankruptcy of our political class is manifest in 
throwing up convicted persons to rule our country as stated earlier.

230 

11 Sep 2001 and its Aftermath 
On the morning of September 11, 2001, the world saw an awfully bizarre scene 
on their TV screens. Two commercial airliners were shown colliding with the 
upper portion of two tall building in Manhattan, New York and the buildings 
falling down; the whole process being covered by cameras. Witnessing the 
pattern of collapse, it seemed to be a clear case of controlled demolition of those 
buildings. Another less tall building adjacent to the two towers also collapsed 
after few hours without any external force being applied which is clear indication 
that these buildings had been prepared for controlled demolition by placing 
explosives at appropriate points.  There was news of four large passenger aircraft 
having been being hijacked, two of those used for attacks on these buildings 
known as Twin Towers and other two for attack/collision with Pentagon and the 
White House. The Pentagon building was shown being attacked. The attacks were 
blamed to have been carried out by hitherto unknown organization ‘Al Qaida’ led 
by Osama bin Laden, a wealthy Arab living in Afghanistan. There were number of 
questions on the version being given by the Bush Administration and it looked like 
inside job a ‘false flag’ operation, making an excuse to go for control of energy 
resources of the Central Asia and Middle East as it transpired later. 
This incident commonly known as 9/11 resulted in US occupation of Afghanistan 
followed by her occupation of Iraq. The set of rulers in the US at that time were 
led by Mr. George W Bush as President and Mr. Dick Cheney as Vice President. 
They were working for the interests of Wall Street establishment, keen to have 
control of energy resources of the Middle East, particularly Central Asian region 
which had recently come out of the Russian control. Earlier the elder Bush, father 
of George Bush in his four year term as US President had brought US forces in 
Middle East by initiating the Gulf War. To start this war services of Iraqi president, 
Mr. Saddam Husain were used. This man had earlier been used against Iran when 
he ordered Iraqi forces to invade Iran starting a prolonged war between the two 
countries causing large number of deaths on both sides. The Iranians ultimately 
threw out the Iraqis from their territories at great cost. The purpose of checking 
possible spread of influence of the Iranian revolution was successfully achieved.

