81 

tank movement. An interesting conversation in this regard took place between CO 
25 Punjab, Lieutenant Colonel Muhammad Hussain, SJ (called ‘Dora” because he 
was a little hard of hearing) and Major Abdul Haq Mirza, Brigade Major (BM) 23 
Bde. As the Indians, on declaration of war in December started their move from 
the border advancing into area occupied by 25 Punjab, the CO reported to 
Brigade on wireless net that Indian tanks were moving towards his positions. The 
BM responded that it could not be tanks because the area was not suitable for 
tank movement. After some argument over wireless net, the CO concluded 
conversation saying that,  
“OK may be those are buffalos but they seem to be carrying gun barrels 
on their back”.10 
We in our unit were following flexible drill on employment of these weapons. 
Where required, and mostly this was the case, we had formed composite 
platoons, each platoon having all the three weapons. Each infantry division had 
nine infantry battalions and one R & S Battalion. The R&S unit was authorised 
about 150 vehicles, mostly jeeps as major weapons were all jeep mounted. I, in 
my company was authorised to have 35 vehicles.  But in East Pakistan the unit 
operated as normal infantry battalion carrying out operations at the initial stage 
of reaching the borders on foot, the vehicles reaching the unit much later. After 
that it was given vast areas of responsibility during the counter insurgency phase 
which needed constant vigil, by establishing posts and foot patrolling. 
As my company was detached to 205 Brigade in first week of August, an anti tank 
platoon under command Captain Mian Bux Baloch was also detached to Comilla 
Brigade commanded by the Brigadier Saadullah, a commander reputed for 
courage and competence. 34 Punjab was left with less than three companies of its 
own and with an additional company from 8 Baluch at Pachagarh which was later 
replaced by a company from 48 Punjab. 


10Spoken in Punjabi, (Hala ay Majhee  hosan par lagna’e utte baerralan ladian hoian ne) this sentence 
gives a real taste of satire it contains.

82 

Battle in Thakurgaon Sector 
The happenings in Thakurgaon Sector after I had left in first week of August are 
described from the information gathered initially from Major Sajid Jalal Mazari, 48 
Field Regiment, Artillery, Battery Commander with the unit who came to 
Prisoners of War (POW) Camp Number 25 at Ramgarh and later from the unit 
officers after repatriation. 
The Indians, a task force of about a divisional strength, 1971 Mountain Brigade 
Group, having four regular infantry battalions i.e.12 Rajputana Rifles, 21 Rajputs, 
12 Garhwal Rifles and 7 Maraths, with additional force placed under command for 
operations comprising five battalions of the Border Security Force, one battalion 
of Territorial Army,an armour squadron, a mountain regiment, two field 
companies of engineers, and seven companies of Mukti Fauj  was commanded by 
Brigadier (later Lieutenant General) Pran Nath Kathpalia who after the war, 
expanded his ‘after mission report’ into a book titled “Mission with a Difference”. 
The objective of Indian task force was to capture Dinajpur operating on axis 
Pachagargh- Thakurgaon- Dinajpur. A very detailed account by him on the 
progress of his operations opposed by a small force, less than three companies of 
34 Punjab, a company of 48 Punjab located at Pachagargh placed under command 
34 Punjab with artillery support by ‘P’ Battery of 48 Field Regiment Artillery (just 
four guns instead of normal six guns that a Battery is supposed to have) is a very 
interesting study about performance of our unit during war. 
The Indians started their operation on 21/22 November by putting attack by an 
infantry battalion on Amar Khana; the border outpost located about sixteen 
kilometers north of Pachagarh. This post, manned by about fifteen persons was 
vacated about a month before start of Indian offensive due to paucity of troops. 
Capture of that unoccupied post by using an infantry battalion was celebrated as 
great victory as narrated by the Indian force commander in his book. After 
savouring the fruits of victory for some days and gaining some much needed 
confidence, the next move against occupied positions at Pachagarh came on 26 
November.

83 

Pachagarh, a town just about three kilometers from Indian border towards its 
west was held by a company of 48 Punjab commanded by Major Khurshid (name 
sake of our Bravo Company Commander, Khurshid Mallal) with Captain Lal Khan 
as his Company officer. This Company had recently replaced 8 Baluch Company 
(Captain Akbar Niazi) deployed at Pachagarh earlier under command 34 Punjab. 
The Indians after capture of unoccupied Amarkhana post took about five days to 
approach Pachagargh positions. Their attack came from three directions; using 
one battalion from north astride Amar Khan-Pachagarh Road, the other battalion 
from North West and the third battalion to encircle the positions from the south. 
An intense battle ensued, denying the Indian to overcome resistance and capture 
our positions. The battle raged for two days. ‘P’ Battery, 48 Field regiment 
commanded by Major Sajid Jalal Mazari with four guns brought very effective fire 
at critical times using High Explosive Air Burst ammunition, that burst at thirty 
feet above ground with devastative effect on attacking troops who were in the 
open. Here Captain Mansoor as observer who called for fire and Lieutenant 
Muhammad Hanif (retired as Colonel) as gun position officer played crucial role in 
preventing a large force, three Indian infantry battalions supported by tanks to 
overcome position of just one of our company.  The guns had been deployed very 
close to our defensive position and at one stage Lieutenant Hanif in great 
excitement was preparing his guns for direct fire on Indian tank closing in on his 
gun position. The Indian tanks however stopped a few hundred yards away from 
his position out of sight masked by sugarcane field, not giving Hanif the chance to 
take on the tanks with direct fire from his guns.  
The Indian move from west made holding Pachagarh untenable. The positions 
were almost surrounded when Colonel Amir reaching the site and assessing 
situation ordered Major Khurshid, the Company Commander to extricate from the 
positions, supervising the withdrawal operation himself. This was on night 27/28 
November. The company was ordered to rejoin its unit 48 Punjab in 
Khansama/Saidpur sector. 
To counter Indian move from Pachagarh towards Thakurgaon, 34 Punjab was now 
left with less than three companies supported by ‘P’ Battery, 48 Field Regiment. 
Confronted with seemingly impossible task, the unit deployed its small force with

84 

great skill to delay the Indian advance before they could contact Thakurgaon; the 
town which had been prepared as strong point and was to be occupied after 
fighting the delaying battles. 
After clearing Pachagarh, the Indians resumed their advance on Pachagargh-
Boda-Thakurgaon-Dinajpur axis served by a good road. Their move was resisted 
by skillful deployment of vastly outnumbered troops. Confronting the advancing 
Indians was a very small force that could not have delayed them for more than 48 
to 72 hours. However from Pachagarh, the Indians took almost six days to cover a 
distance of about thirty kilometers, mostly empty spaces to contact our main 
defensive position at Thakurgaon on 2 December 1971.  
The delaying battle between Pachagarh to Boda, a distance of about fifteen 
kilometers astride the road was fought by ‘D’ Company commanded by Major 
Nisar Hussain Bukhari with Lieutenant Qaswar Naseer as one of his platoon 
commanders. At Boda ‘A’ Company with some EPCAF elements commanded by 
Major M Saeed Azam Khan was deployed in the role of Advance Position. Both 
these companies fought to delay the Indians for about four days before they 
could move forward from Boda towards Thakurgaon a distance of about sixteen 
kilometers.  
Between Boda and Thakurgaon, Captain Jamil from ‘B’ Company with about fifty 
men was tasked by the CO to delay the Indians while ‘A’ and ‘D’ companies were 
falling back to occupy Thakurgaon positions. As narrated by Captain (later 
Lieutenant Colonel) Muhammad Jamil, he deployed his group accordingly. During 
night he saw an enemy patrol comprising about a dozen men approaching 
towards his position on a bridge on main road. Instead of engaging that patrol, 
Jamil surreptitiously left his position on the bridge for the enemy probing men to 
see that the bridge was unoccupied. When next morning the enemy started 
advancing astride road with confidence that the place was unoccupied, all hell 
was let loose on them with available weapons fired from close range for 
maximum effect causing them large casualties, making them to recoil, thus 
delaying their move to Thakurgaon.  Such actions and tactics used by the officers 
and men enabled them to accomplish their tasks with remarkable success.

85 

The town of Thakurgaon had been converted into a strong point by laying 
minefields and creating other obstacles. Indians took so much time to contact 
Thakurgaon positions speaks volumes about stiff resistance skillfully offered by 34 
Punjab. Considering the size of Indian force, it was remarkable achievement made 
possible by the indomitable will of the officers and men using innovative tactics 
with their jeep mounted weapons. Adroit use of weapons, delaying tactics and 
our inherent mobility provided the capability to occupy, adjust and readjust 
positions with considerable ease and was fully exploited by daring officers and 
men who accomplished a seemingly impossible task of resisting advance of such a 
large Indian force for so long. 
These troops after fighting delaying battles fell back to rejoin the main defensive 
positions at Thakurgaon which the Indians contacted by 2 December 1971. ‘P’ 
Battery, 48 Field Regiment, by frequent redeployments of gun positions of its four 
guns played crucial role by bringing effective fire to force delay on the advancing 
enemy.  
As the war was formally declared by Pakistan on 3 December 1971, the CO was 
told to vacate Thakurgaon and take up position on River Karatoya some distance 
south of Birganj, a town located about thirty five kilometers south of Thakurgaon. 
The message was passed by the Brigade Major, Abdul Haq Mirza on 3 December 
in the late evening. Our CO tried to contest and argue that he had not seen the 
new position and that his defenses at Thakurgaon were ready. But he was told 
that the General Officer Commanding (GOC) had ordered this move and it had to 
be complied immediately. The Brigade Commander was not available, confusion 
prevailing because of change of command, Brigadiers Ansari and Shafi both being 
present in the Brigade area. This order was a complete surprise as CO or any one 
from the unit had not seen the position because no such contingency had been 
planned. All effort was to convert Thakurgaon town into a strong point by laying 
minefield and creating other obstacles. Withdrawal from Thakurgaon became a 
controversial decision and the CO had to do some explaining after repatriation to 
clear his position. After repatriation from India, I came across late Abdul Haq 
Mirza and asked him about his passing on that withdrawal message. He told me 
that as war was declared on 3 December, the GOC Major General Nazar Hussain

86 

Shah told him to convey directly to CO 34 Punjab to take up position on Karatoya 
River south of Birganj. As he was taking time to encode the message using slidex 
keys, the GOC was getting impatient. Since both of them belonged to same area, 
District Chakwal, General Nazar told Major Mirza in typical Chakwali dialect 
something like,  
‘Mirzia unj ta toon Bara efficient ban Na ain, hun wela aaya ae tan teri 
khoti khub gai ay'.11 
Abdul Haq Mirza was an enthusiastic man whose cheerfulness was infectious. He 
radiated vitality affecting all those around him. Alas, he, a man of great potential 
got wasted away retiring soon after repatriation in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel, 
a casualty of adverse circumstances. 
With commendable organisational acumen, unit broke contact with enemy to 
complete the move during night 3/4 December 1971. By morning of 4 December 
the unit was busy in preparing defensive positions astride bridge on River 
Karatoya south of Birganj. All its ammunition and essential stores had been taken 
out during the night due to meticulous work of our Quartermaster, Captain Shafiq 
Sarwar Malik, an officer of outstanding abilities. On reaching the new position 
south of Birganj it was realised that Thakurgaon thermal power station had not 
been disabled before withdrawal. Captain Zahid Nawaz Janjua was told to go back 
and disable the power station. Despite presence of the Indians in Thakurgaon, 
Captain Zahid with his party completed the assigned mission and rejoined unit 
when fighting at the new position was going on. 
The Indians started their move southwards from Thakurgaon and made contact 
with our small detachments placed successively astride the main road to delay 
their advance These detachments delayed the Indians for about two days before 
the Indians contacted our new position by 6 December. The Indians started their 
attacks while the unit was still working to develop the defensive positions. Next 
three days tested the mettle of 34 Punjabis in fighting from a hastily prepared 
position against a divisional size enemy force under Brigadier Kathpalia. The 

11Translation would be (You claim to be very efficient but in a time of crisis you seem to have bogged 
down in a quagmire).

87 

Indians at one point reached our trenches astride the bridge. This position was 
held by a platoon led by Second Lieutenant Ghulam Abbas, Bravo Company 
commanded by Major Khurshid Mallal. The attack was beaten back with heavy 
losses to 7 Marhatta. Since their wireless transmissions could be monitored, the 
CO of 7 Marhatta was being exhorted by his force commander to exert more 
pressure to capture the bridge with promise of a Vir Chakkar of high order. The 
CO was heard saying that his unit had been butchered and he was not in a 
position to do any more fighting.  
At one stage the situation became so precarious that our CO, Colonel Amir had to 
get hold of washer men, barbers and sanitary workers to plug a gap. All these 
people had been given arms and had been trained to fight. In fact barber 
contractor Khuda Bakhsh, affectionately called ‘Bakhshoo Nai’, was quite trigger 
happy and a problem to control. After three days of intense fighting, the Indian 
force commander asked for more troops to proceed further towards his objective 
of reaching Dinajpur. He was told to abandon the effort on this axis and was 
redirected to join forces operating towards Khansama /Saidpur. Thus 34 Punjab 
stayed in the positions they had occupied on night 3/4 December 1971 till 
ceasefire was announced on 16 December. Captain Shafiq Sarwar Malik had saved 
some photographs which he gave to the unit on re-raising in 1975. These pictures 
included four Indian tanks destroyed in front of the unit’s positions. 
After announcement of ceasefire when ordered to hand over weapons, the unit 
destroyed its major weapons like recoilless rifles and equipment including 
vehicles to avoid these being handed over to Indians.  
Brigadier Kathpalia, while giving details of troops opposing him makes a very 
unusual mistake. May be he does it deliberately to show that he was confronted 
to overcome a large force. While listing the troops opposing him he gives 48 
Punjab to protect areas Thakurgaon, Pachagargh and 85 Punjab (Reconnaissance 
and support battalion) to deny areas Boda, Thakurgaon and Nilphamari. In actual 
fact, our troops opposing Kathpalia’s task force as described above were; a 
company of 48 Punjab at Pachagarh, which was withdrawn when being encircled 
on night 27/28 November. This company had given very tough fight for forty eight 
hour to the Indians attacking Pachagarh with three units from different directions.

88 

The company after withdrawal from Pachagarh rejoined its own unit, 48 Punjab 
deployed in Khansama/Saidpur area in the south east of Thakurgaon.South of 
Pachagarh, 34 Punjab was left with its A Company, B Company (less its anti tank 
platoon) and D company. There was no unit by the designation of 85 Punjab on 
the Order of Battle (ORBAT) of Pakistan Army till then. 
The officers and men of 34 Punjab were remarkable people. Although the 
Battalion performed assigned tasks with outstanding success, overall result of the 
conflict washed away all good deeds. The officers were a valiant lot of young 
leaders who, led by wise and inspiring COs performed their role with 
extraordinary dedication, motivation, unbounded courage and selflessness. With 
fond memories of respect and honour, I have always felt privileged to be part of 
that lot (List of officers with the unit is given at annex A) 
Looking back at performance of the Battalion in three distinct phases of the 
conflict; 
 During initial phase of clearing operations, 34 Punjab, starting its march 
from Dacca on 11 April 1971 carried out its assigned tasks in areas 
Narsinghdi, Bhairab Bazaar, Ashuganj, Kishorganj, Mymensingh, and 
Nitrakona, reaching Durgapur on borders with the State of Meghalaya in 
India. Then crossing over River Brahmaputra/Jumna to Rangpur, the unit 
cleared area Nageshwari, Bhurangamari from entrenched rebels up to the 
borders with the State of Assam in India, finally reaching Thakurgaon – 
Pachagarh in the extreme north western corner of the country bordering 
the State of West Bengal in India by Jun 71. A perusal of Bangladesh map 
will show that this was a very long journey and an enormous 
undertaking.The unit covered largest distances marching through a good 
part of the country, overcoming opposition en route and clearing areas up 
to the borders a feat unmatched by any other unit in that phase of 
operations.  
 In the next phase of restoring normalcy, the unit was responsible for a very 
vast area, restoring peace and normal living conditions in Thakurgaon sub 
division of Dinajpur district bordering the State of West Bengal in India with 
one of its companies in Panjbibi area (District Bogra) under 205 Brigade and

89 

one anti tank platoon detached to 27 Brigade (Brigadier Saadullah) in area 
Brahmanbaria in the east. The unit did not allow rebels to establish 
sanctuaries in their area of responsibility. 
 During the war as Indians started invasion from different directions, 34 
Punjab was only unit in the whole of East Pakistan which could not be 
dislodged by Indians from its hastily prepared defensive position south of 
Birganj. These positions were defended against heavy attacks by about a 
division size task force commanded by Brigadier (later Lieutenant General) 
P N Kathpalia till ceasefire was ordered on 16 December 1971. The task 
force could not pursue their further move towards its objective Dinajpur.  
Having suffered heavy casualties this Indian force was ordered to shift 
direction to join another force directed against Khansama/Saidpur.  
 In Hilli sector, my Company, detached from the unit in August 71 fought 
intense battles in Hilli-Panjbibi sector as narrated in detail in following 
chapter. 
 The Anti Tank Platoon detached to 27 Brigade fought a rearguard action to 
facilitate the Brigade’s withdrawal west of Meghna River. In this action the 
Platoon’s effective fire on Indian tanks pursuing the Brigade made them 
recoil, allowing the Brigade to cross Meghna River Bridge at Ashuganj-
Bhairab Bazar unhindered. Brigadier Saadullah on repatriation made special 
efforts to find Havildar Sharif and got him gallantry reward for that action 
which the Brigadier had witnessed.

90 


The unit, having fought battles over very vast areas in different sectors suffered 
over eighty casualties, sixteen dead and sixty five wounded. Three officers 
embraced ‘SHAHADAT’; Second Lieutenant Abdul Ghafoor on 11 April, first day of 
starting our move towards east from Dacca, Lieutenant Abdul Waheed by mortar 
fire from across the Indian border in October 1971 and Lieutenant Mohammad 
Saeed Tariq, the last person from unit to make the ultimate sacrifice on 13 
December 1971.  Our first ‘SHAHEED’ on start of operations and the last one to 
lay down his life were officers leading their men from front, a tradition Pakistan 
Army is carrying on.

