281 

corruption and embezzlement of State funds to recover their money spent and a 
lot more. To solve this issue, the expenditure on modest election campaigns 
should be borne by the political parties through their funds and not the 
individuals contesting election. Main strength of campaign should be the 
manifesto/program of the party fielding the candidates. Guidelines by Election 
Commission should be provided to restrict the expenditure and a strict check to 
ensure implementation. The same criteria should apply to elections for the 
National parliament and provincial assemblies (till present provinces are replaced 
with smaller provinces that will not have assemblies).  
Community Development 
Community development (CD) is a broad term applied to a structured 
intervention that gives communities greater control over the conditions that 
affect their lives. Exhaustive literature is available on the practices, experiences 
and results of community development efforts all over the world since last about 
two hundred years.In Pakistan a successful model of community development is 
available in the form of Agha Khan Rural Support Programme (AKRSP) in Gilgit-
Baltistan area. Efforts by the Government to replicate that model have not 
succeeded mainly due to lack of commitment and other inadequacies. 
Without going into the details of this very vast subject, suggested methodology to 
implement community development projects is as follows: 
 Community development should be the main responsibility of the local 
governments to be planned and supervised at the union council level.  
 The development programmes should cover rural areas as urban areas are 
being adequately managed through the civic bodies. 
 Village is taken as unit for community development programme.  
 The programme should cover essential aspects of the community needs like 
sustainable livelihoods, health, education,water and sanitation etc. 
 A motivator/CD professional at each union council equipped with the 
background knowledge and leadership capacity is tasked to initiate the

282 

process. Local Government Ordinance 2001 provides for such appointment 
at the Union Council level. 
 The CD professional arranges meetings of the villagers to discuss their 
needs. Lot of motivation and skill will be needed to make this first step a 
success considering the quality of our human capital mired in ignorance, 
jealousy and feuds. Once this first step meets success further process will 
become gradually easier.  
 The villagers are asked to discuss their needs and suggest solutions/plans 
and financial estimates to meet the needs. 
 The plans should cover the arrangement of funds as to how much will be 
contributed by the community and how much funds can be arranged from 
external sources.  
 Each household contributes an amount according to its capacity to 
undertake the project. This gives the community sense of ownership of the 
project and will contribute to its sustainability. 
 Based on the discussions the plans for different projects are finalised 
starting with smaller, easier to accomplish and less expensive projects. 
 Implementation of the projects is undertaken by the community through 
local contractors in a transparent manner to eliminate any chance of 
financial irregularity. 
 The village management committee/ citizen community boards (CCBs) are 
entrusted with the responsibility for maintenance and sustainability of the 
project. 
 The NGOs interested to work in the area should coordinate their activity 
through the respective Union Councils to integrate their work towards 
overall objectives of the development effort.  
To conclude, the responsibility to ensure that essential needs of the population 
like food, shelter, health, education, security and provision of justice are being

283 

met should be the responsibly of the local governments. Union Council should be 
hub of all development activity, overall coordination being done at the District 
governments’ level.

284 

Provision of Justice 
The prevalent system has completely failed to provide justice to the people of 
Pakistan. Even in the present wave of terrorism, the terrorists who kill dozens of 
people in broad day light have not been punished because the system is criminal 
friendly, contributing to protect criminals resulting in increase of all kinds of 
crime.  The process starts when a person who commits crime hires the services of 
a lawyer that is mandatory. The first advice that a criminal gets from the lawyer is 
to deny having committed the crime. The lawyer then works to exploit loop holes 
in the system, gets the process delayed, gets the witnesses compromised and 
finds faults in evidence etc. Fully knowing that his client has committed a crime 
even like murder, the lawyer tries to protect his client from being punished. The 
same lawyer in due course becomes the Judge and reaches to the highest 
echelons of judiciary, his whole professional life spent in falsehood and protecting 
criminals for a fee. The lawyers charge their fees going into millions depending on 
the nature of the cases and the clients, maximum money extracted from mega 
fraud cases, all to protect the criminals, thus promoting crime. The judges with 
such background are also prone to be bought to get favourable decisions. 
On the other side, the victims of crimes are subjected to multiple blows.If 
someone is murdered his traumatised family is required to approach the police to 
lodge a report. If they succeed in lodging a correct First Information Report (FIR) 
which is first obstacle to be crossed by paying hefty bribes to the local Police, the 
victim’s family is subjected to police inquiry. It is up to police to prepare the case 
for trial in the courts whether they do it right or leave lacunas to be exploited 
later. When this stage is reached the aggrieved party is required to find a suitable 
lawyer to plead the case before the judge. The judge is not concerned with 
provision of justice. He is only concerned with the evidence presented to him. 
This evidence mostly is not there because no one wants to earn enmity of 
criminals.  
All this process requires lot of money which the aggrieved parties cannot afford. 
The justice or injustice has virtually to be bought. Thus the system has completely 
failed to provide justice to victims of crimes and is in urgent need to be 
restructured and replaced.

285 

This system must be restructured as suggested in the following lines: 
Lower Courts 
 High powered judges are appointed at the Union Councils in rural areas and 
a cluster of Wards in urban areas. These judges, selected for character, 
integrity, courage and highly paid by the State should be empowered to 
decide the cases of all crimes including serious crimes like murder.  
 They should be assisted by specially trained investigation team(s) placed 
under them for carrying out on the spot investigation. 
 When a crime occurs in the area, it should be promptly reported by the 
local councilorto the Judge’soffice that should remain open twenty four 
hours. Failing to report an incident within specified time by councilor 
should be crime liable to punishment. 
 The judge on getting the information should send his investigation team to 
crime scene to record on the spot evidence. He may also visit the area if he 
considers it necessary. 
 The investigation teams should prepare a summary of evidence based on 
which the trial should commence without wasting time. During trial,a 
lawyer appointed and paid by the State should assist the judge on legal 
points if required. Trial must conclude within days not even weeks.   
 Local police, tasked to assist the Judge is used to apprehend the criminals. 
They do not have any role in investigations. 
 For the cases relating to property and financial transactions, the judge 
should form tribunals to decide these cases promptly. Members of 
tribunals should paid honorarium from the State funds. 
 The judge should be made responsible to provide justice, not dispose of 
cases acquitting criminals for lack of evidence, benefits of doubts and other 
technical excuses. The victims should not be made to buy justice, a double

286 

tragedy, and virtually no justice despite an elaborate infrastructure 
provided by the State. 
 There is need to introduce punishments specifically given in the Holy Quran 
for the serious crimes like murder. This step will drastically reduce crime 
from the society. 
Tiers of Judiciary 
 The tiers of judiciary should be reduced to make the system effective. A 
senior judge with maximum powers to award punishments including death 
penalty is provided at the scale of one for each union council/equivalent in 
urban areas as suggested above. Basically he is the person to ensure that 
justice is provided to victims of crimes and aggrieved parties. Appeals 
against his decisions should be heard at one step above only i.e. at the 
district level. Appeals for pardon in death penalty should be decided by 
provincial governors and not the President of Pakistan. 
 At the provinces level,the High Courts should take up cases of white collar 
crimes and cases offinancial corruption that adversely impactefficient 
functioning of the State.  
 At the Centre, the Supreme Court should hear appeals against the High 
Court’s decisions and take up matters related to constitutional 
interpretations if required. The Supreme Judicial Council responsible to the 
Head of State should provide guidance in functioning of the judicial system.  
Under the revised system being suggested above, the present lot of lawyers will 
find themselves out of the job of earning their livelihood through protecting 
criminals and promoting crime. Some of them, selected on merit, can get adjusted 
in the new system as judges and as assistants to the courts, being paid by the 
State. Rest of them must find other occupations that gives them honest living.

287 

OUTLINE OF A NEW ORDER 
As brought out in the preceding chapters, Pakistan’s geo-strategic location and its 
intrinsic strength in manpower and resources brought it under focus of Global 
Capitalist Establishment.After the two World Wars in first half of twentieth 
century, the imperialist power’s control over different parts of the world has been 
replaced by a small group; call them ‘Zionists’ or any name who have turned the 
world into ‘global village’ exploiting global resources through their puppets placed 
to rule developing countries. I would refer to this group as Global Capitalist 
Establishment (GCE).  They control money supply through banks like US Federal 
Reserve, World Bank, International Monitory Fund, Asian Development Bank etc. 
Based in New York (Wall Street)-London (City District) they conduct their affairs 
through US and British Governments and their intelligence agencies. 
The Global Capitalists gained control over Pakistan’s decision making process, 
using it as pawn on chessboard of their global games. First bolstered to contain 
communist threat, then cut to size for easier management, used in dismantling 
USSR and then a battle ground in mopping up operations against ‘Jihadi’ 
networks, the country has been adversely affected in catering to global powers 
interests.   Because of external manipulations and serious internal imbalances 
aggravated by attitude of ruling classes the country continues to be a fragile State 
threatened by further fragmentation and dismemberment.  
Before suggesting a course of action to neutralise threats and recover from the 
spin, a brief recount of Pakistan’s journey from the perspective of a common 
citizen who was part of this voyage would be in order;  
 Although Pakistan had joined western camp in the post-World War II 
balance of power arrangements, the GCE could not develop desired clout 
with Prime Minister Liaqat Ali Khan who was murdered. Frequent change of 
rulers after him got Pakistan into joining formal pacts like SEATO in 1954 
and Baghdad Pact (re-designated as CENTO) in 1955 against perceived 
communist threat from China and USSR. 
 Overcoming initial hiccups, Pakistan made unprecedented overall progress 
in a few years under Ayub Khan’s rule. The country and its people enjoyed

288 

great prestige in the world. Ours was a tolerant and liberal society, high on 
the scale of peace, satisfaction and happiness in life. 
 As President Ayub Khan wanted global capitalists to remain ‘FRIENDS’ and 
‘NOT become MASTERS’, (his autobiography is titled FRIENDS, NOT 
MASTERS) devilish plans were unfurled to remove him. Mr Z A Bhutto, the 
most effective operative of global powers was launched to remove Ayub 
Khan’s government by getting the country into armed conflict with five 
time’s larger India in 1965. Ambitious to rule a country irrespective of its 
size, Bhutto in league with Sheikh Mujib got the country dismembered with 
help from India under overall direction of GCE. General Yahya Khan, in 
perpetual inebriated state as President facilitated Bhutto’s mission. Cut to 
size for easier manipulation, the country was used for next phase of the 
global game.  
 In their quest to impose capitalist system of economy in the entire world, 
the GCE dismantled Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) by getting 
them involved in Afghanistan. As a preparatory move Z A Bhutto was 
disposed of through General Zia ul Haq.  Pakistan’s tribal region was used as 
launching pad for resistance against USSR. Mullah Zia ul Haq served them 
well to create a ‘Jihadi’ force collecting adventurous young men of different 
nationalities. 
 After successful completion of their mission, the GCE abandoned 
Afghanistan. After a decade they came back with US and NATO forces into 
their ‘Af-Pak’ theatre of operations when Afghans under Mullah Omar 
became impediment in their plans to lay oil and gas pipelines through 
Afghanistan. Controlled demolition of Twin Towers in New York on 
September 11, 2001 was made an excuse to occupy the region. In the same 
thrust, Iraq was invaded shortly afterwards to get control of its oil 
resources using false accusation that the country had weapons of mass 
destruction. 
 Before  physical occupation of Afghanistan, General Musharraf, a ‘liberal’ 
was brought in power to dismantle Jihadi networks created under Zia ul 
Haq regime, some of whom had got settled in our tribal areas. As a side kick 
General Musharraf was ‘inspired’ to launch Kargil Operation without the

289 

Government or even the senior commanders in the Army knowing about it. 
This was to help India in recovering from a grave political crisis, a 
preparatory move by western powers before launching operations to 
occupy Afghanistan. A destabilised India was then failing to form a 
government at the Centre after repeated elections. External threat blown 
out of proportion helped India to manage internal rifts. Pakistan’s position 
as responsible nuclear state got severely damaged. It became easier to 
manipulate Pakistan. 
 Musharraf was shown the door when no longer required. He was replaced 
by Zardari-Gilani duo, one convicted by Swiss courts for money laundering 
and the other having spent a few years in jail for his wrongdoings. Gilani’s 
most unexpected appointment as Prime Minister was announced from the 
premises of US Embassy in Islamabad. These imposed rulers put Pakistan 
into deep pit of loans that requires the largest chunk of Pakistan’s annual 
budget in debit servicing. The amounts of loans taken by Zardari 
Government from Global Banking octopus, exceeded the amount of loans 
accumulated in all the previous years, thus placing Pakistan’s economy in 
oxygen tent. The loans seem mere paper transactions because there is 
nothing on ground in the form of development projects where these huge 
amounts could have been spent.  
 GCE has complete control of decision making process in Pakistan through 
their operatives placed at decision making levels. The present rulers were 
imposed through massive rigging in May 2013 elections. Mr. Najam Sethi, 
as caretaker Chief Minister of Punjab took care of election results as 
desired with help from Iftikhar Chawhdhri led judiciary that provided 
returning officers for these elections. Najam Sethi has a history. In one of 
the TV interviews General Aslam Beg an ex-Army Chief came out with the 
information that when he was commanding a Brigade in Balochistan during 
early nineteen seventies, Najam Sethi who came to Pakistan in 1963 from 
India was actively involved with Baloch insurgents fighting against Pakistan 
Army.  
 Mr Ishaq Dar who admitted in the court of doing money laundering for 
Sharif family during the past has been placed as all important Finance

290 

Minister. Ishaq Dar is closely related to Nawaz Sharif, his son having 
married Nawaz Sharif’s daughter. In his first stroke within a month of taking 
over as Finance Minister, he doled out four hundred and eighty billion 
rupees to the gang owning Independent Power Projects (IPPs). This energy 
dealer’s gang helps the rulers to make enormous money in kickbacks from 
deals like Rental Power Projects and import of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) 
using the excuse of emergency measures to overcome energy shortages. In 
actual fact the installed capacity of power generation is more than our 
present requirement but since the owners get capacity charges for idle 
capacity, the plants are not producing electricity according to their full 
potential.  
 Energy shortage is deliberately created to make fresh deals for making 
money through kickbacks by rulers disregarding people’s miseries, damage 
to national economy,reduced industrial production and high cost of energy 
making the industrial products uncompetitive in international market.  
Weakening of State Institutions  
The State institutions, collectively called ‘Establishment’ are implementing tools 
of State policies decided by the Governments of the country. They are supposed 
to work according to the rules and regulations formulated by the State. While the 
governments keep changing, the State institutions, the ‘Establishment’ provide 
the stability and continuity in functioning of the State. An efficient and strong 
‘Establishment’ is essential for a State to survive.  
Pakistan inherited fairly competent 'establishment' trained in working for the 
British India. Major components of the Establishment were the Bureaucracy that 
implements policies formulated by the Governments, the Judiciary that ensures 
provision of justice to the society creating peaceful living conditions, the law 
enforcing agencies like police to maintain law and order and the armed forces to 
counter external threats.  
In our parliamentary system, the President is head of State. It is his job to ensure 
that ‘Establishment’ remains effective and functional. Unfortunately that has not 
happened in Pakistan. The parliamentary system adopted in ‘New’ Pakistan of Z A

