31 

divisions as a number of secessionist movements were active in different parts of 
India.  In the words Sir Winston Churchill, the  great British leader; 
 “India is a geographical term. It is no more a united nation than the 
equator”.2 
Mr. Churchill, as young subaltern had served in India, seeing much of the 
subcontinent. He took part in operations as part of Malakand Field Force against 
tribes in the areas now part of Pakistan. His observation is fully supported by 
recorded history because the subcontinent was never ruled from one power 
center. Hindustan was a collection of ‘Rajwaras’ (small states) during thousands of 
years of its history. The sixth king of great Mughal dynasty died struggling to 
conquer South India. Much before that, the mythical king Ashoka became 
Buddhist, renouncing conquest southwards after seeing enormous killing in the 
battle of Kalinga in present day Indian state of Orissa. The semblance of unity 
under British rule is deceptive because when they left India in 1947, there were 
five hundred and sixty two states of varying sizes apart from directly ruled parts 
and vast independent tribal regions in all parts of India. The states were 
independent in all respects except that they could not establish diplomatic 
relations with other nations of the world.  It was Mr. JawaharLal Nehru’s stature 
and leadership that started transformation of a heterogeneous, divisive, multi 
religious, multi ethnic India to one united country. That Pakistan helped India in 
transforming her from a geographical term into a strong country by timely 
interventions (in 1965 and 1999) to overcome their internal crises at the cost of 
being dismembered itself is a painful chapter of history as being explained in the 
narrative. 
The skirmishes on India-China border initiated by the Indians in 1962 were used 
to manage and subdue internal dissentions. At that time the main political party 
in southern India, the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), representing 
Dravidians ethnic population was openly demanding separation from New Delhi. 
A number of separatist movements were waging armed struggle in the eastern 
parts of India. An external threat, contrived and blown out of proportions helped 

2Speech at Royal Albert Hall, 18March 1931.

32 

Mr. Nehru to suppress internal discord. After his death, it would have been 
difficult for his successor to maintain unity, had Pakistan not initiated armed 
conflict with many times larger neighbor that turned the tide of history. 
The 1965 Indo-Pakistan War, Causes and Consequences 
After a few months of Mr. Nehru’s death, military forces of Pakistan and India got 
involved in border skirmishes in Rann of Kuch, a marshy area in the south near 
Arabian Sea, both sides accusing each other of starting the clashes in early 1965. 
Cease fire was arranged by June 1965 due to efforts of the government of United 
Kingdom (UK) and it was decided to resolve the dispute through arbitration. After 
skirmishes in Rann of Kuch subsided, Pakistan infiltrated personnel of Azad 
Kashmir forces followed by a group of elite commandos; the Special Service 
Group of Pakistan Army into Indian occupied Kashmir. Since the public in Indian 
Occupied Kashmir was not privy to plans devised by initiators of this conflict, they 
did not provide required support to the infiltrators, who were soon detected, 
some of them caught, killed and the rest ex-filtrated. The Indians responded by 
artillery shelling and captured some posts on the ceasefire line in Kashmir 
including Haji Pir Pass, an important point that could facilitate Indians in making 
further advances to capture more areas of Azad Kashmir.  
On First September 1965, a brigade of Pakistan Army’s 7 Infantry Division, was 
launched across cease fire line in Chamb Sector of Indian Held Kashmir.  
Command of the operation was with Major General AkhtarHussain Malik, General 
Officer Commanding 12 Division based at Murree. 7 Infantry Division, 
commanded by Major General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan had been hastily 
brought from its concentration area in Balloki Headwork where it was located 
since Rann of Kuch crisis. The Brigade made rapid progress in capturing area up to 
Tawi River within twenty four hours. Another brigade from 7 Division was to go 
for next phase across Tawi to capture Akhnur and its bridge over Chinab River. 
Here, on 2 September the Army High Command decided to make Major General 
Yahya responsible for Chamb Sector. Yahya took his time to proceed further 
causing delay of almost two days thus losing momentum, giving the Indians time 
to induct more troops into the sector.

33 

On 6th September, when Indians crossed International borders in Lahore sector, 
Akhnur was just a few kilometers away from Mawanwali Khad, a seasonal nullah 
where our troops had reached. According to Brigadier Amjad Choudhry, who was 
commanding Corps Artillery allocated to the sector, Gen Yahya confided in him 
that Akhnur was not to be captured.He repeated the same to a team of Command 
and Staff College that interviewed him at his Harley Street residence in Rawalpindi 
before his death in 1980. To the questionon why he did not take Akhnur, he 
replied “Because I was ordered not to do it”. 
Failure to capture unoccupied Akhnur Bridge over River Chenab during initial 
offensive in Chamb Sector of Kashmir, the reasons for change of command and 
unnecessary rather deliberate delay breaking momentum of the operation 
continues to remain a mystery and subject of debate. The reason in my 
understanding is that the President as well as General Muhammad Musa had not 
contemplated or planned to initiate all-out war with India. Capture of an objective 
like Akhnur Bridge, the major link between Kashmir and India would have 
certainly provoked an all-out war that they wanted to avoid. Mr. Z A Bhutto the 
Foreign Minister has also given assurance that skirmishes will remain confined 
within disputed area of Kashmir. 
Against expectations of the National and Army leadership, the Indians crossed 
international borders on early morning of 6 September 1965 to attack Lahore. The 
troops from Chamb-Akhnur Sector were pulled out to counter Indian attacks 
launched against Sialkot on 8th September. Shortage of troops had been indicated 
by the Army Chief, General Muhammad Musa when operation to send infiltrators 
was in planning stage, apprehending escalation of conflict to an all out war. His 
demand of raising two more infantry divisions, roughly thirty thousand additional 
troops if the country was to go to war, was partially met during the war by raising 
one division. 
The War of 1965 lasted for seventeen days resulting into a stalemate. A ceasefire 
was arranged by the United Nations and negotiations between leadership of both 
countries facilitated by the Soviet leadership resulted in Tashkent agreement 
restoring status quo ante.Pakistan’s armed forces gave most commendable 
performance against greater numbers of the enemy forces, denying them to

34 

achieve their ground objectives. The most remarkable phenomenon however was 
the spirit of Pakistani nation to show complete solidarity in facing the Indians. The 
streets of Dacca and other cities in East Pakistan saw large scale demonstrations 
against India although the Indians focused their effort on West Pakistan with only 
an air raid at Lal Munir Hat in East Pakistan. However despite the fact that India 
could not cause much damage to Pakistan and its armed forces despite their 
numerical superiority, the conspirators achieved their aim as Ayub Khan did not 
survive in office for long after the War. In fact he suffered heart attack soon after 
the war and never regained health that he had enjoyed earlier. Indian Prime 
Minister Mr Lal Bahadur Shastri died of heart attack on conclusion of proceedings 
at Tashkent, President Ayub Khan joining USSR Prime Minister Mr Kosygin to 
shoulder Mr Shastri’s coffin to the aircraft. 
The 1965 War between India and Pakistan effectively sealed Pakistan’s fate as a 
strong and prosperous country. Pakistan drifted into this War by machinations of 
a rabidly ambitious man in too much of a hurry, Mr Zulfiqar Ali (Z A) Bhutto, the 
young foreign minister in Ayub Khan’s cabinet. Working for global capitalist 
interests who wanted to derail Pakistan from path of progress, he planned and 
worked to remove the President by initiating armed conflict with India. The global 
forces had found Ayub Khan obstructive to their dictates when he tried to keep 
them at the status of FRIENDS and NOT become MASTERS. The largest Islamic 
country progressing at unprecedented pace going out of their control was 
unacceptable to global forces focussed on the region. 
Z A Bhutto, a man armed with Brahamanic intellect, a courtesan’s charm and a 
feudal’s duplicity, was gifted with qualities that are best described by Sir Maurice 
James, the British High Commissioner in Pakistan (1961-65). He had following to 
say about Bhutto,3 

"Bhutto certainly had the right qualities for reaching the heights--drive, charm, 
imagination, a quick and penetrating mind, zest for life, eloquence, energy, a 
strong constitution, a sense of humour, and a thick skin. Such a blend is rare 
anywhere, and Bhutto deserved his swift rise to power…..but there was - how shall 

3 http://www.baaghi.tv/bhutto-in-the-eyes-of-british-high-commissioner-sir-maurice-james/

35 

I put it? - a rank odour of hellfire about him. It was a case of CORRUPTO OPTIMA 
PESSOMA a flawed angel. I believe that at heart he lacked a sense of dignity and 
value of other people; his own self was what counted. I sensed in him ruthlessness 
and capacity for ill-doing which went far beyond what is natural.  

Except at university abroad, he was surrounded by mediocrities, and all his life, for 
want of competition, his triumphs came too easily for his own good. Lacking 
humility, he thus came to believe himself infallible, even when yawning gaps his 
own experience (e.g. of military matters) laid him---as over the 1965 war--wide 
open to disastrous error.  

Despite his gifts, I judged that one day Bhutto would destroy himself -- when, I 
could not tell. In 1965, I so reported in one of my dispatches from Pakistan as 
British High Commissioner. I wrote by way of clinching the point that Bhutto was 
born to be hanged. I did not intend this comment as a precise prophecy of what 
was going to happen to him, but fourteen years later that was what it turned out 
to be".  
Bhutto was born and brought up in Bombay (Mumbai) in India.  At the time of 
creation of Pakistan he was studying in USA. After completing his studies, he 
came to settle in Karachi. Till early sixties, when he was a minister in the 
Pakistan’s cabinet, he claimed to be an Indian citizen in litigation to get his 
father’s property in Bombay, India. In Karachi soon after his arrival from USA, he 
cultivated contacts with the then President Mr. Iskandar Mirza by befriending 
Mirza’s son, Mr. Humayun Mirza. Although already married, he contracted 
another marriage with a Persian girl reinforcing his contact with Presidency 
through Persian second wife of the President. A man of sharp intellect and 
impressive personality, he soon got inducted in the cabinet as a very young 
minister. When Ayub Khan took over from Iskandar Mirza, he retained Mr. Bhutto 
as a minister in his cabinet first as Minister for Commerce and then as Foreign 
Minister of Pakistan. 

About his scheming and role in initiating armed conflict with India that led to 
breakup of Pakistan, I got a chance of listening to a retired bureaucrat, a veteran

36 

foreign ministry official who reached the highest rank in our Foreign Service. 
During conversation with his friend in my presence, he said that; 
“Mr. Z A Bhutto, the Foreign Minister used to say that the only way to remove 
President Ayub Khan was to initiate war with India. After 1965 War he would use 
very derogatory and abusive language against Army” 
I asked the bureaucrat's friend if he would say that in public. The response was 
that the man would never do that.  
Another foreign office veteran on the condition of anonymity had this to say; 
“Generally of course everyone in the foreign office would confirm that Bhutto had 
a great part in the events that led to the country's breakup”.  
This was the kind of attitude of our men at the level of making and influencing 
decisions affecting our fate. Our Foreign Ministry was rightly called ‘Foreigner’s 
Ministry’ in those days by common people. 
The fact that Mr. Bhutto had decisive role in initiating this conflict with the help of 
a small group was known in influential circles of that time.  
Major General Syed Ali Hamid writes that after about one month of skirmish in 
Rann of Kutch, Z A Bhutto suggested to his father, Major General Shahid Hamid 
that it was time to attack India. Despite being rebuffed he continued his advocacy 
of going to war with India. In connection with matters of Kashmir Cell set up in 
the Foreign Office “to de-freeze the Kashmir situation”, Z A Bhutto also visited 
senior army officers at their residences and General Musa complained to the Field 
Marshal that “Bhutto was brainwashing his officers.” 
Syed Ali Hamid writes, “There is sufficient evidence to substantiate the fact that 
the Field Marshal was reluctant to go to war. After the conflict he told my father, 
“Shahid. These people pushed me into the War”.  
Who were these people that the Field Marshal was alluding to? According to Ali 
Hamid a coterie of bureaucrats including Defense Secretary Nazir Ahmad and

37 

others were supporting Z A Bhutto in his designs. About Major General Akhtar 
Hussain Malik’s role he writes;4 
“A number of bureaucrats from Rawalpindi used to go to Murree for the weekend, 
where they would relax, play cards and chill out. Gen Akhtar, as GOC 12 Division, 
would at times attend these sessions. Once he was dared by the bureaucrats that 
Pakistan Army had done nothing for Pakistan’s creation or the liberation of 
Kashmir. At this Gen Akhtar spoke up that he had a plan and disclosed the 
rationale for Operation Gibraltar. The bureaucrats were reportedly quite taken in 
and the Foreign Secretary Aziz Ahmad went and reported it to the Foreign 
Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto”. 
To general public Bhutto was projected as a hawk working for Kashmir cause 
whereas his real motives were personal. A few years back, US Air Attaché in 
Pakistan during the period of 1965 war Colonel (retired) George L Singleton, USAF 
wrote in his letter to a Pakistani newspaper that, 
“Foreign Minister Bhutto largely engineered the foolish events that caused or 
incited the 1965 war. Ayub Khan had to have known what was going on, but his 
chief ‘goader’, if you will, into this war was Bhutto”.5 
He further wrote, 
“The 1965 war was a monstrously dumb move on the part of Mr. Bhutto and the 
Army chief of staff who clearly initiated the whole war”. 
Colonel Singleton wrote this while responding to a controversy on the role of Air 
Marshal Asghar Khan, the Air Chief at the time of Rann of Kach skirmishes. Asghar 
Khan, on his own got in touch with Arjun Singh, his counterpart in India asking 
him not to use Air Force to prevent possible escalation. His statement that ‘Mr. 
Bhutto and the Army chief of staff clearly initiated the whole war’ is corroborated 
by Colonel S.G Mehdiwho writesabout his involvement in the 1965 war (excerpts); 

4 http://pakistanthinktank.org/a-page-from-history-home-truths-of-the-1965-war 
5Dawn – June 14, 2007.

38 

“This writer is a personal witness to the unfolding of this tragedy as I had the 
honour to command our Army's Corps de elite, the Special Service Group (SSG) at 
this critical juncture. In late May 1965, I was directed by the Vice Chief of General 
Staff, (late Major General Abid Bilgrami) to go to Murree and see GOC 12 Division, 
Akhtar Hussian Malik. The GOC's briefing of the outline plan of Gibraltar operation 
left me stunned. The plan was so childish, so bizarre as to be unacceptable to 
logical, competent, professionally sound military persons anywhere in the world. 
I frankly told General Akhtar Malik that the Operation was a non starter and that I 
would render the same advice to the Chief and Vice Chief of General Staff. At GHQ, 
the same day I briefed the CGS and VCGS, who listened to me patiently. The result 
of my presentation however was barren of the result. Major General Malik Sher 
Bahadur (The CGS) posed only one question. You (Mehdi) say that operation 
Gibraltar as planned stands no chance of succeeding, but Akhtar Malik (COG 12 
Division) feels confident of its success. My reply to the Chief of the General Staff 
was that, the conflicting view point of Mehdi and Akhtar Malik notwithstanding, 
as Chief of General Staff of Pakistan Army, he should also have an opinion on this 
important matter as we were not playing a peace time war game, but with the 
destiny of Pakistan itself. To this date I remember the reaction of the CGS. He went 
red right up to his ears, and after a painful pause got up, extended his hand to 
shake and brought the interview to an end with the remarks that it is always 
interesting to listen to you!!” 
He further writes that; 
“The simple truth emerging from the narrative is, that neither the C-in-C Army nor 
General Staff had the guts to stand up to the President, Field Marshal Ayub Khan, 
and tell him that his advisers in the ministry of Foreign Affairs supported by GOC 
12 Division, Akhtar Malik were taking him on a long ride commencing with 
Gibraltar, leading to his downfall via Tashkent, as it eventually proved! The loser 
in the final analysis was Pakistan, described so feelingly by General K.M. Arif in an 
analysis carried by daily Dawn', 6th September 1990. How and why Pakistan 
blundered into war..........

39 

At that time, the policy making in the country was highly personalised. The 
institutions were weak and by-passed. Pakistan's Foreign Office with Mr. Aziz 
Ahmed as the Foreign Secretary and Mr. Z.A. Bhutto as the Foreign Minister called 
the martial tunes. It had miscalculated that despite operation Gibraltar, the 
fighting was likely to remain confined inside the disputed state of Jammu and 
Kashmir. The Foreign Office is on record to have assessed that India was not in a 
position to risk a general war with Pakistan...... 
For inexplicable reasons the General Headquarters based its operational plan in 
Kashmir on a wishful logic. The misplaced ego, the high ambition and the naive 
approach of a selected few plunged the country into an armed conflict. The 
outcome of the war, or the lack of it, eclipsed Ayub's position”.6 
Another writer, Arshad Ahmed, in an article on the 1965 war writes; 
‘Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto wanted to deprive Ayub Khan of his power, and this was not 
possible until the strength, ego and pride of the army was not smashed. This view 
was supported by Marxist leader Tariq Ali, who asked Bhutto about the 1965 war, 
and Bhutto told him, “Until these generals are not defeated it is not possible to 
get in power in Pakistan”.7 
It would be interesting to find out exact written directive of the President from 
the records of the President House/Foreign Ministry. Reportedly President Ayub 
Khan’s gave just a two worded directive; ‘Defreeze Kashmir’. Mr Z A Bhutto the 
Foreign Minister had succeeded in convincing the President that it was time to 
instigate disturbances in Indian Held Kashmir to bring Kashmir issue to world 
focus by sending some infiltrators to start the process. This was done on the false 
assurance that problem would remain confined within Kashmir, the disputed 
area.  
As operation in Chamb Sector across the ceasefire line was in progress, our High 
Commissioner in India Mr. Arshad Hussain on 3rd September sent an urgent 
communication to our Foreign Office that India had decided to launch attack 

6 http://www.defencejournal.com/july98/1965war.htm 
7 (Excerpt from article Kashmir And The 1965 War By Shabir Choudhry, 1st October 1998.  
(http://www.jammu-kashmir.com/shabir/shabir_1998_10_1.html)

40 

across the international border in Lahore sector on 6th September. This vital 
information was concealed from the President by the Foreign Minister Mr. Z A 
Bhutto and his Foreign Secretary Mr. Aziz Ahmad because they were themselves 
working to expand the conflict. 
The years between 1965 war with India and that of 1971 war saw lot of 
disturbance in the peaceful conditions prevailing before 1965. President Ayub 
Khan’s position weakened as a result of an unnecessary and costly war as 
intended by its initiators. Just few months after the war some armed forces 
personnel from East Pakistan were arrested on the charges of conspiracy to break 
up Pakistan with Indian help. Sheikh Mujibur Rehman, leader of Awami League 
was also arrested for being involved. The case, known as ‘Agartala Conspiracy 
Case’ had to be withdrawn due to political pressure on Ayub Khan by political 
parties leaders from West Pakistan. 
Mr. Z A Bhutto parted ways with his benefactor, President Ayub Khan, whom he 
used to call 'Daddy', by launching his own political party, named Pakistan People’s 
Party (PPP). The party was mainly supported and joined by socialist element of 
the society, later sidelined by strong feudal elements when Bhutto came to power 
after the 1971 war. The people were promised food, clothes and shelter (Roti, 
KapraaurMakan), ownership of lands and factories thus drawing support from 
large illiterate sections of the society who continue to dream of those promises 
being fulfilled, giving repeated chance to People’s Party through their votes to 
plunder national resources for personal gains. 
It is not a mere coincidence that a few months after 1965 war, ‘Agartala 
Conspiracy Case’ involving Sheikh Mujibur Rehman working for creation of 
Bangladesh came to light and Z A Bhutto left Ayub Khan’s cabinet to launch 
agitation against the regime. Both were working in tandem as tools of global 
forces for break up of Pakistan. The game was on.

