201 

difficulties reportedly created by the Chinese authorities in transporting goods 
through their area. The people are apprehensive of China’s domination replacing 
the Russians. The Russians had largely left the country with some people still 
residing in Bishkek. Large gathering on Friday’s congregational prayers indicated 
revival of religious character of the country after prolonged Soviet Union’s 
Godless rule.  
Since there was no direct flight from Pakistan to Bishkek, for the first trip I had to 
use the services of China Airline. This required a visa for China because two days 
stay was forced at Urumchi before boarding another plane from there to Bishkek. 
The return journey also involved same arrangements of staying at Urumchi the 
capital of Sinkiang province before reaching Islamabad. During stay at Urumchi I 
took a guided tour to visit the city particularly down town area where most of the 
local Muslim populations, the Uyghur’s are concentrated.  
During the second visit, I boarded a cargo plane from Karachi to reach Bishkek. 
This service was being operated by a Kyrgyz national on bi-weekly basis from 
Karachi. Since Mr Zahid had come to Pakistan and was using this flight, he had 
arranged for my travel with him. It took us about four hours to reach Bishkek. On 
return journey I came via New Delhi, staying within the airport premises for about 
five hours before boarding Air India flight for Lahore which took about forty 
minutes of flight time. During those hours of prime activity at the main airport of 
Indian Capital, I could not find a single attractive female to look at approvingly. 
The only consolation was somewhat tolerable Air India hostess during the short 
flight. Bollywood projects deceptive image of India. 
After successful running of the restaurant for about one year, differences 
developed between Ejaz Akmal and Mr Zahid ending the partnership and the 
business. Ejaz Akmal came back to Pakistan and died shortly afterwards. 
Working with ERRA 
On 8 October 2005 an earthquake of 7.62 magnitudes on the Richter scale caused 
extensive damage to life and property in parts of Khyber Pakhtunkhaw (KPK) and 
Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJ&K). It virtually paralyzed the organisational 
structure of nine districts; five in KPK i.e. Abbotabad, Mansehra, Battagram,

202 

Shangla, Kohistan and four districts i.e. Muzaffarabad, Neelum, Bagh and 
Rawalakot in AJ&K.  
An area roughly 30,000 Sq Km was affected leaving 73,338 people dead and 
128,304 severely injured. Three million people were rendered homeless and 
about 600,000 houses destroyed. Road infrastructure, educational and health 
facilities and government buildings were extensively damaged. As immediate 
response, the Pakistan Army was inducted into the area to start relief operations. 
The people of Pakistan, overawed with the scale of this tragedy responded with 
overwhelming support, eager to help in whatever way they could, reaching out to 
the area to help the Army busy in recovery and relief work. Pakistan, at the time 
was providing vital assistance to the US and NATO countries in their war in 
Afghanistan. It was mainly for this reason that the country got prompt response 
from international community to deal with calamity. Loads of materials, expert 
teams and fleets of helicopters started arriving to help organise the relief work. 
Although an organisation at the national level, the National Disaster Management 
Authority (NDMA) existed, a new organisation Earthquake Reconstruction and 
Rehabilitation Authority (ERRA) was established to deal with consequences of the 
disaster.  
ERRA developed into a very elaborate organisation. Work was divided into 
different sectors categorised into clusters like direct outreach to the 
communities (Rural Housing, Livelihood and Social Protection sectors) Social 
Services (Health, Education and Water and Sanitation sectors) Public 
Infrastructure (Governance, Power, Telecommunications, Transport andTourism 
sectors)and Cross Cutting Themes (Disaster Risk Reduction,Environmental 
Safeguards and Gender Equality). A total of nearly 13000 (thirteen thousand) 
projects were identified to be repaired and rebuilt. 
The manpower was gathered from the government departments, the Army and 
mostly from the private sector. A large number of consultants, both local and 
international, were hired at exorbitant remunerations to assist in working out 
strategies and provide technical assistance to the organisation. Apart from the 
organisation at the national level, similar organisations were created at the

203 

Province level as implementing agencies. At the districts level District 
Reconstruction Units (DRUs) were created to undertake the work. It all required 
large expenditure on the administration provided with Land Cruisers, Prado’s and 
other expensive vehicles to numerous Director Generals looking after their 
sectors at different tiers and other appointment holders. An elaborate set up for 
monitoring and evaluation was created to monitor construction progress and 
measure the outcomes and impact of ERRA interventions. 
The flagship program which met outstanding success was in the Rural Housing 
Sector. With the ‘owner driven approach’; the owner of a destroyed house was 
provided with funds at four different stages of construction. His work was 
checked by the Army teams at every stage to make him eligible for next payment. 
Thus six hundred thousand small two room houses were completed in a 
comparatively short period all over the affected area.  Work on remaining sectors 
particularly the construction of Education and Health facilities progressed at low 
pace according to the normal government procedures of the respective line 
departments.  
Considering the slow pace of construction through normal procedures, I 
suggested to the Deputy Chairman, Lieutenant General Sajjad Akram, a dynamic 
commander who achieved good progress despite severe impediments, that the 
schools in the villages should be constructed by adopting ‘Community Driven 
Approach’. My reason was that if the villagers could construct their two room 
houses, they could also construct five to eight rooms’ primary and middle schools 
in their villages within very short time and with very less money as compared to 
construction by government departments. This proposal was vehemently 
opposed by the bureaucracy during ERRA board meetings for obvious vested 
interests.  
The concept of ‘District Government Complexes’ was introduced where all the 
departmental offices of district administration and their residential quarters of 
the staff were to be housed in one building complex. One such complex was 
completed at Muzaffarabad with the help from Government of Turkey, a Turkish 
company completing the work in a short span of about two years. Work on such 
projects in other districts was abandoned for lack of funds/ interest.

204 

I worked in the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Wing of the Authority for over 
two years (June 2008 – Sep 2010) in the social survey group measuring the 
outcomes and impact of ERRA’s interventions in the affected area. During the 
period I along with our group, attended two short courses; one for five days and 
another for three days at Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS) 
concerning the M&E processes and technical report writing. Results of surveys 
conducted by survey teams were reflected in the periodic/ annual reports and the 
impact assessment reports. It was a very good experience to learn about the 
working in the development sector.  
Frequent travel by the international community experts and the US Helicopter’s 
extensive flying was good familiarization experience with the area for them. This 
perhaps helped the US aviators in conducting successful navigation and operation 
deep inside Pakistan during the night on 2 May 2011 reaching Abbottabad to raid 
a house supposed to be Osama bin Laden’s hideout.  
One very obvious fact was that the reconstruction and rehabilitation work which 
should have been done through the normal working procedures of the respective 
provincial, state and district governments, a new organization was created 
substantially increasing overhead expenditure. It was duplication of efforts and 
expenses. In addition a large number of consultants, including international 
consultants were hired at very high remunerations who only contributed in 
writing voluminous reports portraying rosy picture of various interventions 
although results on ground were not as good as reflected except for the rural 
housing programme. 
Another aspect which came to light was that work of non government 
organisations (NGOs) was below par, most of them doing sub standard work and 
leaving the projects incomplete.  
About foreign consultants I had an observation earlier. Some years back I had 
invested money with a contractor responsible to carry out some repair work on 
Sohawa-Chakwal road. The contract was worth 2.5 million rupees to repair small 
patches of the road. To identify those small patches for repair a foreign consultant 
was working with his office located in a house in Islamabad. He had further hired

205 

the services of a retired senior officer, a Lieutenant Colonel of Pakistan Army 
Engineer’s Corps to assist him along with the support staff and transport etc. His 
emoluments and expenditure during a year was six times more than the cost of 
projects he was supposed to provide services for. That year he had only two 
projects; each worth 2.5 million Pak rupees. Actual identification and marking of 
the patches to be repaired, which was the job of overseer of concerned 
department, were done by the contractor himself. The Consultants’ 
representative visited only once and felt satisfied with the work. This consultant 
was working in Pakistan for more than nine years by then and must have 
continued afterwards also. He had spent eight years in Sind before coming to 
Punjab to offer his services. I asked the Punjab Government Secretary of 
Communications, Brigadier Shadab Ali Khan, a course mate of mine from the 
Pakistan Military Academy about this consultant. He replied that the Punjab 
government had not asked for him. He had been imposed on the department. 
This I feel is a small example of how our country is being exploited by the so called 
donors who get ingress deep into our affairs by employing their people who keep 
stashing millions into their own accounts out of the allocated funds. Most 
foreigners so deeply embedded work for international spy agencies providing 
information and data required by those agencies. 
Some observations on working with ERRA are; 
 The plans for dealing with natural disasters adopting measures for disaster 
prevention, risk reduction and mitigation of effects should be worked out at 
the district level as each district has peculiar conditions prone to different 
kinds of disasters. 
 The Provinces should coordinate and supervise the works to ensure that 
workable plans are in place and in case of disaster the district governments 
are supported in their needs. 
 At the Central government level, organisation like the NDMA should mainly 
focus on funds allocation from central government to the districts and 
coordination with international donor organisations and international 
NGOs.

206 

 Ad-hoc organisations tend to convert into permanent features as it is 
evident from the fact that ERRA is still functional (2015) although its 
mandate was for three years. This is despite the fact that another national 
level organisation, the NDMA is in place and actual work on ground is being 
done according to normal government procedures with full involvement of 
respective government departments. This is not duplication but triplication 
resulting in wastage of efforts and resources. 
 International agencies should not be given unlimited access to sensitive 
areas for obvious security concerns. The extensive helicopter flying by US 
Army in the area and combing of the area by persons of western countries 
accessing large data on different aspects collected by our survey teams was 
undesirable to say the least. The area affected by the earthquake was of 
special interest to the US looking for our nuclear assets related installations 
and India for alleged training camps for the Kashmiri Mujahideen. Although 
nothing was found but it certainly was questionable to give unlimited 
access to foreign forces. Targeting a house by US helicopters deep inside 
Pakistan would not have been that easy had the US helicopter pilots not 
done flying in the area earlier.  
I have shared some of the experiences of my life. Like every concerned citizen I 
find enough reasons to be perturbed considering the scale of mismanagement 
and malice of our ruling class.  I sanguinely await divine intervention for providing 
us with better leadership to steer the course of our nation on road to progress, 
prosperity and peaceful living. Our unique variety of terrain, climate, abundant 
resources and above all very important geo-strategic location makes the task 
much easier. My views on various issues are reflected in the following chapters.

207 

OPINIONS 
Part – IV 
Conflict with India 
In 1947 when British left the Indian Sub Continent divided into two independent 
states of India and Pakistan, the question of princely states numbering five 
hundred and sixty two was left to the discretion of their rulers; to join either of 
the new states or to remain independent. This caused conflict between India and 
Pakistan over the question of states of Jammu and Kashmir, Hyderabad (Deccan), 
Junagarh and Manavadar.  Both countries went to war in 1947-48 in Kashmir 
which resulted in a stalemate. The matter was taken to the United Nations by 
India where it is still waiting to be resolved.  
Relations between the two countries started gradually improving till 1965 war 
reversed that process. This war changed the fate of our rapidly progressing 
country to that of failures, defeats, dismemberment and a continuing struggle for 
existence as a state.  
Pakistan, after experimenting with parliamentary system in the nineteen fifties 
resulting in unstable short lived governments had stabilized under the 
presidential form of governance. The country, under the leadership of President, 
Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan was making rapid progress in 
industrialization, building of infrastructure, multipurpose large dams and overall 
peace and prosperity for the people of Pakistan. Our country enjoyed 
unprecedented respect amongst nations of the world. Efforts towards regional 
cooperation were successful in reaching agreements, like Regional Cooperation 
for Development (RCD) between Pakistan, Iran and Turkey.  
Because of this internal strength, relations with India had improved to an extent 
that President Ayub Khan offered India for a joint defense treaty against any 
external aggression to the sub continent. Contentious issue of sharing of waters 
of the Indus Basin had been resolved in 1960. During the India- China skirmishes 
on their borders in 1962, Pakistan did not pose any threat to India. In 1964, Mr. 
Jawahar Lal Nehru, the Indian Prime Minister sent prominent Kashmiri leader

208 

Sheikh Muhammad Abdullah, to discuss the possibility of resolving Kashmir 
dispute with Pakistani leadership. Unfortunately while Sheikh Abdullah was 
holding talks in Pakistan, Mr. Nehru died. Sheikh Abdullah had to abandon his 
talks and returned to India.  
Just after few months of Mr. Nehru’s death the devilish game of initiating conflict 
with India was started by machinations of Mr. Z A Bhutto, the foreign minister in 
Ayub Khan’s cabinet. His aim, which he would share with some top men in his 
ministry, was to remove Ayub Khan by fighting a war with much larger neighbour 
India which obviously would result in a defeat. That, he claimed was the only way 
to get rid of Ayub Khan as a first step to reach his goal of grabbing power. The 
plan as it unfolded was; first there were skirmishes in the Rann of Kuch in the 
south in April 1965. At that time there was only one Division (about fifteen 
thousand all ranks) in Sind and Baluchistanwith its brigades located one each at 
Quetta, Karachi and Hyderabad. This spread and paucity of troops precluded 
taking any offensive action against India. However, the Brigade located at 
Hyderabad then being commanded by Brigadier Iftikhar Janjua (later Major 
General who died in a helicopter crash in Chamb area during 1971 War) was used 
to conduct an operation on the borders with India in Rann of Kutch area. This 
small scale operation was given a great hype of a resounding victory and it 
resulted in mobilization by both the countries, moving their forces close to the 
borders. 
Having succeeded in creating conditions, Mr. Bhutto persuaded the President to 
allow sending some infiltrators into Kashmir Valley to help initiate an uprising 
which will force the UN to take up this dormant issue. The President was assured 
that Kashmiri people were ready for an uprising and that the problem will not 
escalate beyond the confines of Kashmir, a disputed area. The President gave his 
consent to “Defreeze Kashmir”. Once this move was initiated, the events gained 
their own momentum to disastrous results. Pakistan Army was under strength 
and not ready for war with India. General Musa, then Commander-in-Chief of 
Pakistan Army, wanted at least two more divisions raised if the country was to go 
to war with India but he was assured of a limited involvement confined within 
Kashmir. While Pakistan never recovered from the effects of this war in a slide

209 

towards the abyss, India got timely support from Pakistan to prevent a leadership 
crisis that could have developed after about seventeen years rule of India by 
Jawahar Lal Nehru. External threat helped India to manage internal discords. 
The man who initiated this conflict ultimately succeeded in grabbing power in 
1971 after another war with India and dismemberment of Pakistan of 1947. His 
plans to rule for long were disrupted due to his own follies although his daughter 
and son-in-law did rule new Pakistan at different intervals putting the people in 
greater difficulties due to their unbounded corruption and misrule.  
Pakistan’s Role in Strengthening India as a State 
India is a geographical term and was never a country as aptly described by Mr. 
Winston Churchill in one of his speeches in 1931 in these words, “India is a 
geographical term. It is no more a country than the Equator”. The largest empire 
created by the legendary Asoka did not extend south of the Ganges valley, the 
‘cow belt’. His efforts to venture south ended at the battle of Kalinga in present 
day Orissa State where seeing the scale of killings he renounced further conquest 
and converted to Buddhism. Later on great ruling dynasties including the 
formidable Mughals ruled only part of the sub continent. Emperor Aurangzeb, 
sixth in line of the Mughal dynasty, after whom Mughal rule started collapsing, 
died fighting in his quest to conquer South India. 
The British created a semblance of unity after they consolidated their hold on the 
Indian sub continent, but their system of control was ingenious and benevolent. 
The sub continent was part of their global empire ruled from London. When the 
British left India in 1947, apart from the areas directly under British control, there 
were five hundred and sixty two states of varying sizes comprising one third of the 
total area and one fourth of the population of the sub continent. These were 
ruled by hereditary rulers, independent in all respects except that they could not 
establish diplomatic relations with other countries. Also there were vast tribal 
areas spread all over the subcontinent enjoying autonomy. The sub continent was 
never one country. It was collection of ‘Rajwaras’ (small states) in frequent 
conflicts with each other prone to be subdued and dominated by external 
powers.  Muslim invaders from west established their rule over a good part of

210 

India for about one thousand years till replaced by the British in nineteenth 
century as part of their global empire.  
In 1947 when the British left, India had leaders like Mahatma Gandhi, Mr. Jawahar 
Lal Nehru, Sardar Willabh Bhai Patel and other experienced men on the Indian 
scene during the ensuing period. A man of great caliber and charisma, Mr. 
Jawahar Lal Nehru as Prime Minister fully exploited the semblance of Indian unity 
created by the British to form the modern Indian state. All India Congress Party, 
well organised all over the sub continent striving to get independence from British 
rule was Nehru’s tool to wield political power. Soon after independence large 
parts of the new country, particularly the eastern parts like Assam, Nagaland, 
Mizoram started their struggle for independence from Delhi. Assam and the areas 
east of Bengal were never part of the Indian sub continent. Assam, an 
independent country was invaded by Burma (1817) and occupied for a few years 
when as result of First Anglo-Burmese war Assam, Manipur, Arakan and some 
other area was ceded to British by the Burmese in 1826. Burma itself came under 
the British rule as a province of British India in 1886 after Third Anglo-Burmese 
War and later declared a separate colony in 1937. Assam and areas east of Bengal 
were never part of India geographically or politically at any time in history. In 
Southern India the main regional political party, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam 
(DMK) was demanding an independent nation for Dravidians called Dravida Nadu 
consisting of areas that were covered under Madras Presidency during British 
rule. At one time there was armed resistance in twelve different regions against 
the central authority.   
Increasing internal turmoil was managed by the Indian rulers through initiating 
skirmishes on the Sino-Indian borders in 1962. After a short period of having very 
good relations with China with oft repeated slogans of ‘Hindi-Cheeni Bhai Bhai’ 
(Indian and Chinese are brothers) this was complete reversal in policy. The actions 
on both extremities of the long mountainous borders were initiated by the 
Indians and a great hype of external threat created with the basic aim of 
managing internal conflicts. The DMK changed its stance with this contrived 
threat from China in 1962, suspended its demand for independence and 
supported Indian government in raising funds for the war. When the war ended,

