271 

District Governments 
Basic unit of governance should be the present DISTRICTS. The district 
governments should function according to Local Governments Ordinance 2001 
removing some anomalies and laying down clear responsibilities for meeting basic 
needs of a citizen like food, shelter, education, health, security and justice at the 
local level. The Union Councils, provided with resources should be made 
responsible for ‘Human Resource Development’, the district providing physical 
infrastructure and technical input. Provision of timely justice should be ensured to 
maintain order and counter extremism in the society. Senior judges placed at the 
Union Council level, with their offices open twenty four hours, investigating teams 
under command and police on call, should be made responsible to dispense 
justice instead of acquitting the accused persons because of inadequate or 
nonexistent evidence. For this, the rules of business need to be changed, the 
judge reaching out to the victim rather than the victim struggling to get justice.  
The Provinces 
Smaller provinces should be formed named after principal cities that would 
eliminate chances of fanning ethnic and parochial biases and concerns.These 
provinces would be almost equal in size of geographical expanse with limited role 
of providing support to the district governments. In these provinces there is no 
need of provincial assemblies, the ministers, advisors and chief ministers. The 
provinces should be headed by governors assigned with a limited, clearly 
specified role of supporting the district government in maintaining law and order 
and provision of justice. For this purpose, the governors assisted by a small staff 
team should select, enroll, train and provide police and judicial staff to the 
districts. The laws are made by the National parliament. There is no need to make 
laws at different tiers increasing the number of law makers, a class of parasites 
devouring national resources.  
The Central Government 
The central government should retain ten to twelve ministries responsible to 
formulate and implement national level policies, rest all the responsibilities being 
passed on to the provinces and district governments.

272 

The Tribal Areas, AzadKashmir and Northern Areas                     
The Tribal Areas should be integrated into the new system as districts, eliminating 
their status of tribal agencies. Azad Kashmir and Northern Areas should also 
function on similar pattern that is the Union Councils as hub of development 
activity and the Districts responsible for effective management and provision of 
services to the people.  
The Parliament 
The National Assembly and the Senate should concentrate on their job of 
legislation, deliberate on national issues to help the government in formulating 
and implementing sound, well considered policies. They must not be involved in 
development work by providing them funds which is cause of corruption and their 
interference with functioning of local governments. 
Role of the President 
The President as Head of State is guardian of the State’s establishment. While the 
Governments keep changing, it is the State’s establishment that provides 
ownership of state’s policies and continuity in functioning of State. The 
governments of the time decide polices that are implemented by State’s 
institutions, the ‘establishment’.  State functionaries working according to rules 
and regulations are effective check on any mismanagement, misappropriation or 
misuse of State’s resources. The President has to ensure that all State institutions 
work according to rules, are provided with job security and protected against 
pressures to commit illegal acts from Government bodies.  
The Parliament should elect a suitable person as the President whose main 
responsibility is to ensure that State’s establishment works effectively according 
to rules and regulations; appropriate judicial structure in the country is in place 
and functions effectively providing timely justice to the citizens. He should 
appoint suitable persons as judges at different tiers and supervise their 
performance. His chain of functioning will be through the provincial governors 
appointed by him with limited role as defined in preceding paragraphs.

273 

Presidential versus Parliamentary form of government 
Disillusionment with the inept and corrupt political governments which came into 
power at intervals between the dictatorial rules has raised doubts on the 
suitability of parliamentary form of government itself. Debate on the need of 
doing away with our present form of government and going back to the 
Presidential system continues. Any system can work well if the people running it 
are honest and competent.The parliamentary system can have effective checks 
and balance in exercising power provided the President performs his role 
effectively. In Parliamentary system, if the parliament elects a suitable person as 
President who is vested with well-defined responsibilities mainly; of ensuring that 
judiciary and bureaucracy functions effectively to provide justice to the society, it 
creates a desirable check in exercise of power by the executive.  
In our circumstances as the division of powers and responsibilities causes friction 
due to attitudes of individuals, the presidential form of Government is more 
suitable as already tried and tested. It was only during the years of President Ayub 
Khan’s rule that people of Pakistan enjoyed peace, prosperity, job security and 
unprecedented overall development in a short period of time. The President, 
directly elected by the people of Pakistan will be better placed to provide the 
country with required political stability, resuming path towards progress. A new, 
simple, few pages Constitution instituting presidential form of government; a 
directly elected President, with about thirty provinces sans assemblies, effective 
local governments and restructured judiciary seems a better option to recover 
from the downwards slide the country is in. 
Advantages of forming smaller Provinces 
The proposal to work through effective local governments, to form small equal 
provinces sans assemblies with a limited role in governance and a lean central 
government as outlined above will bring following major advantages:- 
 It will meet the demands of sub national groups, eliminating threats of 
further breakup of the Pakistan as experienced in 1971 by removing causes 
of  
 discontent, neutralising propaganda themes like hatred against 
Punjabis developed by our adversaries for a long time. The new provinces

274 

will be named after principal cities to eliminate the causes of possible 
agitation and protests on ethnic or linguistic basis. 
 It will bring the desired level of political stability. The parties winning 
national level elections will be able to form stable governments at the 
center without having to make compromises to form provincial 
governments. 
 It will reduce the overall number of legislators, end their involvement and 
interference in administration. At present, if we take a constituency of 
national assembly seat, there is one member of National Assembly (MNA) 
and two to three Members of Provincial Assemblies (MPAs) supposed to 
make laws for the citizens. Practically they hardly do anything except 
interfering in the functioning of district governments to improve their 
position for next election and amass assets, pocketing a good part of 
money allotted for development works. Removingone tier, that is at 
provincial level and redefining the role of legislators at the national level 
will help in effective functioning of local/district governments. 
 Disturbances and discontent in an area would be isolated, promptly 
addressed and problems easily resolved without affecting other areas. 
 The role of Governor of the provinces to support the district governments 
in maintaining law and order by providing required force and in 
dispensation of justice by maintaining effective judicial structure will 
establish inherent checks and balance, restricting chances of district 
governments in going overboard. 
 Responding to the aspirations and genuine needs of the people of Pakistan, 
facilitating them in solving their problems at local level and ending 
acrimony on divisive issues, will act as catalyst to our progress and 
strengthen us as a nation. 
Method to Affect Change 

The change can be brought about by following methods:-

275 

a. The Parliament can affect the change by mustering required majority to 
make constitutional amendment. 
b. The change can be made by holding a referendum on the subject. 
c. A political party fights elections on this issue demanding from the public 
to provide the party with required majority to bring constitutional 
amendments about these basic reforms.  
d. To overcome resistance in making any move on the issue, effective local 
governments are to be formed first. When these governments, provided 
with resources and empowered to decide their own priorities on 
meeting essential needs start delivering, the question of provinces can 
then be taken up and change affected without much opposition.  
New Provinces Suggested  
The present provinces of Pakistan are cause of political instability and potential 
threat to the country’s survival as explained. Having considered the matter in 
some detail, a list of suggested provinces based on administrative considerations 
is being given below. This list is not exhaustive.  In this, ethnic identities do not 
change and any opposition or resistance on this account will be merely playing 
politics and not be justified. A Sindhi will remain a Sindhi if he is part of Sukker, 
Hyderabad or Larkana Province and so would be other nationalities which do not 
change due to forming smaller provinces named after principal cities. However, 
the reasons for bringing about this change will have to be explained to the public 
through well articulated, effective campaign. 
Malakand 
Hazara 
Peshawar 
Kohat 
Bannu 
Dera Ismail Khan 
Rawalpindi 
Gujranwala 
Lahore 
Sargodha 
Faisalabad 
Multan 
Bahawalpur 
Dera Ghazi Khan Zhob 
Sibi 
Naseerabad 
Quetta 
Kharan 
Chaghi 
Panjgur 
Kalat/Khuzdar 
Bela/Awaran 
Mekran 
Sukker 
Larkana 
Hyderabad 
Mirpur Khas 
Gilgit 
Sakardu

276 

These provinces will be headed by governors with a limited, clearly defined task 
of supporting the district governments in maintaining law and order and provision 
of justice. The governor will be assisted by a small staff team to do the job. There 
will be no need of assemblies, ministers, chief ministers and advisors at the 
provincial level. Thus the numbers of law makers will come down from present 
about twelve hundred to about four hundred and forty two i.e. limited to the 
strength of Senate and National Assembly.  
Tribal Agencies and Frontier Regions will be absorbed into the adjoining new 
provinces as districts.  
For Azad Jammu and Kashmir, Gilgit, Baltistan status quo is to be maintained till 
conflict on this issue is resolved through UN or negotiated settlement with India. 
Reducing number of ministries at the Centre and eliminating ministries at the 
provincial level will render a large number of government employee’s surplus. 
Some of them would be absorbed in the new provinces and the district 
governments but most will have to be given golden handshake. Initially for some 
time they may have to be kept on the pay roll without work till their disposal is 
finalised.  
The above proposal is summarised as:- 
 Strengthen district governments by providing them required resources and 
making them responsible to ensure that a citizen’s basic requirements like 
food, shelter, education, health, employment, security and justice are met 
at local level, his problems not going beyond the district in any case. 
 The present large unequal provinces are replaced with small equal 
provinces sans assemblies and ministries. Such small, equal provinces 
named after principal cities are headed by governors with specific mandate 
of supporting the district governments by selecting, training and providing 
police and judicial staff to the districts. The governor is assisted by a small 
team and there is no need of assemblies, ministers and chief ministers etc. 
Tribal areas are integrated in the new system. Northern Areas and Azad 
Kashmir maintain status quo till solution of Kashmir dispute with India.

277 

 The Centre retains only ten to twelve ministries, dealing with matters of 
national concern. Rest all responsibilities are transferred at the district 
level. The National Assembly and the Senate concentrate on their job of 
legislation, rather than the member’s interference in the affairs of local 
governments. 
In 1973/ 74, the unrest in Baluchistan was confined to Marri tribal area and a 
small pocket of Mengal tribe living in area Wadh near Khuzdar. The whole 
Pashtun belt, the coastal belt, the vast areas of Chaghi, Kharan, Turbat, Panjgur, 
and the plains of Sibi, Nasirabad were not interested or affected in any way. If the 
provinces had been formed on the lines suggested above, the problem could not 
have aggravated to present proportions. In the smaller administrative units the 
grievances could easily be addressed, troubles and trouble creators isolated and 
matters resolved. Considering that the Baloch inhabited areas of Balochistan are 
not densely populated, the government could meet the requirements of the 
population by directly reaching out to the communities, helping them in 
sustainable livelihood programmes, planned and implemented by the district 
governments, instead of doling out money to local Sardars and Waders.  
Pakistan of 1947 could not survive even for twenty five years. Remaining Pakistan 
continues to face threat of further disintegration mainly due to unaddressed 
concerns of different regions. The proposal suggested in preceding paragraphs 
provides a comprehensive solution to resolve our basic problem which must be 
done without further prevarication to put Pakistan on the path to stability, peace, 
progress and prosperity.

278 

Local Governments and Community Development 
Our major political parties have never been interested in forming effective and 
empowered local governments. The political party leaders enjoy their powers 
through highly centralised and personalised dispensation of these parties. They 
are fearful of losing their influence when problems of people are addressed at the 
local governments’ level. It is for this reason that the local bodies have functioned 
under the much maligned dictatorial rule, starting with President Ayub Khan’s 
Basic Democracy to Zia ul Haq’s Local Bodies and Musharraf’s Local Government 
Ordinance 2001. 
Since every new government scrapped old systems instead of building upon them, 
there was no continuity to consolidate the local government system. The latest 
effort, the Local Government Ordinance 2001 introduced during Gen Musharraf’s 
regime produced mixed results. In those districts where the Nazims worked with 
some degree of honesty, there was visible improvement in the area. Since the 
programme was discontinued soon as the political government took over, the full 
benefits of this system could not be realised nor its results correctly measured.  
Effective Local Governments 
To carry the process forward, there is need to build upon the Local Government 
Ordinance 2001. A major shortcoming in this ordinance is lack of laying down 
clear responsibilities to meet essential needs of the people. Building upon the 
existing system, the present Union Councils should be provided with adequate 
resources, say annual non lapsable grant of Rupees 100 million to start with (2015 
currency value)for catering to basic l needs of the people by adopting ‘Community 
Development Methodologies’. These governments must ensure; 
Provision of Sustainable Livelihoods. No citizen should die of hunger, not forced to 
sell children or commit suicide. Although every citizen is responsible to earn 
livelihood for himself and his dependents, when a person finds it difficult to meet 
his responsibilities he needs help. Widows, orphans, old people unable to work 
and persons with disabilities must be helped to meet their essential needs of life.

279 

Given the responsibility and provided with resources in the form of grants and 
local taxes, local governments must devise solutions according to their peculiar 
circumstances. For example, in Punjab, Sind and parts of KPK where agriculture is 
basic means of sustenance, the local governments can organize cooperatives like 
small dairy and livestock projects making people shareholders with initial 
investment through grants or soft loan, thus not hurting self respect of the 
people. In large parts of Balochistan raising livestock and horticulture with input 
from experts will increase employment and incomes.  
There would be a need to emphasis on the people that if they face any problem, 
President or Prime Minister is not supposed to take notice. The solutions to their 
problem must be sought at local government level. 
Shelter. Every family must have suitable shelter. Housing even at the village level 
must be planned to save fertile agricultural land going to waste. 
Health, Hygiene and Sanitation. The local governments should be responsible for 
providing essential health , hygiene and sanitation services including provision of 
clean drinking water. Every citizen must get medical cover in time of need. A 
comprehensive health policy at the national level would cater to the 
infrastructure needs of population by providing basic health units and hospitals at 
appropriate levels. The local governments should oversee the functioning of staff 
and provision of medicines. 
Education. The local governments should ensure that every child, male or female, 
in their respective area is provided basic education and chance to pursue higher 
studies/technical education. Performance of teachers and educational institutions 
must be monitored. 
Security. Peaceful atmosphere must be ensured by cubing criminal activity in the 
area using the local police. The local councilors must know every person living in 
their area of jurisdiction. No terrorist should remain sheltered amongst our 
population. 
Conflict Resolution and Provision of Timely Justice. Prompt and timely justice 
must be provided to victims of any crime committed. Restructuring of present

280 

judicial system and revising procedures is needed to ensure that a judge, provided 
with essential tools like investigating team(s) placed under him and the police at 
his call is made responsible to provide justice. Details of changes suggested in the 
system are given in a separate chapter. 
Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs). Work of all the NGOs and other 
organisations/ institutions on poverty alleviation measures and provision of social 
services must be made part of overall plans of the local governments. No NGO 
should be allowed to work without permission of the local governments. 
Countering Extremism.  To maintain peace, the local governments must have 
control of the mosques ensuring that no hate speech is delivered from the pulpit. 
In Islam there is no appointment of ‘Imam Masjid’. The prayers are to be led by 
the rulers and elders of the community. Till the professional/paid Mullahs are 
made to find some other job, their activities should be monitored. The only paid 
staff for the mosque should be those who are to keep the premises clean and 
maintained. 
The requirements of the community should be met by adopting a holistic, all 
encompassing, integrated approach by adopting the process of community 
development practices as outlined in succeeding paragraphs. 
Local Government Elections 
Elections for the local governments are responsibility of the Election Commission 
of Pakistan. Holding of these elections at one time demands large scale 
administrative and logistic arrangements. To facilitate holding local government’s 
elections in a transparent manner, these elections should be staggered district 
wise, completing the process in a province in a couple of weeks. The elections 
should be held on non-party basis. That will help in electing the best suited people 
from all parties as well as those who are willing and can deliver results in 
community development work while remaining above party affiliations. 
Expenditure on Elections 
A major factor in increasing corruption in political system is the expenditure on 
election campaigns by the candidates. On being elected they indulge in financial

