DISMEMBERM
national politics as ONT OF PAKISTAN, 1971 219
a eo 9s
_ other power in the same eine ee crisis like any |
messages to Yahya; they were all ‘i : read the Chinese
for war. Indeed, the Chinese For P cas for restraint and not
Bhutto, when he went as Yahya’ Minister publicly told
Chinese support in the imminent wpe ~ Peking to secure
that Pakistan should try to find a “rati a nil west india,
crisis — which by implication was a solution to the
policy of Pakistan's military condemnation of the
As regards the Chinese role at the UN, when the I
Pakistani war broke out in December 1 careful . Indo-
of the Chinese stand will prove that China's wrath was
ted against the Soviet Union and India rath het | =
fe Balada. her than against
The United States and Bangladesh .
The U.S. Government’s policy durin isi
drew extremely sharp from A feet
tuals and press. This was due partly to lack of understanding of
the genesis of the conflict and to the dubious Indo-Soviet role
in complicating the issue, so that a chain of developments
would be set in motion in such a way as to further their own
national interests. The prevailing mood among the so-called
liberal forces in the U.S.A. depicted U.S. policy as supporting
a military régime against a democratic movement: “The .
emotionalism which surrounded the American public under-
standing of it portrayed Pakistan as a complete villain and
India as a knight in shining President Nixon be-
came the target of public misunderstanding over, his
on the issues involved in the crisis. Nixon never condoned the
Pakistan Army’s action in East Bengal; indeed he put the
strongest pressure on Yahya to make a political settlement of
the crisis and to give up the path of repression and supression, —
During my two private visits to Pakistan in May and September
1971, I had lengthy conversations with Yahya, during which
he showed me the contents of Nixon’s letters to him, and I
can say without fear of contradiction that Nixon did his best
for a political solution of the crisis. Most probably the Nixon-
sponsored efforts would have averted the Indo-Pakistani war ~

220 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
on Bangladesh, which destroyed not only the economic in.
frastructure of Bangladesh but also its social fabric. After
more than two years of independence, Bangladesh was stil]
in a shambles.
As regards American economic aid to Pakistan in 1971,
the bulk of it went to East Bengal, and without it the people
there would have faced a major famine in which millions of
people could have died. The U.S. economic assistance did not
help the military operations by the Pakistani Army, but was
utilized for humanitarian relief operations for the Bengalis,
both inside East Bengal and outside, i.e. those who fled to the
refugee camps in West Bengal. The: U.S. Government, as
disclosed by President Nixon in his Report to Congress in
February 1972, stopped military supplies to Pakistan as soon
as the civil war began. He told Congress: “Immediately, in
early April, we ceased new commitments for economic deve-
lopment, This shut off $35 million worth of arms. Less than
$5 million worth of spare parts, already in the pipeline under
earlier licences, was shipped before the pipeline dried up com-
pletely by the beginning of .
The Indo-Pakistani war finally broke out on December 3,
1971, at a time when Nixon was “in sight of a political settle-
ment” between Yahya Khan’s régime and the Bangladesh
government-in-exile in India. The U.S. efforts for a political
settlement were discussed fully with Mrs. Gandhi when she
visited Washington just ten days before the war began. It
was reported that Nixon pleaded with her to give him a little
time for a negotiated settlement and that she complied with the
President’s pleas. So when, less than ten days later, Mrs.
Gandhi nevertheless sent her troops across the boundary into
East Pakistan, the United States Government’s reaction was
quite naturally unfavourable to India. When the matter came
up before the Security Council, the permanent U.S. representa-
tive, George Bush, said on December 5 that India was clearly
' “the major aggressor”. The U.S. Government had proposed
to both India and Pakistan that there should be a cease-fire
and a mutual withdrawal of troops. The Government of Paki-
stan accepted the U.S. proposal without any reservation.
The Government of India, however, rejected it publicly and
following that rejection there was an escalation in the fight-

DISMEMBERMENT op PAKISTAN, 1971 221
ing on ye Whecontinent, the first incursions being made by
aol that i lh SP ge added: “The White House
a ene dame EY Bea tS
member of the United Nations »41 gn state whic is a
Senator. Edward Kennedy, denouncing Nixon’s attitude
towards the war, raised the question in the Senate: “Are we
ee to what our Country stands for that our govern-
ment can actually Support as well as apologize for a military
régime’s brutal suppression of democracy 743 The real position
was that neither did President Nixon approve the milita
regime's Policy of suppression nor could he approve of Mre
Gandhi's war Solution of the Problem by dismembering a
smaler neighbour with the military and diplomatic Support of
eae poe Nixon’s Policy was dubbed as a “tilt” in favour |
of Pakistan. In reality, as Joseph S, Sisco, Assistant Secretiny
of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, «3 explained
it was “a tilt toward peace and to achieve and help achieve
the kind of peace and stability which we think is in the interest
of all countries in the area as well as the major powers who have
.an interest in the area”.
The New Balance of Power, in South Asia and its Implications
India’s military success in the third Indo-Pakistani war was
almost a foregone conclusion: a demoralized Pakistani ~
Army, surrounded by the hostile local population and without
any air cover, could easily be defeated. Moreover, India: had
the full backing of a super-power: although Pakistan had the
moral and diplomatic Support of Washington and Peking,
she received no effective military help from them. So the
Indian victory was achieved at little cost or difficulty. Though
it cannot be termed a decisive military achievement for the —
Indian forces, it greatly boosted the Indian Army’s morale
after its débacles at the hands of the Chinese In 1962 and the
indecisive result of the 1965 war with Pakistan. re
Politically and psychologically the victory was o a
greater significance: India at last was able to are ee
principal enemy and inflict a major diplomatic defeat on her
number two adversary, China.

222 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN |
India began to claim a hegemonic role in the affairs of the
subcontinent. The state of Bangladesh was treated like one of
her client-states such as Bhutan, Sikkim and Nepal. Ceylon
and Burma were expected to be impressed by India’s new
military and political stature as the dominant power in the
region. Pakistan was taken for granted as a “Jost rival”, both in
military and diplomatic competition. Indians began to talk
in terms of a “confederation” or a “larger union” — a theme
which the Indians can never forget after the “tragic mistake”
of partition or “‘vivisection” of their motherland in 1947. The
Indian Foreign Secretary Mr. Kaul expressed the view that
“in the new era of peace, a union between India, Pakistan and
Bangladesh could subsequently be extended to cover countries
like Nepal which badly wanted transit facilities, as well as
other countries of the region.”4¢ The Hindustan Times of New |
Delhi expressed the hope that the countries of South Asia
could “in time assume the attributes of a confederation or
|
After about two years, India’s hegemony seemed to be less
bright than the Indians had expected after their military victory
in 1971. Pakistan has not proved to be a “lost cause”, either
economically or militarily. Her armed forces are reported to
have made good the losses of 1971: Chinese arms including
MIG 19s and tanks have continued to pour in. According to
some reliable estimates, the total of Chinese military supplies
to Pakistan from 1966 to the present day roughly matches what
Washington had provided during the previous decade (1954-
65).“ Furthermore, the Pakistan-Iran military collaboration
and the latter’s huge military build-up have caused some
doubts about India’s absolute supremacy over Pakistan —
“The Shah of Iran’s interest in Pakistan deserves a careful
watch.”4?7 The most disappointing political development for
the Indian Government in the new era is the rise of anti-
Indian feelings in Bangladesh.** India’s economic situation
also does not favour her role of hegemony. ~
The Major Powers and The New Balance in South Asia
The Soviet Union was quick to cash in on her role as the
liberator of the seventy-five million people of Bangladesh, and

\
DIS
teil to pen eae OF PAKISTAN, 1971 223
th ctrate all s ;
of an “economic-cultaral life garb
Bangladesh with some Risdon teva - She also provided:
stationed in Calcutta, India. Th IGs — which are, however, |
UN. relief operations in Ban, ¢ Soviet contribution to the
$137 milli Pangladesh in 1971~2 was only abo
37 million or 10-7'per cent, compared vith the US. cnet
i he pared with the U.S. a
bution of about $347 million or 27; —
made a lot of publicity for Saat bl iii Yet the Russians
‘Bengalis. 3 concern” for the suffering
The Soviet diplomatic objective ;
to include it esis the oe a a to be
of Asian collective securi hag cus aig
“adi ty. At present, Bangladesh is
covered indirectly under the Russian plan through New Delhi’
“Treaty of Friendship” with Bangladesh similar to the Indo.
Soviet Treaty of 1971. The Russians have intensified their
campaign for the Asian Security Plan. through non-govern-
mental channels. Their claim that this scheme is attracting
interest in Asia is now shored up’ with references to
speeches at conferences and symposia” and proposals of
various partics and organizations.*® These include the Afro-
Asian Peoples’ Solidarity Organization (A.A.P.S.O.) execu-
__ tive committee, which met in Aden in February 1973, and
peace conventions in India and Nepal this year. A leading
role in this campaign is being played by the World Peace
Council (W.P.C.), whose “‘conference on Asian Security and |
Cooperation” in Dacca on May 23-26, 1973, was among the
preliminaries to a “World Congress of Peace Forces” in
Moscow in October 1973. |
‘The unfriendly attitude of the Soviet Union towards the
“new” Pakistan continues. When Bhutto visited Moscow
in March 1972 he was told bluntly by his Russian hosts:
“If history were to repeat itself we would again take the same
position [referring to the Soviet role in the dismemberment
of Pakistan] because we are convinced that it was correct.”
This was a clear warning to Pakistan in the context of present-
day turbulence in Baluchistan and the North-West Frontier
Province of truncated Pakistan. The alleged Soviet role in
current political unrest in the “Wild West” of Pakistan
was dramatized by the seizure of Russian arms smuggled into
Pakistan through the Iraqi embassy in Islamabad. Baghdad

224 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Radio’s broadcast propaganda for a “greater Baluchistan” and
Kabul Radio’s propaganda for Paktoonistan are some of the
omens from Moscow for the further fragmentation of Pakistan,
The coup in Afghanistan in 1973, which was alleged to have
Soviet blessing, and the new Afghan rulers’ threats to revive
the old issue of Paktoonistan are regarded by Pakistan as
Russian pressures to browbeat her into the Asian collective
security plan. Further fragmentation of Pakistan and the
creation of Soviet client-states such as Baluchistan and Pak-
toonistan would fulfil the old Tsarist ambition of a “warm-
water”’ port for the Russians in the South. If this were to hap-
pen, the Russian expansionist designs in the Indian Ocean
and Persian Gulf would be fulfilled and the peace and stability
of the area would be threatened, for not only Pakistan but
also Iran would be affected.
_. The United States is still committed to a low-profile policy
towards South Asia. There have been suggestions that she
should “no longer have any doubt about the Indian hegemony
within the subcontinent and therefore about the need for what
Mr. Galbraith has called a ‘North American solution’ ”
[referring to the strategic accommodation between the
Canada and Mexico].*! It would be a risky step in the context
of Soviet expansionist designs and current Indo-Soviet colla-
boration. It is encouraging to note that President Nixon told
Bhutto that the U.S. objectives in South Asia include the main-
tenance of the territorial integrity of Pakistan.
Dr. William Kintner has made a better and more realistic
appraisal of the new situation in South Asia. He favoured the
classic balance of power strategy and in this context he notes
that “it is desirable to prevent domination of Asia by one
power”, 532 ‘
China, despite having suffered a diplomatic setback in 1971,
is not likely to tolerate passively a “Soviet-Indian axis”.
Chou En-lai predicted that the fall of Dacca to the Indian
‘Army on December 16, 1971 “is not the end of the problems
but just the start of them”. Chou expressed similar views to
the British author, Neville Maxwell, when he said: “India
would in the end taste the bitter fruit of its own making. And
from then on there would be no tranquillity on the subconti-
nent,” 54 Kintner’s arguments are: “Support for China in this

DISMEMBERMENT oF PAKISTAN, 1971 225
pel Higa | Soviet expansionist designs in the area]
eatin ih the classic balance of power strategy —
¢ weaker power against the power threaten-
counterbalance t.” He then adds: “China’s role as
ace va fo the U.S.S.R. has more potential than cur-
wer “to & - ** Bhutto has warned an unnamed foreign
heats cep her hands off the warm waters of the
Je tie sea on the Baluchistan Coast”, §* an obvious reference
roller’ Soviet Union. Pakistan’s viability and. territorial
a a remain, as Kintner points out, “a fundamental
Eich he Und Sela una eee
. e Unit tates “inten ve
ae ¢s.“intends to be a participant and not
, REFERENCES ah
t« See the text of President N. Podgorny’s letter to Yahya Khan i
4, ont. y's let | in in
2. pee 21, 1969. |
3- ver, The Ramparts we Guard, New York, 1950, p. 10, °°
4- Thomas B. Manton, “China, India and Pakistan: New Relationship,”
& paper submitted at the annual meeting of the Association for Asian
Studies in Chicago, Illinois, March 30-31, 1971, p. 3 ;
5- J. A. Naik, India, China and Bangladesh, New Delhi, 1972,
PP- 47-53- ;
6. Ibid:
7- Felix Gross, World Politics and Tension Areas, London, 1966, p. 415 .
8. Neville Maxwell, India’s Chinese War, London, 1970, p. 410:
g: See the text of the Chinese note in the Peking Review, September 24,
1965,
10. For a fuller account see the writer’s forthcoming The Major Powers
and the Indian Subcontinent.
11. Norman D. Palmer, Recent Soviet and Chinese Penetration in India and
Pakistan: Guidelines for Political-Military Policy, McLean, Virginia:
Research Analysis Corporation, 1970, P-43-
12. See “The Nixon Doctrine” in Documents on American Foreign Relations, .
New York: Council on Foreign Relations, 1968.
13; See Hearing before the Subcommittee on Near East and South Asia
Aenean a? gira
12; 15, 20 27, 1973, Washington, 1973, p. 52.
14. a nee ors fice Ect sh 1948), Pp. oF |
cited in William J. Barnds, Jndia, Pakistan and the Great Powers (Ni
York, 1972, P. 366,

|
226 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN .
15. See Central Asian Review, Vol. 14, 1966,
16. "emia interviews and research in Islamabad during 1969-
17, I was a member of President Y Khan’s entourage to Peking and
this information was given to me by Yahya himself. ee
18. See G. W. Choudhury, “U.S. Policy towards the Subcontinent”, in
Pacific Community, October 1973.
19. See Alvin Z. Rubinstein, “Red Stars in the Third World”, Soviet and
Chiflese Influence as a Problem in Foreign Policy Analysis”, a paper
submitted at the Fifth ANPACH Conference, University of Penn-
sylvania, October 25~26, 1973. ,
20. Extracts from the U.N. Secretary-General’s introduction to the Annual
Report on the Work of the U.N. Organization Relating to the Situation
in East Bengal, September 17, 1971. at .
21. Hindustan Times (New Delhi), April 1, 1971.
22. Ibid.
23. Sec the text of Indira Gandhi’s speech in Lok Sabha on March 27, 1971,
in Bangladesh Documents, Vol. 1,.p. 669, New Delhi: Ministry of External
_ Affairs, n.d.
24. Ibid., p. 670.
25. Ibid., p. 672.
a6. Ibid., Vol. II, pp. 922-3. . 8
27. Ibid., p. 324.
a8. Ibid., p. 328. * .
2g. Ibid., p. 329. ,
go. H. Norman Brown, The United States and India, Pakistan, Bangladesh,
Cambridge, Mass., 1972, p-218.
g1. See The Observer Foreign News Service, London, No, 28727, April 5, 1971-
32. Robert H. Donaldson, “Soviet Political Aims in South Asia”, a paper
submitted to the Twenty-fifth Annual Meeting of the Association for
Asian Studies, March 3o=April 1, 1973, Chicago, Illinois, p. 8.
33. See Daily Telegraph, London, December 6, 1971.
94. See the text of the statement by the Government of China issued by its
delegation at the U.N. on December 16, 1971, in the Naw York Times,
December 17, 1971. ; :
35- Ibid. ;
36. President Nixon’s Report to the United States Congress, February 9,
1972, PP» 50-1.
37. See Peter Van Newss, Revolution and the Chinese Foreign Policy: Peking
Support for Wars of National Liberation, London, 1971.
38. Thomas B. Manton, op. cit. -
39. President Nixon’s Report to the United States Congress, February 9,
1972, pp. 48-51.
40. See the statement of Mr. ‘Charles Bray, the State Department spokes-
man on December.7,.1971-  -
41. See the USIS White House. correspondent, Alexander M. Sullivan's.
. statement on December 8, 1971.
42. The @bserver Foreign News Service, London, No. 29487, December 8, 197!-

DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN, 1971 227
43- Par ret, Submits on Near Bast and Seth Ai, op. cit, p
44- Far Eastern Economic Review, Feb +1972, p. 19,
45. Cited in ibid. eS a
46: See Howard Wriggins, “One Year Later: India, Pakistan and Bangla-
desh”, World View, May 1973.
47, See the Report of the Indian Economic and Scientific Research
Foundation on National Security in the Overseas Hindustan Times,
January 25, 1979. a
48. For details of current anti-Indian feeling in Bangladesh, see India--
Bangladesh Tangle, published by Research and Documentation Centre,
P.O. 734, London, S.W.11; see also The Statesman Weekly, Calcutta;
Pane |
49. » “April 26, 1979.
50. Ibid., March 78, 1972,
51. Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Near and | Asia, op. cit., p. 125.
52. William R. Kintner, The Impact of President Nixon's Visit to Peking on
International Politics, Philadelphia: Foreign Policy Research Institute,
Thon ok techn it | ;
53. Thomas op. ci zs
54 Maxwell, “Midnight Thoughts of Premier Chou”,. The Sunday
Times, London, December 5, 1971. ty ,
55- William R. Kintner, op, cit, p. 45. |
London, Septem 10, oe
56. The Times, on, oe 1973 World” by Kenneth ‘Rush,
57- “The United States and the Changing ;
Deputy Secretary in the Department of State’ Bulletin, April g, 1973. |
|
|
|

| | IO
END OF AN ERA
Pakistan was claimed by the Indian Muslims on the principle
of the right of self-determination. The state was born and bap-
tized in blood — thousands of people were killed and millions
were uprooted from their homes in 1946-7 when Pakistan
finally emerged as'a result of the Indian Muslims’ determined
struggle to achieve a state of their own where they wished to
lead their lives in accordance with the broad principles of
equality, social justice and fair play as taught by their religion,
Islam. Pakistan was established amid great popular rejoicing
and enthusiasm because for the people it was not only libera-
tion from foreign rule; it also meant, as I wrote in one of my
previous books, “freedom from the threat of majority rule in
a caste-ridden social system where they would have been
destined to be a permanent and stagnant religious minority’’.*
But unfortunately the people’s rejoicings soon died down and
their cherished homeland was plunged into political instability
and confusion. Pakistan’s history was one of political instabi-
lity: “personal civilian dictatorship through various mutations
of parliamentary government to military dictatorship, veering
again towards some form of democracy. The constitutional
problem has been the making’ of constitutions rather than
their working. The political image of Pakistan has been one
of controversy and instability.”* What Dr. Spear referred to .
as “some form of democracy” was introduced by Ayub in his
constitution of 1962, and proved a fatal blow to Pakistan’s
emerging nationalism. The philosophy of Ayub’s constitution
as he himself claimed was to “blend democracy with disci-
pline”. It implied that the people were not fit for self-rule
which therefore had to be‘ introduced by “instalments”. The
attitude was the same as that of a colonial power. The people
, , 228 . 3° 4

