THE FIRST AND LAST GENERAL ELECTION 191
to. Figures from papers of the Election Commission.
* 11. Fora concise but useful accountofvarious parties and their programmes,
see G. G. M, Budruddin, Election Handbook 1970, Karachi, 1970.
12. See the full text of the Awami League Manifesto in Bangladesh Documents,
published by the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of Pakistan,
n.d., Vol. I, pp. 66-82.
13: Ibid., p. 82.
14. For Mujib’s various speeches during the Election campaign in 1970,
_ see Bangladesh Documents, op. cit., and also Bangladesh, My Bangladesh:
= ¢ Selected Speeches and Statements by Sheikh Muijbur Rahman, New York,
' Fernhill House, 1972. i
15+ Bangabandhu Speaks: A Collection of Speeches and Statements, Dacca,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Government of Bangladesh, n.d., p. 42.
_ 16, See Election Handbook 1970, op. cit.,p. 31.
17. Z. A. Bhutto, The Great Tragedy, Karachi, 1971, p. 14 and pp. 60-1.
18, Ibid., p. 13 and 75.
19. For text of the television-radio broadcasts of the political leaders, sce
Information Handbook, Part I, Vol. 11, ed. by M. Naeem Tahir, Pakistan
_ Television Corporation, Rawalpindi, 1970.
20. See the text of Yahya’s broadcast in Dawn, December 4, 1970.
at. See Morning News, Dacca, November 28, 1970.
92. See Fazal, Muqueem Khan, Pakistan’s Crisis in Leadership, Karachi,
1973, p. 41; and see also Anthony Mascarenhas, The Rape of Bangladesh,
‘Delhi, 1970, pp. 58-8. |
—

6
TRIPARTITE POLITICAL NEGOTIATIONS
BEFORE CONFRONTATION
The arrangement left by the British authorities when they
voluntarily liquidated the raj in the subcontinent in 1947
has been destroyed by the tragic events which began on the
night of March 25, 1971, in East Bengal culminating in the
dismemberment of Pakistan and the emergence of a new —
and problematical - state of Bangladesh in South Asia on
December 16, 1971. Before the division of India in 1947,
a series of political negotiations took place between the British
Government, the Congress and the Muslim League in search
of various formulae — one such being the Cabinet Mission
Plan of 1946 to maintain. the unity of India; sincere and
honest efforts were made to resolve the conflict between the
divergent aspirations of the Indian National Congress and the
Muslim League, so that the division of India could be
Contrary to widespread popular belief, Pakistan. was not the
product of the “wicked British policy of divide and rule”.?
The British authorities made sincere efforts to maintain the
unity of India, which they considered the greatest achieve-
ment of their raj.? .
Similarly, before the disintegration of Pakistan, a series of
political talks was held to find some workable means of main-
taining the unity of Pakistan — at least to keep the green and
white crescent flag flying in both East and West Pakistan.
There were serious and sincere efforts to resolve the conflicting
aims and aspirations of the emerging Bengali nationalism
(or regionalism as it used to be termed at that stage) and
those of Pakistan nationalism, which had begun to face
various challenges in the. previous decade. Again, making an
analogy with the events of 1946-7, the biggest hurdle in the
132 :

TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 133
way of the transfer of power from the military régime headed
by Yahya Khan to the elected representatives of the people
Was the Bengali and West Pakistani controversy, like the
Hindu-Muslim controversy in undivided India — whether
Pakistan should remain united or the Awami League’s de-
mand for a separate Bengali state be conceded.
Of course, unlike the Muslim League and Jinnah, the
Awami League or Mujib could not openly ask for secession or
_' the creation of Bangladesh. Jimnah was free to demand a
separate state for the Muslims from a foreign ruling authority
which had declared its policy of winding up the empire.
Mujib and his party were living in an. established state —
constitutionally a federal union which was regarded as indivis-
ible — and the Pakistan central Government was legally and
morally committed to uphold the territorial integrity of the
country. Any federal authority would feel such a commitment
as of paramount importance and value. Mujib’s modus
operandi was, therefore, entirely different from Jinnah’s and
sometimes appeared as ambivalent, if not sometimes vague
and contradictory. But the fact remained that the Bengali
intelligentsia, like the Muslim intelligentsia in undivided
India, seemed to have come to the conclusion in the 1960s
that it could no longer live with the West Pakistanis and that a
separate state was not only possible and desirable, but inevit-
able because of the growing tension between the unresponsive
ruling élite in Islamabad and the militant Bengali nationalists ©
in Dacca.‘
The final blow to the concept of a united Pakistancame asa.
result of the Indo-Pakistan war of 1965 when the last argument
in favour of living together — that federal union, however
unsatisfactory it might otherwise be, at least provided a guaran-
tee against external aggression-— was also destroyed.5 The
war of 1965 had a disastrous impact on the viability of Pakistan
as a united country. It was immediately after that war that
‘Mujib put forward his famous six-point programme which, 3
on close scrutiny, proves to be nothing but a veiled scheme of
secession. Mujib could not produce another “Lahore Resolu-
tion” of 1940 but ironically it was in the same city of Lahore
that, twenty-six years later in 1966, he produced his subtle
scheme of another separate state. As the political negotiations

134 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
between the ruling authority (ic. the Army), the Bengalis
and West Pakistanis centred on’ how Mujib’s six-point pro-
gramme could be accommodated in some federal or (at the
final stages) in any confederal scheme for a United Pakistan,
I shall begin my discussion of political talks in 1969-71 with a
brief analysis of Mujib’s scheme.
The Six-Point Programme
Mujib’s programme, on which he based his election campaign
and won a landslide victory in East Pekistan, was like many
other political programmes ~ capable of more than one inter-
pretation.® The identity of its real authors or draftsmen is still
a matter of speculation. Rumour went so far as to make the
author Altaf Gauhar, one of the most trusted and close mem-
_bers of the ruling élite during the Ayub era; the hint was made
in certain quarters that Ayub himself asked Altaf Gauhar to
do this job at a time when there was great unrest in West
Pakistan over the Tashkent agreement, and that Ayub wanted
to divert the attention of West Pakistan by raising the spectre
of the secession of East Pakistan. But during my four years
stay in Islamabad, both during and after the fall of Ayub,
I could find no basis for such a rumour. Nor can I believe
that Ayub with his very real patriotism could resort to such _
a trick; with all his limitations, Ayub was a great Pakistani
leader and a statesman. A shrewd document like this was most
likely the joint product of several intellectual advisers and
associates of Mujib. :
The first point laid down was: “The constitution should
provide for a Federation of Pakistan in its true sense” — but it
significantly added “‘on the basis of the Lahore Resolution’’.”
Many interpretations of the Lahore Resolution claim that it
envisaged independent and sovereign states: thanks to
its most unsatisfactory wording, the Lahore Resolution was
,capable of such interpretation. So the commitment in favour
of a federal union was not unqualified. There were certain
other sub-points such as parliamentary form of government,
supremacy of the legislature, election on the basis of direct
elections and adult franchise, but all these were made in the
context of Ayub’s constitution of 1962 which denied them.

TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 135
When Yahya began his political dialogue with Mujib, these
issues were of no Significance because Yahya had conceded
all these demands; as pointed out already, he in fact, went
one step further by providing the representation in the
federal legislature on the basis of “one man, one vote” thus
ee a clear Bengali majority in the National Assembly.*
Point 2 laid down that “Federal Government shall deal
only with two subjects, defence and foreign affairs, and all
other subjects shall vest in the federating states.” Point.3 — 4
provided for either a common currency with so many limita-
Hons as to make it almost unworkable, or “two separate but
freely convertible currencies” for East and West Pakistan.®
Muyib tried to justify the demand for a central government
with two, or if currency was added, three subjects by citing
the Cabinet Mission Plan of 1946, in which the British Govern.
ment proposed a complicated three-tier union with a central
government having three subjects.!° But he did not add that the
Congress leaders like Nehru and Patel preferred to accept
division of India rather than such an absurd arrangement.2!
If one examines the existing federal systems of the world,
one could hardly find a federation with only two powers. But
the significant part of Mujib’s scheme of a centre with only two
subjects was that while it gave defence and foreign affairs to
the centre, it deprived the centre of any financial or adminis-
trative means to carry out its obligations even with regard to
those who subjects, As the renowned author on federalism,
K. C. Wheare, points out, a power without financial resources
is meaningless. A federal form of government requires both
the national and regional governments of the country to be
independent of each other within their own spheres. To give
the centre defence responsibilities without any financial
resources is something like the elaborate collective security ;
system provided under the United Nations Charter. It
might have been anything but a true federal union. So Points
2 and 3 were contradictory to Point 1, which claimed to seck a
“Federation of Pakistan”. |
Then turning to foreign affairs, Mujib’s proposal made a
subtle distinction between what may be termed political or
diplomatic aspects and economic aspects of foreign affairs.
His Points 4 and 5 made it clear that the federal government |

136 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
would have nothing to do with the country’s external or in-
ternal economic policies. There was good and ample justifica-
tion for Mujib’s demand that the Bengalis should be masters
of their own economic development and even in external
economic relations. He cited unchallengeable data and
material proving how the economic plight of the Bengalis
was intensified by the policies and actions of the ruling élite
in West Pakistan. No impartial observer of the economic growth
of Pakistan could challenge these figures.?* But the point here
is how a federal government could carry on its foreign policy
without any say in external economic relations. Mujib’s
scheme gave powers to the federating units “to establish
trade and commercial relations; to set up trade missions in
and enter into agreements with foreign countries’ 4 [my italics],
In a developing country like Pakistan, foreign affairs are
.closely connected with economic issues and problems such as
foreign aid, foreign loans and regional economic co-operation.
I once asked Mujib whether the purchase of tanks or planes .
counted as external trade, or did it concern diplomatic and
political relationships between the seller country and the
purchasing one? His answer was, as usual, blank and vague.
In short, under Mujib’s six-point programme the centre was
made a paper one; it would have no control over the country’s
fiscal, monetary and budgetary policies or their execution. In
external affairs, it made the work of a foreign ministry meaning-
less, and the defence obligations of the centre would have
worked something like those of the United Nations — dependent
on the federating units for financial contributions to enable it
to carry out any of its responsibilities in the defence of the
country. So my earlier contention that Mujib’s six-point plan
was nothing but a veiled scheme of secession is borne out by
any objective analysis of the proposal,
As pointed out earlier, Mujib could not adopt Jinnah’s
clear-cut demand for a separate state because he was operating
in entirely different circumstances. So his strategy had to be
a veiled one. Nor was he sure whether the Muslims of Fast
Bengal would opt for a separate state even in 1970 if a clear-cut
proposal were put before the electorate. The vast majority of
the Bengali intelligentsia, civil service and business community
would most likely back him even if he demanded a mandate

|
: . TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 137
for a separate state; but it was doubtful whether the Muslim
voters of the rural areas would 80 easily give up their cherished
ideals and ideology which had made them the most enthusiastic
Supporters of Jinnah in the Plebiscitory election df 1946.
It was only the Army’s ruthless atrocities on the innocent vil-
lagers, including their women and children, that turned the
whole of East Bengal to secession, |
Dilemmas and Problems
The pertinent question is how any meaningful dialogue with
Mujib was possible when the six-point plan struck at the
very existence of a united Pakistan; how could Yahya reconcile
his five points, as laid down in his L.F.O., with Mujib’s six-
point plan? There was no doubt that the provisions for one
Pakistan as laid down in the L.F.O. - or for that matter any
concept of a united Pakistan — yas irreconcilable with Mujib’s
six-point plan if the latter were not modified. This particular |
“if” is of greatest significance in the history of Pakistan’s dis-
memberment. The whole political dialogue between Yahya
and Mujib from 1969 up to their crucial meeting in January
1971 after the elections were over was based on Mujib’s un-
qualified and repeated pledge to modify his six-point plan.
There were tape-recorded versions of the Yahya-Mujib talks —
I do not know if the Mujib-Ahsan dialogues were also tape- .
recorded. I was also present during some of the political dia-
logues, and I used to visit Mujib regularly at the time of final-
izing the L.F.O. and had lengthy discussions with him, As
pointed out earlier, provincial assembly elections Were also
held simultaneously with those for the national. assembly at
Mujib’s own suggestion so that he did not need to face the
' electorate again in six months’ time ; if'so, he argued, how could
he modify his six points? _
Sony eee Bhutto, now accuse Yahya of sim-
plicity, if not stupidity, in placing reliance on Mujib s words,
But was it an unfair game? After all, the public in East Pakistan
was behind his demand for regional autonomy, although it must
be made clear the Muslim masses in rural Bengal who voted
for Mujib did not realize that the six-point plan, if it were not
modified, would mean the end of one Pakistan. After all, the

138 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
voters in an Asian country can hardly be expected to
understand the fine distinction between ““maximum autonomy”
and a veiled scheme of secession. Fyrthermore Mujib, as is
apparent from an analysis of his election speeches during 1970,
never fora moment told the Bengali Muslims that his aim was |
the creation of a separate state of Bangladesh — as he claimed
after its establishment with the triumphant entry of Indian
troops into Dacca on December 16, 197!-
It is true that by August 1970 the government had received
authentic reports concerning Mujib’s real intensions. General
Akbar’s periodical (fortnightly) reports and the civil intelli-
gence service, of which the regional chief in East Pakistan was a
Bengali officer, gave Yahya enough indications that Mujib’s
strategy seemed to be to use the elections to establish his creden-
tials as the sole leader of the Bengalis, and after it he would
“show his teeth”. At this stage (August-November) serious
discussion took place as to whether Mujib should be allowed
to face the electorate without autonomy being defined, or
whether Yahya should challenge Mujib on substantive evidence
including a press statement which he had given to a foreign
journalist, expressing his ultimate goal of establishing a separ-
ate state for Bengalis. Mujib asked the foreign journalist not to
publish his interview; however the intelligence service in Dacca
obtained a copy of it from a local journalist who accompanied
the ‘foreign journalist to Mujib’s residence. There were also
reports that Mujib had begun to have contacts with New
Delhi.
While Yahya might have been justified in formulating his
plan for transfer of power in November 1969 on the basis of
his honest belief in Mujib’s words, developments in the latter
part of 1970 were too serious to be ignored. I had taken a
leading part in finalizing the L.F.O., and it was on my sugges-
tion that provincial autonomy was not defined in the L.F.O.
and instead “five principles” relating to the minimum require-
ments for one Pakistan were spelled out in L.F.O.; however,
when I heard Mujib’s own voice in a tape-recorded conversa-
tion in his inner cabinet giving clear hints of his ultimate
aim as referred to earlier (as also when I read the full contents
of Mujib’s press statement to the foreign correspondent as
. referred to earlier) my own doubts about the success of the

\ TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 139
plan for transfer of power as laid down in the L.F.O. began to ;
grow. I also held discussions with Bhashani, Nurul Amin,
Ghulam Azam and some of the student leaders inside the
Awami League who were my students I carefully read various
intelligence reports, particularly those of Akbar for whose
integrity and sense of patriotism I have a high regard. It was
a terrible dilemma for me: the L.F.O., which I had helped to
draft, conceded all legitimate demands and aspirations of
East Pakistanis, and I knew that Yahya was thoroughly sincere
in implementing these provisions relating to maximum auto-
nomy for East Pakistan. But when it became evident that,
instead of appreciating Yahya’s gestures, Mujib now seemed to
be moving along the path of separation, I could no longer, :
while remaining true to my deep-rooted convictions in favour
of a united Pakistan, remain silent.
When Yahya returned home from his extensive stay in Dacca
during the floods in August 1970, I was busy organizing
a conference on international affairs which was attended by ;
many foreign scholars. Yahya was to inaugurate the conference
and my task was to prepare his speech for the occasion. During
this period Yahya with his family including his wife came to
my residence at Islamabad for a dinner on August 25. On that
evening I requested him to give me a “lengthy session” with
him “to discuss some most urgent problems”; he at once
agreed and we met two days later.at the President’s House for
a three-hour session. I gave my candid views on the growing
threats to Pakistan; I also showed him a copy ofthe preliminary
draft constitution prepared by Mujib’s constitutional advisers,
which had no trace of any compromise on the six-point plan.15
Yahya was very grave after my exposition of the situation; .
he raised the question of how we could now retreat. My answer
to this was that there was no question of retreating over the
matters of transfer of power or free elections on the basis of
“one man, one vote”, neither should there be any going back
on the pledge: to give East Pakistan “maximum autonomy”,
particularly in economic and financial matters. Yahya then
asked for specific suggestions. My advice to him was that there
was nothing “final” in political thinking or policy; we had
decided not to define “provincial autonomy” in 1969, but by
1970 Mujib and his followers had started a campaign of hatred,

140 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
-_ openly preaching Bengali nationalism and challenging the very
existence of one Pakistan. In the changed circumstances, |
added, Yahya as the country’s President should firmly declare;
“Thus far and no farther.” He asked me to elaborate, and |
then pointed out to him that it was high time that the question
of provincial autonomy, which had created the most explosive
situation, should no longer be kept undefined; the viability
of national government must now be spelled clearly by giving
the maximum possible autonomy, and then if Mujib should
revolt, Yahya should put the issue in the form of a. referendum
to the East Pakistanis and ascertain if they wanted “genuine
autonomy” or separation. I concluded that seventy-five million
people couldn't Ye kept by force if they really wanted separation,
But Mujib should not be allowed, like Abdul Ghaffar Khan in
1946, to mislead the Bengali Muslims. Ghaffar Khan also
never said in 1946 that he wanted a separate state for the
Pathans, but he demanded “autonomy” for them. Yahya
listened carefully to my arguments; he always used to give
serious consideration to my suggestions on constitutional issues
and also on foreign affairs. He asked me to work out the details
of my proposals. However, a number of factors worked against
my plan.
First, Ahsan reacted sharply against any such plan; he was
confident that a deal with Mujib would be made — which only
betrayed his lack of understanding .of political dynamics in
East Pakistan. Peerzada’s role was dubious; he remained on
the sidelines during this crucial period. He wanted to keep his
options open for a Yahya-Mujib understanding because if the
rightist parties in West Pakistan, which his rival in the cabinet
Major-General Sher Ali Khan was supporting, won the elec-
tions, his personal future would not be secure. Until Bhutto’s
conclusive victory at the polls, he would not advise Yahya
anything which might offend Mujib. In the absence of the
support of the provincial Governor’s and the de facto prime
, minister, my plan had little chance of success as Yahya unlike
Ayub could not take a bold decision without the backing of
some members of the junta.
Secondly, Yahya was then busy with two important state
visits — one to Washington in October and the other to Peking
in November. While he was in Peking, the terrible cyclone

