/
THE DACCA DIALOGUE 169 >
Som Vashington for. his confrontation with the Pakistani
central authorities, The U.S: Ambassador, Mr. J. Farland,
had a meeting with Mujib in Dacca in March and told him,
in unmistakable terms, not to expect any “support” for what
the U.S. Government considered an “internal problem of
Pakistan”. Mujib was bewildered by the U.S, Ambassador’s
remarks, as the latter told me subsequently in London.
Mujib’s real sources of support (New Delhi and, via New Delhi,
Moscow) were, however, certain,
On March ar Mr Bhutto and his aides also arrived in
Dacca. Bhutto, who had earlier declined to to to Dacca when
Yahya had urged him to talk to Mujib, now suddenly hurried
there amid unexpected rumours of a “settlement”? between
Yahya and Mujib, Bhutto’s Presence was, no doubt, needed
as he was the leader of the majority party in West Pakistan:
however, it did not contribute to any settlement but rather
created further complications. Bhutto and his aides were given
copies of Yahya’s constitutional draft proclamation, and raised
| a number of objections to it. One argument put forward by
Bhutto and subsequently echoed by Yahya after the failure
of the Dacca dialogue was that if the transfer of power wag
effected and martial law was lifted without the approval of
the National Assembly, it would create a@ legal vacuum and
the proclamation would be “without legal validity”. What
they conveniently forgot was that when Ayub in 1962 had
introduced a constitution and lifted martial law by a proclama- {
tion, there had been no question of “‘legal
Though Mujib was opposed to meeting Bhutto, Yahya
was successful in arranging a tripartite conference among them;
so the three principal Parties (Yahya, Mujib and Bhutto)
met on March 22. However, on the day before the proposed
meeting a most discouraging development took Place. Mujib,
accompanied by Tajuddin, on his own initiative sought an
unscheduled meeting with Yahya. At that crucial meeting
Mujib had Tajuddin inform Yahya that the Awami League
could not agree to the setting up of any “central or national |
cabinet”. Instead, it was argued, the Awami League wanted
Power to be transferred to the two provinces or regions of East
and West Pakistan. This meant that they were formally asking
for the country to be split into Bangladesh and West Pakistan.

\
170 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Yahya was completely shocked b this demand to dismember
the me he pleaded and urged Mujib to reconsider.
Yahya reminded Mujib of his pledge to the nation in 196g
that his intent after coming to power would be the transfer
of power to the elected representatives of the people and hot the
dismemberment of the country. Yahya told Mujib 7 Ua
takable terms that he could not preside over the liquidation
of his country and that Mujib’s threat to the territorial integrity
of the country would not remain challenged.
Zero hour was rapidly approaching and the rumours of a
settlement that had been circulating in the previous four
or five days were fading away. Instead, the grim shadow of
civil war loomed near when the tripartite talks began at the
President’s House on March 22. Bhutto gave the following
version of his March 22 meetings with Mujib: “He suggested
that I should become the Prime Minister of West Pakistan
"and he would look after East Pakistan. According to him,
this was the only way out of the Bhutto added
: that he'told Yahya of his reaction to Mujib’s proposals: “I
could not be a party to the proposed scheme as it inevitably
meant two Pakistans.”® Nobody who cherished any hope of a
united Pakistan could agree to Mujib’s plan for dividing the
country. _
According to the minutes of the talks on March 22, no
progress was made at all. The Awami League had expressed its
unwillingness to accept Yahya’s draft proclamation, and
promised to prepare a counter draft proclamation, but it was
not presented at the meeting on March 22. It seemed that
what Mujib proposed to Yahya and Bhutto on March 21 and
22 in private conversations, which amounted to splitting the
country, would now be presented in a more subtle document
so that the onus for the failure of the Dacca dialogue and its
dire consequences would not fall on the Awami Leaguers.
So Dr. Kamal Hossain was now engaged with his economic
' advisers in putting the final touches to the plan for separation
ina camouflaged form. The same technique of a veiled scheme
of secession, which the constitutional experts and economists
of the Awami League had been preparing since 1970, would
now be formally announced to the people. Yet even at that
stage, they were cautious not to announce formally an un-

THE DACGA DIALOGUE
qualified plan for the division of the country. Their technique
seemed to be to speak in terms of a “‘Confederation of Pakistan”,
rather than the Federal Union which the six points had pledged
to the people, while in reality their plan was the division of the
country ~ a plan which both Mujib and the Awami League
knew to be unacceptable to the Army, thus making a confron-
tation inevitable.
March 23 ; |
March. 2 has for long been a great day for the Muslims of the
Indian subcontinent. It was on this day in 1940 that Quaid-i-
Azam Mohammed Ali Jinnah, the founder of the future state of
Pakistan, proclaimed to: the world that the ultimate goal of
Muslim nationalists in India was a separate state of their own.
On the creation of Pakistan in 1947, March 23 was declared
a “national day” and is still observed with due solemnity and
dignity just as January 26 is observed in India. But in Dacca
on March 33, 1971, it was observed as “Resistance day”,
No Pakistani flag was allowed to be hoisted, even on public
buildings, let alone private houses; the two lonely flags that
were hoisted were those at the President’s House where Yahya
was staying and at the Provincial Government House; of
course, it was also flown in the Cantonment areas in Dacca.
Not only was the Pakistani flag not hoisted, it was everywhere —
burned and insulted, and the flag of Bangladesh flew every- -
_. Where. Mujib took the Salute at a march-past composed of
Bengali paramilitary units at his residence; the flag of Bangla-
desh was hoisted with great pomp and grandeur as if the new
nation of Bangladesh were already established. Mujib’s public
Statements were equally unfortunate and Provocative. At a time
when vital negotiations were going on, his actions and speeches
only confirmed the fears of those who had earlier expressed
doubts that once the election was over, Mujib would establish
Bangladesh and not become Prime Minister of Pakistan, even
if genuine autonomy on the basis of the six points were granted.
March 33, 1971, was a truly tragic day for the history of
united Pakistan. When the Chinese and Iranian consulates
tried to hoist the Pakistani flag they became targets of mob
violence,

172 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Mujib’s Final Plan
It was also on March 23, 1971, that Mujib finally provided
his own draft constitution, rejecting the one offered by Yahya
which granted full autonomy on the basis of the six points
minus dismemberment of the country. Mujib’s new proposal
was presented by Dr. Kamal Hossain to Yahya’s aides at 11.45
a.m. at a meeting held at the President’s House. This date thus
marked the virtual ending of a united Pakistan.
The worst fears about Mujib’s six points as well
about his repeated pledges to modify the plan were now proved
to be justified. The text of the new Mujib plan can be studied
in the White Paper published by the Government of Pakistan
on August 5, 1971. 1 read the original copy submitted by the
Awami League negotiating team on March 23. The text was
prepared by Dr. Kamal Hossain and it ran into twenty-six
typed pages and had the signatures of the Awami League aides
including Tajuddin, who became the Acting Prime Minister
_ the Bangladesh government in exile set up on Indian terri-
tory after the failure of the Dacca dialogue. It began with a
preamble and had eighteen articles with many sub-clauses
and a lengthy schedule. The plan both dealt with interim
arrangements that were demanded immediately and proposed
a procedure for framing the “‘two constitutions” by two sove-
reign “‘constitutional conventions” for the so-called ““Confeder-
ation of Pakistan’’. ; \
By the interim arrangement, the powers of the central
government with regard to the “State of Bangladesh” would
be confined to “defence”, “foreign affairs excluding foreign
trade and aid”’, currency, and a few peripheral items such as
citizenship, public debt of the centre, standards and weights
and measures, property of the centre, co-ordination of inter-
national and inter-wing communications, etc. The six-point
formula of a strictly three-power central government was
' proposed. As I ‘have already pointed out, Yahya was
willing to agree to a central government having only three
powers with regard to East Pakistan or Bangladesh. But the
real issue was that the Mujib plan gave the centre these
three powers on paper only and not in reality.
Let me take each of these items. In all previous constitu-

=.
THE DACCA DIALOGUE 173
tions of Pakistan “defence” had been adequately defined so
as to cover ancillary powers connected with the defence of the
country, such as Connected industries, the manufacture of arms,
jurisdiction of cantonment areas, etc. But under Mujib’s plan,
no such powers connected with defence were allowed. The
meaning and connotation of defence as given in the Mujib
plan were vague and narrow, .
More important, while the centre was given the responsi-
: bility of “defence”, however narrowly and restrictively defined,
it was not given any independent financial resources to carry
out its responsibilities and obligations. The financial relation-
ship between the centre and Bangladesh. as proposed in the
Mujib plan was as follows;
All duties and taxes which were prior to the commencing
day (ie. the day on which the proclamation comes into
force) levied and collected within the State of Bangladesh
by or under the authority of the Central Legislature shall
be collected by the Government ‘of Bangladesh and after
adjustment against all Central Government financial
allocations to and direct expedition in the State of Bangladesh
48 provided in the Central. budget of 1970-1, the residue
remaining shall be made over by the Government of
Bangladesh to the Central Government; if upon such
adjustment, an amount is found to be due-to the State of
Bangladesh from the Central Government, the Central
Government shall make over such amount to the Government .
of Bangladesh. Ne
The implications of the proposed financial arrangement
were that the central Government would have no power of
taxation or any source of revenue. The contribution of
desh to the central Government’s expenditures were made
uncertain and vague. In fact, while the central Government ~
was denied any financial Powers or resources as far as Bangla-
desh was concerned, it might be liable to pay “dues” to Bang-
ladesh on the basis of the Yahya Government’s budget of 1970-1
under which generous allocations had been made for East
Pakistan, if the Bangladesh Government should decide that
these were due to it from the centre. The Mujib plan seemed to .
seek both advantages: absolute control over financial resources
and at the same time the centre’s grant to Bangladesh, Yahya

174 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
and his aides proposed that either the central Government
should retain authority to levy taxes to the extent needed to
meet its obligations in defence and foreign affairs, or Bangla.
desh could levy and collect all taxes, with the centre assured ofa
“fixed percentage” of contributions towards the central
Government’s expenditures.® But none of these constructive
Suggestions was acceptable to the Awami League, whose plan
was to make the central Government of Pakistan as dependent
on Bangladesh in financial matters as the United Nations is
dependent on its members for voluntary contributions, though
in the case of the U.N. the member-countries’ contributions
are at least fixed, even though they are voluntary.
__ Turning to foreign affairs, the Mujib plan made an unten-
able distinction between the diplomatic and the economic
aspects. I have.already explained how absurd this distinction
was; it meant giving the centre something with one hand and
taking it away with the other. In order to assure the Awami
Leaguers that the Bengalis would no longer be subject to any
contrél from the central authority in their economic and finan-
cial matters, including foreign aid and foreign trade, Yahya
proposed that foreign trade and aid should be negotiated by the
centre for the whole country but with a constitutional guaran-
tee for “a predetermined share im percentages for Bangladesh
on the basis of population or for some years even a higher
figure”. Once the aid had been negotiated by the central
Government, including representatives from Bangladesh,
the Government of Bangladesh would be free to negotiate
projects “directly, on the basis of its predetermined share,
with the forcign countries and international agencies like the
World Bank’’.!° It was further proposed by Yahya and his
negotiating team that both the posts of Minister and Secretary
for the portfolio of External Trade and Aid would be in the
‘hands ‘of the Bengalis for the next five to ten years, so as to
mollify the Bengali fears that their economic rights and in-
. terests were not being properly Again, none
of these proposals was acceptable to the Awami Leaguers:
if they were as interested in regional autonomy as they
_ Claimed ever since Yahya’s formulation of his plan for the
transfer of power in 1969, there was no reason why these sug-
gestions should not have been accepted. Their personal attitude

| . THE DACCA DIALOGUE 175
during. the Dacca dialogue was adamantly unresponsive
any suggestion regarding the modification of their plan.
The Mujib plan placed inter-wing trade, ie. the trade
between East and West Pakistan, on the same level as foreign
trade. Within “one country” the two regions would have trade
transactions as if they were two separate countries. This too
was untenable. The Yahya team suggested that while Bangla-
desh should be the master of its economic policies and pro-
' gramme, there should at least be some inter-wing council for
any common matters relating to the economy of the country —
as a whole; but nothing of this sort was acceptable to the Awami
League. Regional trade under the Mujib plan would be trans-
acted, if at all, in the same manner as foreign trade; Bangla-
desh and West Pakistan would have separate barter deals and
trade agreements with foreign countries as well as between
| themselves, if they so wished. Thus under the Mujib plan
Bangladesh might have closer trade and economic relations
| with India, for instance, than with the other unit of the
| so-called “Confederation of Pakistan’. Similarly, Bangladesh
| and West Pakistan would have the power to borrow abroad
independently of any control by or even co-ordination with the °
national Government. When Yahya and his team pointed out
that the charter of an international organization like the World
Bank provides that it can only lend on the guarantee of a
| member country and not of its constituent units, the Awami
Leaguers replied: “We are quite competent to look after our
economic policies and problems.”’!2
The Mujib plan demanded complete separation of economic
planning. This had been accepted by Yahya long before: when
he asked me to prepare a formula for the relationship between
the centre and the provinces, it was already conceded that East
Pakistan would have absolute and unfettered control over its
economic planning. What was significant was that even in a
confederation there are provisions for co-ordination and co-
. operation among the units in economic matters, but the Awami
League would have no such provisions even for voluntary
Co-operation or co-ordination such as exists, for instance,
between Pakistan, ‘Iran and Turkey under their Regional
Co-operation for Development (RCD) Plan.
. The Mujib plan also demanded a Separate central bank

176 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN .
for Bangladesh — the “Reserve Bank of Bangladesh”. Under
Article 16 of the Mujib plan, “the State Bank of Pakistan at
Dacca shall be redesignated as the Reserve Bank of Banglad=sh,
and all branches of the State Bank of Pakistan in Bangladesh
shall become branc!.es of the Reserve Bank of Bangladesh. . . ,
| The Reserve Bank of Bangladesh and its branches shall be
under the legislative control of the State Legislature of Bangla.
The proposal for an entirely independent central
bank for Bangladesh had far-reaching implications, as it
would unmistakably mark the separate entity of the state of
Bangladesh from the rest of Pakistan.
In fact, the Mujib plan, as given to Yahya on March 33,
with Tajuddin’s demand that it be issued in the form of a pro-
- Clamation “within forty-eight hours”,!4 was nothing but an
unqualified scheme for splitting the country into two separate
entities, Bangladesh and West Pakistan. History has not yet
furnished an example of a form of government — federal or
confederal — where a central authority can discharge its funda-
mental obligations to protect the territorial integrity or carry
on its normal duties as in the plan presented by Mujib.
Under his plan, the central authority would have had no in-
dependent financial resources, either direct taxation or a
guaranteed financial contribution from the units; no effective
control over foreign affairs because of the artificial and absurd
distinction between the economic and political aspects of
external relations. The central authority would also have had no
control over the country’s monetary policy, banking, foreign
trade, external borrowings, fiscal policy or — for that matter —
in any important sphere.
The Mujib plan for the interim government demanded
the full implementation of the secession scheme, which had
always been veiled in his six points. Now, contrary to the
pledges he had made not only to Yahya but also to the Bengalis
during the 1970 elections, Mujib proceeded to divide the
| country under a deceptive plan for the “Confederation of
_ Pakistan”, which would not have been workable even for a
day. Yahya was not wrong when he remarked that “through
this plan they expected to establish a separate state of Bang-
ladesh. That, needless: to say, would have been the end of
Pakistan as created by the Father of the Nation.”!5 But Yahya

_—
THE DACCA DIALOGUE 177
failed to see that when he made these remarks on June 28,
1971, Pakistan as it had been. established in 1947 was already
dead.
Turning to the process of drawing up the constitution for |
the so-called “Confederation of Pakistan”, the Mujib plan
would have split the National Assembly. as elected in Decem- |
ber 1970 for the country as a whole into two separate “consti-
tuent just as the original Constituent Assembly
of India had been divided into two assemblies under the {
Mountbatten plan of June 3, 1947, when the British Govern-
ment, the Congress, and the Muslim League jointly agreed to
the partition of India. The two constituent conventions — one
for Bangladesh and the other for West Pakistan — would
be free to frame any form of constitution, acting as two |
sovereign bodies. The five principles which were spelled out
in the Legal Framework Order of 1970, in consultation with
. and with the approval of. Mujib, as the basic and minimum
requirements of a united Pakistan would no longer be binding
on the two constituent conventions, Under the Mujib plan, |
the President would be required to authenticate the proposed |
constitution as framed by the two constituent conventions,
no matter whether the proposed constitution divided the
country or not. Under Article 17, sub-clause 7, of the Mujib
plan, it was laid down that even if the President would not sign
or authenticate the proposed constitution, “in any event upon .
the expiration of seven days” from the date of such presentation |
of the constitution, it “shall be deemed to have been authenti-
The members of the National Assembly who were
elected under the Legal Framework Order of 1970 were re- |
quired to take an oath of allegiance to Pakistan: “I... do
hereby swear (or affirm) that I will keep true faith and |
allegiance to Even this was not acceptable to
Mujib. His plan demanded that members of the two consti-
tuent conventions take an oath in the following form: “J
A. B., do solemnly swear/affirm that I will be faithful and keep
true allegiance to the constitution of Pakistan as by law estab- |
lished.”® This was also significant in understanding the modus
operand: of Mujib and his advisers; they were not even pre-
pared to pay allegiance to Pakistan. This demonstrated clearly —
that the Awami League did not believe in the unity of Pakistan,
G

178 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
although Mujib told the Muslim voters in 197° that he would
never destroy Pakistan: “Pakistan has come to stay.”""* *
There was a fihal meeting between Yahya’s team and the
Awami Leaguers on March 24 at 6 p.m. but no further meet-
ing took place between Yahya and Mujib after their meeting
on March 22. In fact, March 9 virtually marked the end of
the Dacca dialogues and also of united Pakistan. After the inci-
dents of March 23, when the Awami Leaguers did not even
allow the Pakistani flag to fly on the National Day, and after
the Awami League presented its final plan, the Army decided
to take military action to challenge Mujib and plunge the
country into a most tragic civil war, which I shall describe
in the next chapter. ;
_ In the meantime, all West Pakistani leaders not belonging
to Bhutto’s party had meetings with Mujib and tried to per-
sude him to avoid the path of confrontation, but without suc-
cess. They also met Yahya; Bhutto and his team had meetings
with him on March 24. By that time, they could only discuss
the post mortem of the Dacca dialogues. wae
Outside the President’s: House at Dacca, the movement
for Bangladesh was going full steam ahead. Mujib and Tajud-
din made declarations to the effect that they had nothing new
to announce. Mujib said on March 24: “Our demands are
just and clear and they have to be accepted.” He warned
against any attempt to impose a decision on the people of Bang-
ladesh, saying that “we would not tolerate it’’.*° In a sub-
sequent press statement on March 25, Mujib called for a
general strike on March 27 against the Army’s actions in cer-
tain places in East Pakistan or Bangladesh. This was his last
press statement before the Army began its military operations
on the night of March 25-26, which ended in the formal
dismembering of Pakistan on December 16, 1971, when Dacca
fell to the Indian Army.
Yahya left Dacca at an undisclosed hour sometime on
‘March 25. The Pakistan Government in its White Paper gave
details of what: it termed as “an armed rebellion” to be
launched in the early hours of March 26. Nobody can vouch
for the authenticity of the account given in the White Paper;
in many quarters it was interpreted as a justification for the
military measures taken by the Pakistani Army at midnight

