. ae
32 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
disclose the so-called “‘secrets” of the Tashkent agreement,
Nothing was more popular in the Punjab, “the bastion of
power” in West Pakistan, than to whip up anti-Indian feelings.
Bhutto became ever bolder in his wild accusations against
Ayub in collusion with some generals at GHQ.
This was the background of the sudden outburst of violence
in Rawalpindi, the garrison capital of Pakistan; and the role
of Z. A. Bhutto, the so-called “revolutionary leader”. General
Musa, Ayub’s trusted Governor, and Khawaja Shahabuddin,
the Information Minister, tried to meet Bhutto’s allegations
against Ayub on the Tashkent agreement. Musa pointed out
that although Bhutto might now be criticizing the Tashkent
agreement, he had earlier taken the credit for its drafting and
had defended it both inside and outside the National Assembly
until he was sacked by Ayub. I had the opportunity of reading
the entire proceedings of the Tashkent Conference, but could
not trace any sign of dissent by Bhutto. At the height of the
movement, the Soviet Union made an unusual gesture to
_ Ayub: the Soviet news agency Tass came out with a denial of
- any secret “‘clauses” in the Tashkent Agreement. But who
cared for the truth? Ayub. had lost his initial popularity by a
number of factors as described earlier, and Bhutto had no
difficulty in rousing public passion against his régime. In an
underdeveloped country where there are colossal socio-econo-
mic problems, it is not difficult to discredit a régime when it
has been in power for ten years. Moreover, the Ayub régime
had given enough provocation for political agitation; and its
record was worsening. es
As soon as the student—police clashes took place in Rawal-
pindi in early November resulting in the death of a student
from police firing on November 7, 1968, the undercurrent of
popular resentment became articulate and was given vigorous
expression. As pointed out earlier, the agitation began as un-
expectedly to the opposition leaders, excluding Bhutto, as to
the ruling authorities. But the political leaders were quick
to react to the situation to bring about the downfall of Ayub.
Students, journalists, lawyers, doctors, engineers and labour
all joined in the movement for an end to Ayub’s political
system.74 , ey ee
However, once it had spread to East Pakistan, the movement
|

THE FALL OF AYUB 33
took a different shape. There it was not merely an agitation.
ee Ayub or his régime, but a revolt agai the Ben-
' gainst what the
~ galis began to regard as their “domination” Pakis
or, more accurately, by th by West Pakistan
vain ef thee 1¢ Punjabis. It was the most articulate
aa € emerging Bengali nationalism. While the
leaders in West Pakistan demanded th i i
, ¢ restoration of parlia-
mentary democracy and a direct method of election, the
Bengalis raised their voice for exireme regional autonom
namely Mujib’s six-poi oe se
to have adopted as ot oe te pair
que of kicking the enemy
It is true that as the movement progressed, in West Pakistan
too, It was not merely a movement for constitutional reforms;
=” turned into a struggle between the “haves” and the “have
nots”. The unprivileged group seemed to have got their oppor-
tunity to voice their resentment against a. privileged élite,
who in the name of “Pakistan”, “Islamic ideology” and other
high-sounding slogans, had grown fat since the creation of the
state in 1947. In East Pakistan the grand old Maulana Bhashani
was agitating not only for regional autonomy but also as the
spokesman of the “have nots”. Mujib was still in military
custody for his part in the Agartala conspiracy case; his party
had been ruthlessly suppressed by the provincial Governor ;
Abdul Monem Khan since the movement for six points in 1966,
and as such was not well organized although Mujib had ac-
quired tremendous popularity. The opposition parties, includ- ~
ing Mujib’s Awami League but excluding Bhutto's People’s
Party and Bhashani’s National Awami Party, formed an alliance
known as the Democratic Action Committee (DAC). .
Initially, Ayub and his advisers tried to minimize the.
impact of the movement, and Ayub refused to talk to the
opposition leaders. Bhutto was arrested on November 13, two
days after an unsuccessful attempt on Ayub’s life while he
was addressing a public méeting at Peshawar. The reaction
among the students to Bhutto’s arrest was great, as Bhutto had
by. this time become a hero of the students for condemning the
police excesses against them. The more significant develop-
- ment was that after Bhutto’s arrest two new figures, both noted
for clean records, joined the movement: Air-Marshal Ashgar
Khan in West Pakistan and Justice S. M. Murshed in East

34 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Pakistan: They were newcomers to the political scene and as
such Ayub’s oft-repeated adverse comments against “old
politicians” of the parliamentary era (1947-58) were not
applicable to them. They gave fresh momentum to the move-
ment.
Ayub and the Generals
After ten years of unchallenged rule, it was a big shock for
Ayub to face the realities of his situation. The army intelligence
chief, Major-General Akbar of I.S.I.D., had no hesitation in
sending the most candid reports to Ayub; even his top civil
service advisers could no longer conceal the unpleasant truth.
There was a scene of confusion and panic at the Presidential
House. There were regular meetings of a small group consisting
of Altaf, Fida Hasan and one or two others to review the situa-
tion and plan the strategy for meeting the most serious
challenges to the régime.
At first, Ayub’s expectations were that the norma] machin-
ery of law and order, consisting of the police and paramilitary
forces, would be adequate to meet the situation. Ayub was still
thinking in terms of law and order, but he soon realized that
the situation had gone far beyond the capacity of the normal
machinery of law and order. There were two alternatives
before Ayub: a political settlement with the opposition ~
a very complicated task, apart from Ayub’s reluctance to “talk
to the politicians”, because of the lack of a national party
ora national leader. The country seemed to have been already
politically split: Mujib was a popular hero in East Pakistan
but anathema to West Pakistan; Bhutto was popular in West
Pakistan but in East Pakistan he was not only uninfluential but
thoroughly disliked for his long eight-year association with
the Ayub régime. Ashgar Khan and Murshed were newcomers
and were listened to respectfully by the urban ¢lites but had no
hold over the masses who were getting beyond the control
of the centre politicians, Bhasani was never interested in any
political or constitutional settlement; along with other leftist
forces, he was working for a real revolutionary movement,
not one which had the secret blessing of GHQ.
The second option before Ayub was to regain the Army’s

THE FALL OF AYUB 35
confidence. He therefor :
help. As I gathered i turned to his real constituency for
cabinet in 1969, a tom Yahya himself after I joined his
to > @ Series of meetings between Ayub and the
P armed forces lead ] )
account ers look place in February 1969. ‘This
was also substantiated by G oot
members of the President; y General Akbar and by some
provide a better Sinton te staff, who can sometimes
the Army, Air Force and N * sa, me npr Ha Arse
separate meetings wiin Ayub [An cir aides had joint and
place in mid-FeLruary i the sh oe Ce
rnp Nur Khan and Vice-Admival par amet
tell Ayub to work for “a political sett] ” Lng
Th the military forces to suppress the noch 4
€ most interesting part of this crucial ra: who
was to break the unpleasant truth = rs oe pee
pause, hesitancy and silence. Ahsan of the Nav a es
take the injtiati Navy would not
ake the initiative as he wanted to maintain his posture of
neutrality ; for Yahya it was a delicate time — Ayub had made
him Commander-in-Chief, by-passing a few senior generals.
Ultimately the task fell to the outspoken chief of the Air Force,
Nur Khan. The army chiefs agreed to use the armed forces
only to the minimum extent needed to keep the administration
functioning and prevent the situation from being exploited
by any foreign country, presumably India.
For Ayub the advice to seek a political solution as a remedy
for the basic causes of the upheaval was ‘perhaps the biggest _
shock. He had been the unchallenged chief of the armed forces
for the last eighteen years (1950-68). As he told a visiting
foreign dignitary, “perhaps they are now tired of seeing my
face’. There were, however, genuine reasons for the army’s
“getting tired” of Ayub.
Ayub Turns to Political Leaders
Ayub invited the chairman of the DAC, Nasrullah Khan, to
meet him. Nasrullah was also authorized to invite any of his
other colleagues. The DAC responded by saying that Ayub
must withdraw the state of emergency and Defence of Pakistan
rules which had been imposed since the 1965 war with India.
Further demands included the release of all imprisoned students;

. 36 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
the lifting of the. ban on ublic meetings, processions, etc.,
and an end to the of students by the police. Ayub,
after some tactical delays, agreed to the four demands of the
DAC. Three important leaders with popular support, Muijib,
Bhashani and Bhutto, were away from the scene: Mujib was
still in military custody, Bhutto was still in prison, and Bhashani
declared in unqualified terms his opposition to any negotia-
tions with the Government. Bhutto was released with the with- _
drawal of the Defence of Pakistan rules under which he had ~
been arrested, but after coming out of prison, he declared his
opposition to any negotiations with Ayub. The reasoning of
Bhashani and Bhutto differed totally~vz=shiat* favoured a pro-
longed confrontation and ag upheaval, which was good
strategy for his long-term political objectives, while Bhutto
knew that Ayub’s days were numbered as the generals\*cfused
to back him, so why make a compromise with a sinking man?
He rather pleased the rising military group with his negative
attitude.
Mujib’s case was most complicated. While Ayub could
accede to the four demands of DAC, it was difficult for him to
withdraw the Agartala case and release Mujib unconditionally.
A powerful group of the military junta was still opposed to the
withdrawal of the Agartala case. But events overtook all
calculations. The agitation against the Agartala case was so
great in East Pakistan that the provincial Government
virtually collapsed and student leaders were running the ad-
ministration of the province: Mujib, however, did not get the
true picture of the situation while he was living in military
custody. So the general officer commanding in East Pakistan,
Major-General Muzaffruddin, managed to make a deal with
Mujib: Mujib pledged not to work against the viability of
United Pakistan, and was thus assured of Ayub’s clemency.
But strangely enough Mujib, without realizing the ‘depth of
public feeling, agreed to go to Rawalpindi on parole. So Ayub
did not have to withdraw the Agartala case and yet was able to
bring about Mujib’s participation in the Round Table Con-
ference (RTC). Ayub’s Defence Minister, Admiral A. R. Khan
also had meetings and talks with Mujib in his military custody.
It was at this crucial moment that the same Bengali officer
who gave me the full account of Ohja’s meetings with Mujib’s

THE FALL OF AYUB™ 37.
follower during the Agartala conspiracf, which. was referred _
to earlier, made a shrewd move which saved Mujib’s prestige ~
and honour. He arranged a meeting for Mrs. Mujib with her
husband at the place where he was held in custody by plead-
ing with General Muzaffruddin that this request should be
granted on humanitarian grounds and the General agreed.
Mujib’s wife thus had the opportunity to brief her husband
on the prevailing mood of the people and to tell him that it
would be a terrible blow to his prestige if his followers were to
see him going to attend the RTC under parole and military
custody. She also explained that Ayub was bound to release
him if he were to stick to his demand for unconditional
release. So a dramatic turn occurred: while the plane was
| ready to take Mujib to Rawalpindi and the leaders were al-
ready at Karachi, Lahore and Rawalpindi airports waiting to
meet Mujib, he turned his face and demanded his release be-
fore he would participate in the RTC. Ayub had no choice.
The final step was also taken: the Agartala case was withdrawn
and Mujib went to participate in the RTC as a free man who
was also a In the meantime, Ayub announced his
irrevocable intention not to contest the presidential election.
Had Ayub lost all his hopes? Not yet. I had two meetings
with him in February. It was difficult to assess anything
accurately but I had no doubt that the initiative had gone from
the Presidential House to GHQ. Ayub began the RTC with
all seriousness; but it soon became evident that this much- —
publicized event would achieve nothing. Events were moving
fast. |
Ayub’s Final Bids
Many of the “leaders” participating in the RTC were self-
styled ones without any popular base. Any settlement with
these leaders, except for Mujib and Wali Khan of the North-
West Frontier Province, would be meaningless. In fact, in the
absence of Bhashani and Bhutto, Mujib was the key figure. _-
So serious attempts were made for an Ayub-Mujib under-
standing. Ayub’s closest adviser, Altaf, began the initiative.
He had the support of the Haroon brothers, Yousuf and Mah-
mood. The Haroon family had a feudal type of rivalry with the

38 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Bhutto family. While Bhutto was serving Ayub as his Foreign
Minister, the Haroon brothers had a difficult time. Yousuf
Haroon was not allowed to enter Pakistan because of his
alleged links with a foreign agency. But when Bhutto began
his campaign against Ayub in 1968, Ayub made a deal with the
Haroon brothers: Mahmood was made Ayub’s High Com-
missioner in London while Yousuf was made Governor of
West Pakistan. ay
Though belonging to one of “the twenty-two families”,
the Haroon brothers had a long-standing friendship with Mujib,
to whom they gave a salary of 3,000 rup¢es and many other
facilities during his long period of political persecution. Now, |
with the help of Altaf, Ayub utilized the services of the Haroon
brothers in reaching a deal with Mujib, which was Ayub’s
last hope. Secret meetings took place at the Presidential House
between Ayub, Mujib and the Haroon brothers in a “cordial
atmosphere”. The proposed deal was that Mujib would be
made Prime Minister of Pakistan under a parliamentary sys-
tem and with regional autonomy for East Pakistan; Yousuf
Haroon was already sworn in as the Governor of West Pakistan
and a nominee of Mujib, Dr. M. N. Huda, was appointed as
Governor of East Pakistan; and Ayub would continue as
President under a system of parliamentary democracy. Again
events overtook the working-out of this deal. The generals
- at GHQ were not happy with any such secret deal between
Ayub and Mujib. Bhutto got the news of th: secret talks as he
_ had no difficulty in knowing what was happening either at the
GHQ or the Presidential House, thanks to his friend Peerzada.
Bhutto at once issued press statements denouncing the secret
parleys, and this embarrassed Mujib. Bhashani was also
terribly upset over Mujib and the Haroon brothers getting
power. The latter were regarded as having strong links with
the Americans. Ayub’s shifts in favour of the Haroon brothers
had cost him Bhasani’s covert support, which he had enjoyed
‘since the Presidential election of 1965. This was mainly
due to his moving away from Washington and closer to Pek-
ing. Bhashani and his followers were happy with Ayub’s
_ foreign policy, but Ayub’s courting the Russians since 1966
and his latest deal with the Haroon brothers annoyed Bhashani
and the pro-Peking group of National Awami party. At this

. THE FALL OF AYUB 39
stage, Bhashani openly preached violence, destruction, and
_ armed uprisings: hartal (strike), gherao (encirclement).
Mujib became shaky; in fact, the whole situation was so
confusing that hardly any political settlement or serious politi-
cal negotiations could take place, The small advisory group at
Fida Hasan’s office in the Presidential House met regularly.
I was summoned twice to attend those meetings but nobody
could understand what was happening and how the crisis
could be resolved. The RTC came to a deadlock when Mujib
presented his extreme demands for autonomy bordering on
break-up of the country. All the West Pakistani leaders were
opposed to Mujib’s scheme, and so the RTC met its natural
death. When the RTC failed to reach any agreement, Ayub
announced his own formula on March 13 — restoration of the
parliamentary and federal system and a direct method of elec-
tion. Ayub wanted to restore the status quo as it had existed
before his capture of power through the coup of 1958. But the
Bengalis were not satisfied with the status quo of 1958; much
water had flowed under the bridge since they accepted “parity
of representation” in 1955 and the federal structure of the 1956
constitution. |
The RTC failed; so too did the Ayub-Muijib secret parleys.
Mujib was nervous that it might jeopardize his image with the
Bengalis. But the final blow to the Ayub-Mujib deal came
from GHQ; when Ayub really had good prospects with Mujib,
the group opposed to him in the military junta tantalized Mujib
with the prospect of getting power through the front door
(i.e. through elections) rather than the door”, which
was what Ayub offered him,
After the failure of the talks on political settlement, either
through the RTC or by bilateral negotiations with Mujib, the
country’s situation deteriorated quickly. There was almost a
complete breakdown of governmental machinery, and the
condition of the country was semi-anarchic. It was obvious
that this state of affairs could not be allowed to continue.
Ayub summoned a special cabinet meeting in mid-March,
which also turned out to be his last. Yahya was specially in-
vited to attend the meeting. The description he gave me of it
was as follows.
Ayub summed up the situation after the failure of the RTC

40 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
| and Mujib’s demand for total/acceptance of his six points,
He told the cabinet, and Yaltya in particular, that the only |
remedy for saving the country lay in the imposition of martial |
law. The cabinet, as usual, listened to the supreme boss but all |
eyes were fixed on Yahya who, as he narrated to me, listened |
to the debate quietly but without much comment; he indicated
to Ayub that he would talk to him alone. So the Ayub cabinet
was adjourned for good. The two old colleagues and friends, |
Ayub and Yahya, moved from the cabinet room of the Presi-
dent’s House to Ayub’s office in the adjoining room. Ayub put
the final question to Yahya: would he come to the govern- |
ment’s rescue by imposing martial law, which was now the © |
only remedy? Yahya agreed that martial law was now the |
only solution. But he stipulated certain conditions before he
would impose martial law in support of the government:
First, Ayub must sack his provincial governors and his |
Cabinet — to this he agreed at once. Secondly, Ayub must dis-
solve the National Assembly and the two provincial Assemblies;
again came Ayub’s prompt affirmative response. Then Yahya,
after a pause, proposed: ““You must also abrogate your constitu- |
tion as it has proved totally unacceptable to the people, both
in East and West Pakistan. I cannot allow my troops to make |
an unacceptable constitution operate against the wishes of the
, ,
At this stage Ayub exclaimed: “Abrogate the Constitution!
No, that is impossible; the Constitution is bound in the book of
Pakistan and in the soil of Pakistan!” : |
But soon Ayub realized what Yahya was demanding: in the
absence of the Constitution, martial law would be the supreme
law of the land and the chief martial law administrator would
be the final Ayub’s position would the same as
that of President Iskander Mirza from October 7 to October
27, 1958, when Ayub threw him out of the and
sent him abroad into exile for an
the with a significant smile and remark from
Ayub: “I know what you wants all right, let/us mutually work
out the final arrangement.” So Ayub decitled to hand over
power to Yahya and the final preparations/ for the imposition
of martial law began immediately.
It must be added that even if Yahya had/been willing to back

TRE FALL OF AYUB 4t
the Ayub régime with the 1 Constitution, it would have
been a hopeless task. The aie od, the popular uprisings,
the new socio-economic forces, the growing regional tensions
were all against the continuation of the Ayub régime in any
shape or form. It was not merely a question of Yahya’s. loyalty
to Ayub; the movement might have been originated by some
green signals from GHQ as a result of Ayub’s loss of confidence
among the armed forces, but once it started it became a genuine
mass upheaval and no secret deal or “palace plan” could
- Save the situation.
On the contrary, it was also not wholly true that the new
military régime was a “reluctant” one, as it was interpreted to
be in some quarters. The miktary junta was as “reluctant”
as Ayub pretended to be in 1958 when he said: “We solemnly
decided to build up a true national army free from politics,”
It was as untrue as the new military régime’s “reluctance” to
take over power in 1969.
In his “farewell broadcast” Ayub presented the same dismal
picture. of the country as he had done when the army coup |
took place on October 7,, 1958. On that occasion Ayub had
justified the army’s take-over on the grounds of what he.
termed “‘total administrative, economic} political and moral
chaos in the country”.!’ After about eleven years of almost
absolute rule, he confessed that the country was on the verge
of total collapse and declared with great pathos: “I cannot.
preside over the destruction of my country.”!8 What a sad
ending!
An Assessment :
Was the Ayub era so unsuccessful and blank as Ayub himself
seemed to admit in his last broadcast? Why did he make
such a pathetic statement ? Some interpreted Ayub’s final speech
as having been made under duress, but this is not correct. .
Both Ayub and Yahya told me that the farewell speech was
made freely without any pressure or even hint from Yahya.
Ayub’s sense of frustration, humiliation and failure was the
explanation. I began the discussion of the fall of Ayub by re-
ferring to some of the most flattering remarks on Ayub, his
political order, his economic policy and successes in external

