72 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
19. For details of the Dacca talks see Chapter 7.
20. Dawn, July 2, 197°
at. Ibid., July 29, 197° ;
a2. Ibid.
gg. From Professor Wahidul Haque’s paper “Development Policies and
Regional Justice in Pakistan” at the University of Rochester conference,
op. cit. me
24. Based on personal interviews.
25. See Pravda, April 10, 1969, and Izvestiia, April 11, 1969.
26. Based on personal interviews.
27. For see my Major Powers and the Indian Sub-Continent (forth-
coming).

4.
THE ABORTIVE SCHEME
FOR THE TRANSFER OF POWER
As pointed out earlier, Yahya’s pledge, made within twenty-
four hours of his accession to power on March 25, 1969,
to transfer power to the elected representatives of the people
was treated with scepticism. It was recalled that Ayub had
made a similar pledge in 1958, but there were some differences.
Ayub had qualified his pledge by saying that he would restore
democracy of the type which he would consider suitable for
Pakistan. Yahya’s pledge on March 26, 1969, was unqualified;
he elaborated it in his first press conference on April 10, in
which he categorically opted for a democratic process: “Our
aim must be to establish constructive political life in the
country so that power is transferred to the elected representa-
tives of the people.” On the subject of elections, he specifically
spoke of “election of the representatives of the people on the
basis of direct adult franchise” and on the future constitution
Yahya’s views were that “‘it will be for the representatives of
the people to give the country a workable constitution”.+
There were three clear and unambiguous promises; first, .
transfer of power to the elected representatives of the people;
secondly, the election would be held on the basis of direct
adult franchise - Ayub’s system of indirect election through
Basic Democrats was rejected; and thirdly, the future constitu-
tion of the country would be framed by the elected members.
By April ro the new military régime was in full control of the
authority; while Yahya’s pledge of March 26 might have been
a “panic one” after a four-month-long popular movement for
democracy, the unqualified commitments made on April ro,
did not arise from a panic decision.
Between April 10 and July 28, 1969, when Yahya again
73

74 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
spoke in detail on his plan for a transfer of power, much dis-
cussion and parleying took place between Yahya and
the leaders of the various political parties. One significant
phenomenon was that though Yahya abrogated the constitu-
_ tion, dissolved legislatures and cabincts, both national and
provincial, and imposed martial law throughout the country,
political parties were not banned, nor were politicians put
into prison as under Ayub in 1958. In fact, the new military
junta had made some prior contacts with political leaders like
Mujib, Bhashani and Bhutto. Hence the imposition of martial
law was no surprise to the political leaders; as for the public,
the reaction was one of relief after months of chaos and con-
fusion in the country, although there was no welcome to
equal that with which Ayub was greeted in 1958.
Yahya did not summon any conference of political leaders
after seeing the fate of the Round Table Conference summoned
by Ayub before his departure. Yahya, on the contrary, began
quiet and bilateral talks with political leaders; he toured the
country from one end to the other and had genuine dialogues
with leaders of various parties, and politicians gradually
became impressed by his sincereity. He devoted most attention
to Mujib — rightly so, since he was the leader of the Bengalis
who constituted a majority of the country’s population. Mujib,
however, was suspicious of the military régime’s intentions.
He had never forgotten the arbitrary removal in 1957 of the
Prime Minister, H. 8. Suhrawardy, his political mentor and
the founder of the Awami League, by President
Mirza, who a year later presided over the establishment of the
first military régime in Pakistan. Mujib showed the greatest
amxiety to secure every possible safeguard against similar
treatment being meted out to him if — as was bound to
happen — he lost some of his popularity after coming to
power. Eventually Yahya began to win Mujib’s confidence -
| a good personal relationship gradually developed between
As a member of Yahya’s planning cell entrusted with con-
stitational and political affairs, I had opportunities of watching
poral that took place between April and July
cat g : ugust and November, when Yahya
y spelled out his scheme for the transfer of power. I used

ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 75
ide of Yahya’s talks with the politicians and he
mate cacti a to them to find out their reaction as well
; proposals and suggestions back to Yahya
sing! a modus operands for the transfer of power. I had
engthy discussions with most of the political leaders including
Mujib, Bhutto, Bhashani, Asghar Khan, Justice Murshed,
_ Qayyum Khan, Nurul Amin, Ghulam Azam (Jamaat-i-
Islami), Muzaffar Ahmad (pro-Moscow Group) and others. It
' was @ most interesting experience for me; I had similar ex-
periences in 1960-1 while acting as honorary adviser to the
Constitution Commission, headed by a former Chief Justice,
Shahabuddin, but this time it was a unique opportunity for a
political scientist, as well as a rewarding experience. I was
impressed by Yahya’s straightforwardness in his talks with
the politicians.
_ I shall particularly narrate my own assessment about Yahya’s
talks with Mujib, Bhutto and Bhashani. Mujib, as already
noted, was suspicious of the military régime and its intentions.
He had good reasons for it; Yahya was, no doubt, sincere and
Mujib gradually became convinced of the sincerity of his
pledge, but Yahya was never master in his own house as
Ayub had been. He never had more than a limited hold over
the army generals, who in fact constituted the ruling junta 4
between March 1969 and December 1971, nor did he seem
either anxious or able to acquire a position of complete domi~
nance. Consequently what he did or intended to do was often »
torpedoed by other members of the junta. Yet between March
1969 and December 1970 Yahya was given a free hand.in his
constitutional quest; however, he would consult his “inner
cabinet” of generals before taking any important move;
even his policy statements, made on the 28th day of the month
— Yahya had been commissioned in the army on the 28th —
at four-monthly intervals which continued till the time of elec-
tions in 1970, were discussed paragraph by paragraph by the
“inner cabinet”, but from my attendance of these meetings I
could observe that while some generals had reservations and
doubts about the unqualified transfer of power and grave
misgivings about Mujib’s six-point plan, on the whole Yahya,
with the help of his advisers like Peerzada and myself, had a
free hand in dealing with the politicians to work out an

ie |
76 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
acceptable formula for the transfer of power on the basis of a
united Pakistan.
Any threat to the break-up of the country was to be met
effectively; on that there was no difference of opinion. Within
the framework of “one Pakistan” Yahya could freely negotiate
with political leaders including Mujib, whose alleged involve-
ment in the Agartala conspiracy was never forgotten by ‘the
generals, So Mujib’s doubts and reservations had some basis.
The East Pakistan provincial Governor, Admiral Ahsan, was
to some extent successful in removing Mujib’s doubts; or,
alternatively, Ahsan let himself be fooled by Mujib and his
few advisers like Dr. Kamal Hossain, who was Mujib’s consti-
tutional adviser (he became Bangladesh’s first Law Minister to
frame its constitution in 1972), and Rahman Solhan, a pseudo-
economist who had failed to obtain a Ph.D. from London
University, but he was close to Mujib as his economic adviser.
The two met almost daily with Ahsan at the residence of a
common friend whose services were recognized when he was
given an ambassadorial assignment in 1970. Ahsan was sincere
but lacked the capacity to understand the political dynamics
of East Pakistan and the external forces at work there. He was
all for a. deal with Mujib while the zonal MLA, General
Yakub, and the intelligence services, both military and civil,
were apprehensive of Mujib’s ultimate aims — whether these
were to become the first Bengali Prime Minister of Pakistan or
the creator of a new state, Bangladesh. Yahya was bewildered by
the conflicting views of Ahsan, Yakub and his intelligence
chiefs. So the Yahya-Mujib dialogue was a most important and
complex one. The crucial issues were whether Mujib would
modify his six points; and whether the military junta would
really hand over power to Mujib.
Dialogues with Bhashani were interesting but not of great
significance. The octogencrarian Maulana Bhashani is a
legendary figure; he never accepted any office, and is
thoroughly dedicated to the causes of the poor and the “‘have-
nots”. “Maulana” is sometimes dubbed as “red” or as a pro-
Peking communist but he is also a sincere and devoted Muslim;
he is a leader of the Gandhian type with a missionary zeal to
serve the poorest. At his first meeting with Yahya, Bhashent
gave a list of the demands of peasants, workers and students,

ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 777
2 eee that the past governments in Pakistan had
ie i the welfare of the “have-nots”. Bhashani usually
in ho ¢ talking ard would allow nobody else to talk;
ours of one-sided discussion Yahya said to Bhashani
Maulana Sahib, wh ee ene
alent » Why not join my administration and try
es ¢ problems as mentioned by you?” Bhashani’s reply
nar = Job is to find faults with the government and not
. any government.” The first meeting e i iali
and friendliness, but with no ct a dc age aig
constitutional issues. When I “Red Maulana”
I had to listen to his “‘sermors” for five hours without much
opportunity to find out any 1eaction he might have to any
proposal for the constitutional problem; I was, however,
thoroughly impressed by his devotion to the cause of the
poor and his lack of any perscnal political ambition. He is
indeed a great man.
The non-Awami League Bengali leaders like Nurul Amin,
Ghulam Azam and other moderates were most anxious for a
genuine political settlement between East and West Pakistan
but they had serious apprehensions about Mujib’s six points
which they considered a scheme for secession.
Bhutto, the dapper and aristocratic leader in West Pakistan,
was busy building his political base in West Pakistan as well
as cultivating links with various members of the military junta.
Like Bhashani, he had hardly any constructive suggestion or
plan for solving the constitutional dilemma. Moreover, his
task was more complicated than that of Mujib, who had only
one theme — “Bengali liberation from domination of West
Pakistanis”. Bhutto had to speak in one language in Punjab,
where he was preaching the gospel of “a thousand years’
war with India” and to restore “national honour”, which
Ayub was alleged to’ have sacrificed at the Tashkent con-
ference, while-in the smaller provinces of West Pakistan like
Baluchistan, the North-West Frontier and his own native
province of Sind, he had to speak differently on removing
poverty and ensuring social justice on the basis of “Islamic -
Socialism”. Bhutto’s real and secret dialogues were with Pecr-
zada, while with Yahya he would drink whisky and have gen-
-eral discussions. In my talks with Bhutto, he never spelled out
his attitude to Mujib’s six points, which was the most involved

78 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED oe
n inter-
national politics, on which he was an imp
. re: It was a pleasure to talk with
very elusive on specific issues. 10 eriously |
him, but not very rewarding while everyone oe seriously in
search of a formula for a genuine settlement of the country’s
most complicated political problem.
The rightist pa in West Pakistan, popularly known 4
“Tslam-pasand” (Islam-loving) partes, ‘were’ more interest
in ideological issues — the State versus Religion in the new con-
stitution - rather than the threatening tensions between East
and West Pakistan. They betrayed lack of understanding of
real issues but they were patriotic, sincere and honest in their
negotiations and talks.
The pro-Moscow group, led by Wali Khan in West Pakistan
and by Muzaffar Ahmad in East Pakistan, were extremists,
particularly Muzaffar Ahmad. The latter refused to see Yahya
during his first visit to Dacca in 1969 but subsequently sought
snterviews with him, whereupon Yahya in his typical style
snubbed him at a dinner in Dacca which was attended by all
the political leaders by saying to him publicly: “I am not
going to grant you an interview because you refused to see
me when I invited you.” Muzaffar was very much annoyed
and maintained his hostile attitude throughout the period of
political negotiations. I had a single meeting with him and was
thoroughly disgusted by his big talk. .
After four months of discussion, on July 28, 1969, Yahya
made a major policy statement. He referred to his talks with
political leaders and pointed out acute differences of opinion
over such issues as the revival of the 1956 Constitution — Mujib
was opposed to its revival while many others felt that the 1956
Constitution should be a legal document under which an early
election could be arranged. Then there were disputes over the
principle of representation — whether it should be on the basis
of “one man, one vote” or on the principle of “parity”, as
agreed by the leaders of both East and West Pakistan in 1955.
But Mujib had made clear his total opposition to any idea of
parity, and demanded that the basis of representation should
be the democratic principle of ‘one man, one vote’, which
would give Bengalis a clear majority in the national assembly.
However, West Pakistani leaders were unwilling to accept

ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 79
it unless the federal legislature were composed of two
houses — the lower house on the basis of population, or ‘one
man, one vote’, and the upper house on some other basis. In
West Pakistan, there was controversy over “one unit” — amal-
gamation of the four provinces of West Pakistan into one
PEOVINES OF done in 1955. The smaller provinces were
against “one unit”, and Mujib too did not favour it because,
although it did not directly affect East Pakistan, its dissolution
_ would — or so it was expected — give Mujib a better bargaining
position by coming to a deal with the smaller provinces against
“domination of Punjab” — towards which the Bengalis and the
people of smaller provinces had a. shared antagonism. The
most complicated issue, however, was the relationship between
the centre and the provinces - whether a viable national
government was at all feasible if Mujib’s six points were not
modified. After reviewing all three controversial issues, Yahya
stated:
So, you see there is quite a variety of opinions and views on
these major issues. As for myself, I have already indicated
on a number of occasions that my mind is absolutely open
on these subjects and that the decision must lie with the
people. The only requirement that I would insist upon is
that any constitution or any form of government that the
people of Pakistan adopt for themselves must cater to the
ideology and integrity of Pakistan. . . . We must think,
first and foremost, in terms of Pakistan. This is not to say -
that reasonable and just demands of various regions of
Pakistan should be ignored. As long as these demands are
in keeping. with the integrity of Pakistan, ways and means
should be found to accommodate them.?
Then, referring to the Bengalis’ demands and grievances,
Yahya said: “They were not being allowed to play their full
part in the decision-making process at the national level and in certain
important spheres of national activity [my italics]. In my view they
were fully justified in being dissatisfied with this state of affairs”,
and Yahya pledged “to correct this stituation”.* This was the |
first occasion when a Pakistani President looked at the prob-
lems of East Pakistan in its true perspective and not with the
colonial approach of “law and order”. The fact that the Ben-
galis had no effective share in decision-making process was the

80 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED
fundam challenge to viability as a united nation,
The Soren Commission headed by Justice Shahabuddin
referred in its Report to the East Pakistanis feelings of
treated like a colony*” — it was the first official document of
the Government of Pakistan in which the word colony” was
used while analysing the political dynamics of East Pakistan,
and Yahya was the first Pakistani President to give correct
expression to the Bengalis’ sense of frustration over the national
issue. I recall with pleasure that with both the Constitution
Commission’s remarks and Yahya’s speech of July 28, 1969,
I was closely associated and had a share in their drafting. Any-
body who cherished the ideals of a united Pakistan could hardly
ignore the true feelings of the East Pakistanis. The vast majority
of Bengali Muslims were not asking for secession; but they
demanded their legitimate share in national affairs, and it was
the failure to tackle this vital problem in time which ultimately
led to tragic happenings in 1971.
Yahya expressed the hope that consensus would develop
on the vital constitutional issues, but he hinted that if the
political leaders failed to agree, he might have to evolve his
own scheme for the transfer of power.
The second phase in the preparation of the scheme for
transfer of power began in August 1969. By this time, it had
become evident that there would be no consensus among the
political leaders on the major issues of constitution-making.
Mujib now indicated his views on constitutional problems
through Governor Ahsan; I too had several meetings with
him to find out his reactions to various alternatives relating
to the scheme for the transfer of power. Yahya used to ask me
to go to Mujib and get his views. As I mentioned earlier, Yahya
gave Mujib much attention while preparing his plan. .
Yahya Works Out las Plan |
‘Lord Mountbatten, the last Viceroy of the British raj in India,
claimed to have made his plan for the transfer of power of
June 3, 1947, working “hand in glove” with the leaders of
Indian national parties, mainly the Congress and the Muslim
League. Mountbatten’s claim was partly correct; he consulted
the Indian leaders in a series of conferences and talks with

ABO
7: “TIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 81
€ .
ri aceon a Muslim League and Sikh leaders, but the
“i ac Graft of his plan was made by a small group;
he relied mainly on his hu § lig
and th constitutional adviser, V. P. Menon,
¢ final draft sh ‘ .
with, the leader fon Own to, and prepared in consultation
leader who was able to sce vod oe vas the ly
ent on the
"ate hae features of the plan were known to the other
, plan “han dij ? Yahya could claim that he worked out his
m glove” with the politicians, yet, as with the
3 unth atten plan, the final shape was given by a small group.
suit draft was prepared by Peerzada and myself with a
ake , Sroup of aides and with the utmost secrecy. The
views were constantly assessed and reassessed,
and the reports of the intelligence services, both civil and mili-
tary, were taken fully into account. Finally the “inner cabinet”
consisting of Yahya, General Hamid, General Peerzada, two
provincial governors and two zonal MLAs, used to have
lengthy sessions. The civilian cabinet — including the Law
Minister, Justice Cornelius — was completely by-passed. I
myself was the only civilian present and I used to attend the
— cabinet” not as a cabinet minister but as a constitu-
tional expert.
What were the demands from the political leaders? Let me
first take the Bengali demands as voiced by Mujib. First,
Mujib demanded a definite date for holding the promised .
“free and fair” elections, and secondly, he was unwilling to
accept the 1956 Constitution, His main objections to it were
the system of representation, based on the “principle of parity”
and not on the basis of population, popularly known as “one
man, one vote’’; he also strongly objected to the centre—pro-
vinces relationship in the 1956 Constitution. Mujib also gave
hints that he would favour the break-up of “One Unit’ in 4
West Pakistan. He further demanded the restoration of full
activities by political parties. The martial law did not ban the *
parties; it allowed “§ndoor’”’ political discussions and con- 3
ferences, and even press statements by the politicians, but not
public meetings, processions, mass rallies, etc.
The non-Awami Leaguers in East Pakistan favoured the
restoration of the 1956 Constitution, with a fiexible amending
- procedure, for at least one year, so that genuine regional
aA

