42 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
affairs, made mostly by foreigners. Inside the country too, |
Ayub began his political career with wide support even in East
Pakistan, People were so — ikea? mae aoe inl the
working of the country’s parliamentary dem -
of the poliicians that they welcomed Ayub in the
expectation that their basic problems and interests would be
better served by an honest, efficient and stable régime, Ayub
was, in a sense, the last hope for a united Pakistan.
But in giving Pakistan its much needed national identity
‘Ayub was a total failure. The crucial question is why he failed
so miserably in the task of national integration. In an under-
developed country, an effective political leader might be suc-
cessful in developing a broader sense of cohesion in a society
characterized by ethnic, linguistic and cultural pluralism.
As Howard Wriggins puts it: “In. a society made of diverse
primordial groupings with parochial loyalties, a personality
can be the main focus of common loyalty.” First, let it be
stressed that Ayub was not a leader with the mass support or
calibre of Nehru, Gandhi or Jinnah. To achieve political inte-
gration in a Pakistan with two wings geographically separated
by a thousand miles was too big a task for Ayub. He could, at
best, have contributed to the achievement of that goal; but
his political order and his economic policy, instead of contribut-
ing to the goal of integration of the country, greatly widened
the gap, both political and economic, between the peoples of
the two wings. ,
There was no lack of sincerity. Ayub was a great patriot,
and loved Pakistan passionately; he did not éven hesitate to
risk his own personal security in defending what he genuinely
believed to be the “national interest” of Pakistan, When he
wrote in his autobiography Friends not Masters that “Pakistan
is my passion”, he meant it.
As for the East-West Pakistan relationship on which the
Viability of a united Pakistan depended, Ayub’s understanding
was extremely limited. I had the opportunity to read the re-
ports which Iskander Mirza as the Governor of East Bengali
in 1954 used to send to the Governor-General, Ghulam Moham-
med, in which Mirza used to offer his solutions to problems
facing the “troublesome province of East Bengal”, The
approach was that of a district officer under a colonial régime.

THE FALL OF AYUB 43
Mirza suggested, for instance, shifting the campus of Dacca
-. University to a remote place and setting up a few cadet col-
leges as the panacea for East Bengal! Ayub’s approach was
different in degree but not in kind, He allocated more money
for development work in East Pakistan; his rural works pro-
gramme no doubt benefited the poorest landless Jabourers in
East Pakistan; agricultural employment facilities were increased
in rural areas (facilities the lack of which is now lamented in
Bangladesh); a vast extension of roads in villages was made,
hospitals were opened, educational facilities were increased.
Some of Ayub’s social reforms, such as family planning and a
family law ordinance prohibiting polygamy were commend-
able. Ayub’s record for modernizing the country was better than
that of his predecessors. His. economic policy resulted in an
increase of the gross national product (GNP) from 2 per cent
to about 6 per cent in the 1960s. But, as pointed out earlier,
the growth was not being equitably passed on to the poor.
This created frustration and bitterness among the lower
income groups both in urban and rural areas, notwithstanding
Ayub’s rural works programme, because they were not ade- |
quate to meet the growing demands and expectations. |
Turning to his political order, its greatest shortcoming was |
the lack of effective opportunities for the Bengalis to have |
their share in the decision-making process. By curbing the power |
of parliament, by making the cabinet Ayub’s _ |
political order robbed the Bengalis of their share of partici-
pation in national affairs. Nationalism or patriotism cannot
develop or flourish in a vacuum. The Bengalis could not be |
expected to be conscious of “Pakistani nationalism” when |
they “‘could only react but not act on major national issues”. ?¢
The Army’s atrocities during the civil war in 1971 and the
Indian military intervention backed by Soviet help were the
immediate cause of the disintegration of Pakistan. It was
Ayub’s political order and his inability to appreciate the politi-
cal dynamics in East Pakistan in the late 1960s which were
the real factors, among others, for the rise of Bengali national-
ism and the birth of Bangladesh. 5
His lack of understanding of the basic problems of the Ben-
galis was revealed to me when IJ had my last meeting with him
in New York in the summer of 1971. Ayub had gone to the

44 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
United States for a heart operation and stopped in New York
overnight on his way back to Pakistan. I, with two other
friends, went to see him mainly as a courtesy; we had no inten.
of discussing politics with him in his poor physical condi-
tion after a major operation. But the country was in the
midst of a civil war and political issues could not be avoided,
particularly when he insisted that we join him for dinner at
the luxurious apartment of a friend of his (a non-Bengali
. industrialist from East Pakistan) in Manhattan. So we discussed
political issues facing the country. In the course of discussion,
Ayub narrated how moderate Bengali leaders like Nural Amin
and others who opposed Mujib’s six points urged him to grant
real autonomy to East Pakistan. Turning to me, he asked:
“Tell me, what were they asking for? Did not my provincial
Governor Momen enjoy all the powers needed for running the
provincial government in East Pakistan? What more could
I grant?” After so many years of experience, Ayub equated
the delegated powers of his nominated and highly unpopular
Governor with the legitimate demands of the seventy-five
million people of his country! It was a great shock for me;
I wish I had not met Ayub on that occasion as it destroyed my
good opinion of his political acumen, although I still have a
. high regard for his personal qualities and graciousness.
ae REFERENCES
1. Arnold J. Toynbee, “Communism and the West in Asian Countries”,
Ths Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences, July 1961.
2. Quoted in an unpublished paper by Joseph Lelyveld for the Ford
eee New York, September 1969.
3. Ibi +N
4 nar of International Affairs, London, 1960; The Economist, August 15,
I °
5. G. A. Almond and T. S. Coleman, The Politics of the Developing Areas,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1960, pp. 59-5.
7. See Mahbul-Ul Hugq’s speech at the 1968 meetings of the Pakistan
Management Association in The Pakistan Observer, Dacca, May 3, 1968.
i; neh Ss. Manson, Robert Dorfman and Stephen A. Manglin,
_ Kanflict jin East Pakistan: Background and Prospects, London: Bangladesh
Action Committee, 1971, Part III, p. 4.
8, 'See Shahid Javed Bunki, “Ayub’s Fall: A Socio-economic Explanation”,
} Asian Surogy, March 1972; W. M. Dobell, “Ayub Khar. as President

_ THE FALL or ayus 45
of Pakistan”, Pacific Affaics, Fall 1969; Wayne Wi “Pekistan in
Sok rc Moat etn, Ea
/ ; ld, yuo'’s i i °
1 New York Time, M. 30, 1969. ee —— ei
9 G. W. Choudhury, The Major Powérs snd the Subcontinent (forthcoming).
10. I owe this account to a senior civil officié! of Ayub who held a key
' Position at that time and who was opposed to the proposed course of
action.
II. Fe ae tel
_ 2. G. W. Choudhury, “Bangladesh: Why it Hap ” Jaternational :
dhe, London, April 1972. es 2
tg. See Mujib’s television interview with David Frost (London Weekend
Television), January 16, 1972; his press interview with Musa Ahmad.
of the Bangladesh Observer, Dacca, on March 99, 1972, and Bangabandhu
Speaks, published by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Government of
Bangladesh, Dacca, n.d. ‘ :
t4- See G. W. Choudhury, Constifutional Development in Pakistan (second
edition), London: Longman, 1970, pp. 250-5; The movement has also
been described in Herbert Feldman, From Crisis to Crisis: Pakistan
1962-1969, London: Oxford University Press, 1972, pp. 226-76; in
Richard S. Wheeler, The Politics of Pakistan: A Constitutional Quest,
Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1970, pp. 264-74; and in Lawrence
Ziring, The Ayub Khan Era: Politics in Pakistan 1958-69, pp. 172-91.
15. I owe this story to the Bengali officers whom I wish to leave unidentified
oft account of his present position in caps Major-General
Muzaffruddin also told me the same story; subsequently a student
belonging to the inner core of the Awami League and a former
student of mine gave me the same version of the episode. In fact, I
asked Mujib himself about it and though he tried to interpret it in
; such a way as to prove his strength and political strategy, he had to ‘
'  _¢onfess the substance of the episode.
16. See the text of Ayub’s broadcast on October 8, 1959, in Dawn, Karachi,
October 9, 1958.
17. Ibid. ;
18. See Ayub’s last broadcast on March 25, 1969, in Dawn, March 26, 1969.
19. W. Howard Wriggins, The Ruler’s Imperative, New York, Columbia
University Press, 1969, p. 8: f
20. G. W. Choudhury, Constitutional Development in Pakistan, p. 247.
=

YAHYA BEGINS ANEW .
Pakistan had been accustomed to kaleidoscopic political
changes: the dismissal in 1953 and in 1957 of two Prime
Ministers who had the confidence of the legislature; the constitu-
tional coup against the Governor-General, and within a few
weeks the dissolution of the legislature by the same Governor-
General in 1954; the Ayub-Mirza coup in 1958 and Mirza’s
exile within three weeks — these are some of the glaring
instances at the centre. At the provincial level, a police chief
was nominated as chief minister of the North-West Frontier
Province in 1953, and when in 1955 the four provinces of
West Pakistan were amalgamated into “one unit”, the pro-
vincial chief ministers, who opposed the seemingly undemo-
cratic process through which the scheme was rushed, were so
suddenly and arbitrarily sacked that Pakistan’s political order
could hardly be described as parliamentary democracy. It
was described satirically, though not without justification,
as “suddenocracy’’. :
The fact that the great political upheaval in the winter of
1968-9 resulted not in the restoration of democracy but in the
imposition of a new military régime was a big shock, but not an
unusual phenomenon on the Pakistan political scene. The
political leaders were unable or unwilling to- take the
sibility of forming a government. They were only demanding
the immediate resignation of Ayub. Asghar Khan asked for a
' “caretaker government”, but no political leader with adequate
popular support was willing to accept a constitutional arrange-
ment under which such a government and the subsequent elec-
tions could be arranged, While the people had revolted against
an authoritarian régime and wanted a democratic government
the leaders failed miserably to reflect the popular 5
46 I

YAHYA BEGINS ANEW 47
_ The result was the imposition of martial law for the second
time in a decade. It dismayed the friends of democracy both at
home and abroad including the Western press. The Economist
described the situation with the headline “Tweedle Khan
takes over’’. It also alleged that Ayub seemed to have resorted
to martial law “to frustrate” the demands of the regionalists
in East Pakistan and those of the leftist parties for distributive
justice.?
' For Ayub it was a great failure to have to ask the Pakistani
Commander-in-chief, General Yahya Khan, to “save the
country from utter chaos and total destruction’. In fact, the
political leaders were relieved not to be facing the near-anar-
chic situation in the country. They seemed to be pleased that
the army was called in to tackle a situation which was beyond
their calculation. The centre leaders of the DAC were alarmed
_ by the rise of extremist forces and by the militant and highly
articulate expression of Bengali sub-nationalism. Bhashani and
his leftist forces preferred a military régime with no political
base to a bourgeois one with popular backing. For their long- |
range objectives, leftist forces preferred the military régime |
to Mujib’s coming to power through a secret deal. Mujib was
also unwilling to make any compromise; he was afraid of the
growing influence of Bhashani. His strategy in 1969 seemed to
be to face elections rather than to become Prime Minister
under any acceptable political arrangement for the country. |
as a whole, which would mean some sacrifice of his extreme |
demands for regional autonomy. So, although there was |
apparent “‘dismay”, the political leaders were neither sur-
prised nor unhappy by the emergence of the military régime.
This explained how, although it was not welcomed, it was
still accepted quietly. Processions and strikes in various parts
of the country vanished in a moment. The behaviour of the
faculty members’ of Dacca University was amusing: they
were the loudest in making protests but were also the first
to return quietly to their duties. To borrow a Marxist phrase,
the 1969 military régime in Pakistan could perhaps be described
as “a parasite on society”. Marx in his Exghteenth Brumaire
of Louis Bonaparte describes how struggle among various sec-
_tions in France created circumstances which made it “possible
for a grotesque mediocrity to play a hero’s part”.*

48 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
The circumstances in which Ayub and Yahya imposeg
martial law were, however, entirely different. When Ayub
came to power, Pakistan’s democratic institutions had been
perverted and its politicians discredited. On the other hand,
when Yahya became a “military” president, there was great
resentment against authoritarian rule and lively agitation jn
favour of democracy. More important, the Bengalis were no
longer prepared to acquiesce in an “ordering framework”
in which their demands could be ignored. Bengali
ism was no longer covert or inarticulate. The four-month-long
political agitation against Ayub provided the Bengalis with
free opportunities for proclaiming their political goals in clear
terms which could be ignored only at Pakistan’s peril. Simul-
taneously the “have nots” revolted against a privileged élite
and demanded social justice. The Government’s economic
policy must aim not only at a high growth rate but also at
distributive justice. The problems and challenges facing Yahya
Khan and his régime were formidable and complicated. The
_ Movement — or more accurately tounter-coup against Ayub —
was originally hatched by some ambitious generals at GHQ
in collaboration with frustrated leaders like Bhutto, but it
resulted in the “floodtide of Bengali nationalism” and in the
formidable and unprecedented challenges to the privileged
élite in Pakistan who monopolized both political and economic
power.
Yahya had neither the vision nor the capacity to tackle the
gigantic problems facing Pakistan in 1969. His immediate
| task was “to put the administration back on the rails”; he
added “we have had enough administrative laxity and
At the same time, he could not ignore the upsurge of popular
demand for democratic government and social justice. So
Yahya declared within twenty-four hours of coming into
power: aa
: I wish to make it absolutely clear to you that I have no
ambition other than the creation of conditions conducive
to the establishment of a constitutional government. It is
my firm belief that a sound, clean and honest administration
is a prerequisite for sane and constructive political life and
for the smooth transfer of power to the representatives of the
people elected freely and impartially on the basis of adult franchise.

YAHYA BEGINS ANEW 49
It will be the. zask of these elected representatives to give
the country a workable constitution and final solution to
all other political, economic and social problems that have
been agitating the minds of the people.*
Thus began a new chapter — as it turned out, the last -
in the political drama of united Pakistan: Yahya’s pledge to
restore democracy was at first greeted with considerable scepti-
cism; it was the sort of declaration that had accompanied the
emergence of military régimes in the Third World all too often.
Yahya’s régime was described in certain quarters. as Ayub’s
political order without Ayub. That might have been the origi-
nal hope of those at the GHQ who were planning a counter-
coup in the summer of 1968 when Ayub returned with a “clean
certificate of good health” from London, But the four-month
political movement had roused too many expectations and
encouraged too much political activity not permitted during |
the Ayub era, and thus a reversion to Ayub’s system was
simply not possible.
Before discussing Yahya’s efforts to convince the political
leaders that his pledge was not an empty one but that he meant
business, let me ra the new military régime in Pakistan
and its modus operdadi. The Ayub régime had been a civil-
military partnership. Some of the top civil officials were as
much part of his ruling élite as were some of the generals,
- A new régime tries to benefit from the mistakes and shortcom-
ings of its immediate precedessor. One of the causes of Ayub’s
downfall was. believed to have been his overdependence on
senior civil servants. The new régime, particularly Major-
General (soon promoted to Lieutenant-General) S. G. M.
Peerzada, who was described by the Sunday Times as de facto
Prime Minister, and in fact the Rasputin under Yahya, was
ee to avoid a similar “mistake” and therefore made
sure tHat neo bureaucrats were able to get near Yahya.
The administrative set-up at the President’s House was
changed. At the top, Yahya became the chief martial law |
administrator (CMLA); for a few days he did not assume the
title of President. Then, due to diplomatic compulsions, he
became the “reluctant” and “shy” President. Foreign diplo-
mats told the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that it would be a

a. |
50 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
complicated affair to present credentials to a martial law
administrator. The U.S. Government also raised, not publicly
but through diplomatic channels, the question of “recogni.
tion” of the new régime. However, once Yahya became Presi.
dent, diplomatic niceties were solved. Yahya, however, con-
tinued to be the Commander-in-chief of the army. According
to his own order of precedence, he often used to describe him-
self first as Commander-in-chief, then Chief Martial Law
Administrator and lastly President. As Ayub had lost the
confidence of GHQ by becoming an “elective” president and
ceasing to be Commander-in-chief, Yahya always retained his
basic post of Commander-in-chief in the expectation that it
would enable him to have direct access to and links with the
GHQ. |
Next to Yahya at the President’s House was Peerzada;
his official title was Principal Staff Officer (PSO) to the CMLA
and the President. Under the PSO were two brigadiers:
Rahim,,a Punjabi who was given charge: of martial law
affairs, and Karim, a Bengali, who was put in charge of civil
affairs. These two brigadiers (subsequently promoted to major-
generals) were the “super secretaries”; no secretary of any
ministry could send a file to the President without going
through these two, who were under the direct control and
- supervision of the PSO. It was an amusing phenomenon to
see the top bureaucrats waiting in the corridors of the brigadiers
and then at the office of the all-powerful PSO; very rarely
did they have occasion to see the President himself, The Ayub-
Mirza régime in 1958 had been very prompt in having a civi-
lian cabinet, but the new régime decided to have no such
partnership,
The various ministries were divided like this: Yahya was in
charge of Defence and Foreign Affairs, General Hamid, the
Chief of Staff and number two in the armed forces, took the
. Home Ministry. The rest was divided between the two chiefs
' of the Air Force and the Navy: Nur Khan, the Air Commander-
in-chief, became the overlord of the Ministries of Education
Labour, Health, Social Welfare, while the Navy chief, ‘Ahsan,
was given Finance, Planning, Industry and Commerce.
Yahya, Hamid, Peerzada, Nur Khan and Ahsan constituted
a small cabinet known as the Council of “Administration”.
| ‘al
Ine
|

YAHYA BEGINS ANEW st
The secretary of a ministry was summoned before the Council
whenever any matter relating to that particular ministry was
to be discussed.
Nur Khun, however, recruited a number of talented go aia
men from outside the civil service, popularly known as i whizz-
kids”. He began to introduce reforms with far-reaching im-
plications such as the right to strike and other important con-
cessions which had been denied to the workers under the
Ayub régime and then proceeded to introduce a new
educational policy which, although it had some commendable
features, included also such fantastic giving
the right to participate in the selection and promotion of
teachers including university professors. Nur Khan’s labour
policy had already created panic, Yahya was not prepared to
go in the same direction to placate the students to such an
absurd extent; he was willing to replace the “black” univer-
sity ordinances of Ayub and to give the students their legiti-
mate rights, but Nur Khan was too ambitious - he wanted to
create an image for hims-lf, as against Yahya, by introducing
“radical” reforms. So the first tussle began in the ruling junta
between Yahya and Nur Khan. By this time Yahya also set
up a three-man “planning cell” following the model of Nur
Khan’s “whizz kids”. As already mentioned, I became a
member of the planning cell. My first contact with Peerzada
was both surprising and amusing,
Peerzada was unceremoniously removing all the so-called
“Ayub men” — the top civil officers who had been close to
Ayub, such as Altaf Gauhar, N. A. Faruque and Fida Hasan.
Although I had no such important links with Ayub as these
officers, I had, as mentioned in the preceding chapter, a close
and friendly relationship with him. Peerzada’s summons to
me therefore came as a surprise. He recognized me at once
since I had met him on many occasions while he was Ayub’s
military secretary. There were a few moments of initial
‘ surprise and hesitancy. Then, like a big boss, he communi-
cated to me the order of the CMLA’s office “transferring” my
services from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the CMLA’s
office. When I explained to him that I was not a regular
government official and that my services were lent to the |
Ministry of Foreign Affairs for a specific assignment on a con-
Cc

