; ‘fee Brritish-indian Empire 1947-
Sa ay <
y Sr >
sk ‘a adc ft ns PB } Burma separated
; ute ¥ “ee t@ ra LOS va
ae Paes q
I vm ,
‘es, ee. EE i ie
Arabian Soa ~ EAST ’ ts 4
a We PAKISTAN * \ SP 7 ¢
Ge see CPA
e ; 4
Zz a ‘ 3 ¢ 5 |
we, % W, Bay of Bengal } \ <<.
in J
fo SS
PS ed pe ten:
~ C. Wiig
G.W. CHAUDHARY

| : Tomy Mother _ z
' The Late Fatema __
memories of whose affections enabled me to
endure these fateful days
| y.COmM |

CONTENTS
; Page
PREFACE ix
INTRODUCTION + - xi
1 The Rise of Bengali Sub-Nationalism: :
Conflict of the “Three Rs” 1.
2 The Fall of Ayub: a Personal Account —~ 13
3 Yahya Begins Anew : 46
4 The Abortive Scheme for the Transfer of Power . 73
5 The First and Last General Election 106
6 Tripartite Political Negotiations before
Confrontation 132 -
7 The Dacca Dialogue, March 16-24, 1971 161
8 The Civil War i 180 ~
g Dismemberment of Pakistan, 1971:
; Its International Implications 202
_ to End of an Era hy Sifts 228
| INDEX 234
FACSIMILE DOCUMENTS
Letter from author to President Yahya Khan
_ dated December 11, 1970, and President’s reply
dated January 21, 1971 between pages 142 and 143

PREFACE |
_ When I joined the Pakistan Cabinet in October 1969, I made
a plan to write a book on-Pakistan’s transition from the military
to the civilian rule. I had already been associated with the
President Yahya Khan’s plan for the transfer of power to an
elected Civilian government as a member of his three-man
planning cell”. I had also collected much information and |
data relating to the fall of Ayub Khan, with whom also I had
close contacts, My original plan was to write on Pakistan’s Ti
Political dynamics from the fall of Ayub to the establishment __
of a popularly elected government. I began to-keep regular
notes and diaries of important events and developments, |
Then when the plan for transfer of power with which I was
so closely associated failed and the country was plunged into a |
civil war, I.came to London with my family. In London Mr. |
Christopher Hurst approached me to write a book on the |
“Crisis in Pakistan”; I readily accepted his offer, but at that |
time I was engaged in writing another book’, so could not
_ turn to Mr. Hurst’s proposal. In the meantime, Pakistan was
dismembered and a new state of Bangladesh emerged.
I began the present work in October 1972 when I joined
Columbia University, my Alma Mater, for research and teach-
ing. I am grateful to Professor Zbigniew Brzezinski for appoint-
ing me a Fellow of the Research Institute on Communist
Affairs at Columbia University, and for arranging for me to
receive a research grant. I also received a similar grant from
the Foreign Policy Research Institute, Philadelphia, and the
South Asian Regional Studies Centre at the University of |
Pennsylvania. My sincere thanks are due to Dr. Robert L.
Pfaltzraff, Jr., Director, Foreign Policy Research Institute,
and Professor Richard D. Lambert, Chairman, South Asian
Regional Studies, University of Pennsylvania. My former
teacher at Columbia University, Professor J: C. Hurewitz,
never tired of extending his helping hand towards me. I am
extremely grateful to him for his valuable suggestions and help
a* |

|
x THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN i
in my research, I also received valuable help and encourage~
ment for my research from Professors Ralph Braibanti, Norman
Palmer, Howard Wriggins and Karl Von Vorys in U.S.A.
and from Professors C. H. Philips, P. N. S. Mansergh and W. H.
Morris-Jones and Dr. Peter Lyon in England. —
Last but not the least, I must thank Mr. Christopher Hurst
for his long patience with me to get the manuscript; for his
excellent editing of it and for all his efforts to get the book
printed so quickly after its submission.
The book deals with a subject to which my cherished home-
land, near relations and dear friends were involved. I was
personally involved with it. My opinions and interpretations
may be affected by my emotional involvement with the tragit
events in my country in 1970-1, but the book is based on
original and unpublished material and data which I believe
are still unknown to the world. I felt it a duty to reveal this
. story as objectively as I could. Any shortcomings or limitations
are, however, my responsibility. It is my hope that this work
will stimulate further studies and publications on the important
events of 1970-1 in the Indian subcontinent.
London G. W.
January 1974 | oe
ee

_ INTRODUCTION
Why did Pakistan fail to achieve a national identity or produce
_@ viable political order in which the people of both East and
West Pakistan could live together as equal partners? Was
Pakistan really an “‘unbridgeable division of language, climate
and way of life”, and is it true that “the division of Pakistan
into two nations (in 1971) was no more than a belated recogni-
tion of the unreality of the original state divided by a thousand
miles into two parts” ?! The growth of nationalism in Pakistan
was, no doubt, complicated by diversity of language, race,
culture and above all, by lack of geographical contiguity.
But there are many countries in the Third World with acute
regional, racial and linguistic differences and tensions. The
federal solution has proved successful in many newly indepen-
dent Afro-Asian countries with diverse ethnic, cultural,
religious, linguistic and racial groups. Why did federation in
Pakistan fail to achieve a similar success?
Geographical separation between the two halves of the coun-
try was a great challenge to its’ emerging nationalism, but in
the modern age with satellite communications, jet aircraft,
etc., geographical distance was not an insuperable factor.
It was often said that there was nothing in common between
an East and West Pakistani except religion; if that was the
sole argument for the break-up of Pakistan, one may inquire
what common identity makes a Bengali (Indian) and a
Madrassi live together in an Indian union.
_ The disintegration of Pakistan and the emergence of Bangla-
desh in 1971 is a sad story of the Pakistan Army generals’
misconceptions about their roles as the “guardians of national
interests” and of the dubious roles of two unscrupulous and
inordinately ambitious politicians - Mujibur Rahman of
Bangladesh and Z. A. Bhutto of “New” Pakistan. The crisis
| in Pakistan in 1971 was also a case of “foreign-linked factional-
| ism” where there are “linkages between internal political
factors and the international environment”,*
xi ‘

a |
xii THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Pakistan itself was the product of a national movement
on the part of an intolerant majority group which failed to
appreciate the legitimate hopes and aspirations of other
national groups in undivided India. It is tragic that Pakistan
did not profit from its own history. The driving force behind
the creation of Pakistan was democracy, but soon after the
nation had been created, the democratic process was killed.
The eclipse of the democratic process — first under an imperfect
parliamentary system and then under military régimes — was |
the basic factor for Pakistan’s failure in national integration
and for its ultimate disintegration in December There
were, no doubt, other factors such as economic disparity in
per capita income between East and West Pakistan, cultural
conflicts among the peoples of two geographically separated
units, and finally the external complicating factors which in-
tensified the internal diversive forces. But all these factors were,
in a sense, products of the lack. of the democratic political
order in the country...
| In this book I have tried to describe and analyse internal
and external developments. from the fall of Ayub Khan in
March 1969 to the fall of Dacca in December 1971. After
briefly examining the birth of Bengali sub-nationalism as a
result of the conflict of “three Rs” — Religion, Region and
Realities — the volume gives an assessment of the Ayub era,
during which Pakistan was described in many quarters as a
model for developing countries. Apparently the country was
enjoying “political stability”, “economic progress”; an “in-
dependent foreign policy”, etc., under Ayub Khan, but a
critical and inside analysis of the period will reveal that the
death of the democratic process and the rise of an authoritarian
_system under Ayub was the beginning of the end of united
Pakistan. Ayub’s political system, in which the Bengalis had.
lost all initiatives in national affairs, was the root cause of the . :
disintegration of the country. Similarly his ruinous policy of
having an armed confrontation with India in 1965 had dis-
astrous effects on the viability of Pakistan as a united country.
When Yahya Khan came to power in March 1969, he and.
__ his military régime made a final and sincere effort to solve the
East-West Pakistan tensions, but subsequent events proved
that Yahya had not the abilities necessary to meet the com-

"TT a an in Ss ao aoe
; INTRODUCTION xiii
ep situation already created by the misrule of the country
cane i Ae & twenty-two years. Similarly, the two politi-
cv nad "eee he had finally to deal to maintain the coun-
ikon eae political honesty and integrity nor any
comptes statesmanship, External factors were also
The an already explosive situation.
Tesult was the. dismal failure of a plan to transfer
te to the elected representatives of the people from a
tary régime, culminating in a civil war which constituted
@ great tragedy of modern history. Here was a conflict which
could not be resolved, due to a combination of limiting internal
factors and a hostile international environment. Why did
Yahya’s plan for the transfer of power to a popularly elected
civil government fail? Was it inadequate to meet ‘the
Bengalis demands for regional autonomy, or had the Bengalis
under Mujib already decided on an independent state?
Were Yahya and the military régime sincere in handing over
Power to a Bengali-dominated civilian government? What
were the implications of Mujib’s six-point plan? Was it a veiled
scheme for secession or a demand only for regional autonomy?
| Was Mujib sincere and straightforward in his dealings with his
own people and with Yahya and the military régime? Did not
his policy precipitate the confrontation? What were the roles
and aims of Bhutto? Was it correct to say that he was more
interested in getting power than in the unity of Pakistan?
Could not the war have been avoided by states-
manship and moderation on the part of the three parties
involved in the final dialogue in January-March 1971 ?
What'were the international implications of t! e crisis over
Bangladesh? Was it not connected with the Indo-Pakistan .
conflict and the tensions in the subcontinent ? What was India’s
role in the crisis? Was guided by humanitarian con-
siderations, as India pretended, or was it seeking an oppor-
tunity to destroy its “enemy number one”? How far was the
Bangladesh crisis affected by the Sino-Soviet conflict in South
and South-east Asia and by the global competition between .
the two super-powers? ,
These and similar questions are examined and analysed in
this volume. The break-up of Pakistan and the emergence of
Bangladesh have great significance. It will demonstrate how a

xiv THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
depoliticized régime, however well intentioned it may be, is
not capable of dealing with the complex socio-economic
problems of a new country in the Third World. It will also
reveal how a stronger neighbour can take advantage of the
internal conflicts of a smaller country, and how the big powers
can carry on their global competition in the Third World
by proxy. :
REFERENCES
1. See The Times (London), editorial, June 9, 1966, and December 15, 1973:
See Alan Dowty, “Foreign-linked Factionalism as a Historical Pattern”,
The Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. XV, No. 4 December 4, 1971+

ei, | I
THE RISE OF BENGALI SUB-NATIONALISM:
CONFLICT OF THE “THREE RS”
The immediate causes of the disintegration of Pakistan
and the emergence of Bangladesh on December 16, 1971, were
military. atrocities committed by the Pakistan Army against
unarmed Bengalis, the influx of refugees from East Pakistan
into India and finally the direct Indian military intervention
in the Bangladesh crisis from its very beginning, which culmi-
nated in an invasion of East Pakistan in November 197!,
backed up by Soviet military and diplomatic support. The
rise of Bengali sub-nationalism within Pakistan; however, had
its origin in a number of factors — political, economic, cultural
and social — which had operated since Pakistan was created
* in 1947.
When the Muslims of the Indian subcontinent were gathered
together in a unique way in the 1940s under the leadership of
Quaid-i-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah for a separate state of.
their own, Pakistan, they put all emphasis on one “R”:
religion; though the significance of “religion” was much wider
than it usually is in a modern Western society. The Indian
Muslims forgot the second “‘R”; region - which is an important
factor in determining group loyalty in the Afro-Asian coun-
tries. With the appearance of the third “R” — realities — after
the creation of Pakistan in 1947, the second “R” — region —
could not be ignored. The history of united Pakistan from 1947
to 1971 is one of constant conflict between the Pakistani nation-
alism, which could barely acquire a definite identity, and the
emerging Bengali regionalism or sub-nationalism. Like the
Muslim nationalism in undivided India, Bengali sub-national- |
ism within united Pakistan was the product of conflicting
national ideas and aspirations. “Nationalism in Asia is based
; I

