102 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
. e picture inside the conference room of the Pre.
Mutib made a solemn promise that he would
show the draft constitution before presenting It to the assembly,
He was reported to have assured Yahya that his six-point
programme did not imply a division of the country, and that
Yahya’s five points, as laid down in the L.F.O., and his own
six points would both be incorporated in the future constitu-
tion. After three meetings with Mujib, Yahya sent for me on
December 3, 1970, and gleefully told me: “Pakistan is saved”;
he also boasted that his decision not to postpone the election
was “correct and far-sighted”. I could not, however, share
Yahya’s optimism; I only hoped and prayed that he was cor-
rect. The whole Yahya—Mujib dialogue during the three secret
meetings was, as usual, taped and I heard the tape-recorded
version of the talks. Nobody listening to the tape-recorded
version could blame Yahya. However, I also obtained a copy
of the preliminary draft constitution prepared by experts
of the Awami League in which there was no hope for a united
Pakistan. The division of the country was not formally pro-
posed but a rigid and comprehensive interpretation of the six-
point programme was in the draft. If the six points were in-
corporated in toto, there could hardly be a federal union.
In the following account of the disintegration of Pakistan-
I shall try to enable the reader to judge who was truly the
betrayer — Yahya or |
The West Pakistan Scene
I have, so far, discussed the Yahya—Mujib talks and political
developments in East Pakistan because it was the tensions
between East and West Pakistan which were to determine the
fate of Pakistan. But that did not imply that the roles of
cal leaders or the ruling élite in West Pakistan could be ignored
or minimized. Yahya, unlike his predecessor Ayub, did not
have absolute control over the ruling army junta. There
were currents and cross-currents within the junta, but until
January 1971 it gave Yahya and his principal military adviser
Licut.-General Peerzada a free hand to negotiate with Mujib
in the effort to find a solution, provided the unity of the country

ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRAXEFEDR OF POWER 103
was maintained. The junta had neither much ability nor much
enthusiasm for studying the various neces! and
formulae, They seemed Over-confident that if anything went
wrong they would step : g
cf step in, whereupon, as in March 1969,
another period of rigid martial law would bring “sanity”.
What could the non-martial Bengalis, who were looked down °
upon as Muslims converted from the lower caste Hindus, do
once the brave jawans (soldiers) were on the streets of Dacca?
They were living in a world of illusion and had no ability to
read the writing on the wall. Of course, there were exceptions,
Many enlightened and well-intentioned army officers were
watching the situation with dismay and genuine concern.
But like so many, they too could only hope and pray for the best
and were perhaps getting ready for the worst, although nobody
could imagine at that time that events would soon overtake
all calculations and turn the whole situation into one of the
greatest tragedies of modern history.
Among the West Pakistani leaders there was no single
leader like Mujib who had absolute control over the whole of
West Pakistan. Bhutto himself told me in June 1970 that he
would get “‘at least” forty seats out of the 132 allotted to West
Pakistan; that was his greatest expectation. Then there were |
orthodox rightist parties like Jamaat-e-Islami, who had
enjoyed the blessing of some of the generals. General Sher
Ali (a member of Yahya’s cabinet) was a great champion of the
Islam Pasand (Islam-loving) parties, as they were known.’
Qayyum Khan’s Muslim League was also reported to have
enjoyed the patronage of members of the ruling élite. Wali
‘Khan and his party, the pro-Moscow faction of the National
Awami Party (NAP), was active only in Baluchistan and the
North-West Frontier; it was taken for granted that Wali
Khan would have some success in these two smaller provinces
of West Pakistan. But as the election campaign progressed,
Bhutto’s chances became ever brighter. His theme of a “‘thou-
sand years war with India”, restoring national honour sup-
posed to have been sacrificed by Ayub at the Tashkent con- .
ference, and his promise of “Islamic socialism” attracted the
younger elements in the Punjab. —
But more significant, if not sinister, was the deal between
Bhutto and the “Rasputin” of the Yahya régime, General

104 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Peerzada. The Bhutto—Peerzada alliance had a long history ~
both were sacked by Ayub, and common hostility towards
Ayub had made them good friends since 1966. Bhutto was also
coming closer to other members of the military junta such as
Lieut.-General Gul Hasan, Major-General Omar who was a
close friend and colleague of the chief of the army, General
Hamid, who had already started dreaming of becoming the
third military President of the country, following Yahya
. just as Yahya had followed Ayub. |
Yahya seemed to be presiding over not only a divided house
but also a bewildering situation. However, he continued to
relax and have pleasant social evenings. With all his limita-
tions, he was — I still believe — making an honest effort to reach
a political settlement between East and West Pakistan. In his
L.F.O. he conceded all the legitimate demands of the Bengalis.
He sincerely believed that the only way to save Pakistan was to
* win the confidence of Mujib by granting him all the concessions
— minus the disintegration of Pakistan. As pointed out earlier,
Yahya was a non-serious type of administrator; he did not
like reading official files and letters except for brief summaries.
He used to describe himself as a “part-time” president. There
were two matters which attracted his full-time attention —
the constitutional formula by which the unity of the country
could be saved and the assignment given to him by President
Nixon to act as courier between Washington and Peking in the
light of Nixon’s new China policy. Yahya did both these jobs
conscientiously. :
Incidentally, these two important tasks of Yahya brought me
in close contact with him, not as his cabinet minister. I was
‘also a “part-time” Communications Minister: my main job
was to assist him in his constitutional and political dialogue
with leaders of various parties, and as I worked as Head of the
Research Division of the Pakistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs
_ for more than two years immediately before I. joined Yahya’s
‘cabinet, he took me into full confidence in his foreign policy
matters.

{
|
ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 105
REFERENCES
1. See text of Yahya’s press conference in Dawn, Karachi, April 11, 1973»
:. See the text of Yahya's broadcast in Daum, Karachi, July 29, 1969+
ee ne ny at
5. See V. P. Menon, The Transfer of Power im India, Longmans, London, |
10573 Lord Inmay, Mameirs London, 1969) ; Ian Stephens,
akistan (Ernest Benn, London, 1962); Leonard Mosley, The Lat =
Days of the British Raj (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1962).
6. Address to the Nation: General,A. M. Yahya Khan, President -
of Pakistan, November 28, 1969, published by the Department of
Films and Publications, Government of Pakistan, Karachi, p. 5.
7. Ibid., p. 6.
8. Ibid.
g. Ibid.
10. Ibid., pp. 9-10; one may compare my Demooracy in Pakistan (1
294 and pp. 243-4, for almost identical words in this part vi
11. Wew York Times, December 2, 1969,
12. Christian Science Monitor, December 13, 1969. ‘
- 13. The U.S. Congressional Record — Home, December 15, 1969.
14. From an unpublished report by the Pakistani Ambassador in Washing-
ton, January, 1970. .
15. See Awami League Manifesto in Bangladesh Documents published by
the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, n.d. pp. 67-8.
16. See The Legal Framework Order, 1970, Order No. 2 of 1970,
published by the Department of Films and Publications, Government
of Pakistan, Karachi, n.d. .
“7. Pakistan Observer (Dacca), April 5, 1970.
18. Ibid., April 12, 1970. ,
19. Bangladesh Documents, op. cit., Col. I, p. 82. .
go. This account of Mujib’s speech to his inner circle was reported to
Yahya by his intelligence service. For some — presumably to
continue the path of negotiations, he decided to ignore it.
ar. L owe the story of this incident to Lt.-Gen, Yakub and to Governor
Ahsan. :
22. See Banglabandhu Speaks; a Collection of Speeches and Documents, Dacca,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Government of Bangladesh, n.d., pp.
42-3. Mujib now claims that he was struggling for Bangladesh since
1948. :

THE FIRST AND LAST
GENERAL ELECTION
Periodical elections on the basis of direct adult franchise,
contested freely and fairly by more than one party, is regarded
as a sine qua non of any form of representative government.
Democracy was the driving force behind the creation of Paki-
stan, but its eclipse was nowhere more prominent than in the
absence of any genuine general elections in Pakistan during
its two decades of existence as a united country. Parliamentary
democracy, or a parody of it, existed from 1947 to 1958, but
the country did not have a single general election during that
period. Pakistan provided a unique example of “democracy
without any genuine elections”. Two federal legislatures during
this period were indirectly elected by the provincial legis-
latures. The first provincial elections had been held under the
British raj in 1946 on a restricted franchise; then between 1951
and 1954 provincial elections were held on the basis of direct
adult franchise. What was the nature of these elections, and to
what extent were they fair and free?
The best account of these elections in the provinces of West
Pakistan was given by the Electoral Reform Commission
which was set up under the chairmanship of a judge of the
Superior Court in 1955. The Commission’s Report, recalling
the pledge given by the founder of Pakistan, Quaid-i-Azam
Jinnah, that Pakistan “would be a democratic state”, lamented
that the people’s faith in democracy was tarnished by
feelings of frustration and despondency chiefly on account
of the alleged malpractices perpetuated and underhand
tactics used, during the elections held on the basis of adult
franchisé in 1951 in most of the regions now constituting the
province of West Pakistan. ... These elections were a farce,
a mockery and a fraud upon the electorate italics]. It
106

BSS FIRST AND LAST sicoriox 107
_ alleged that pocket constituencj ing in i-
cal compactness or homogeneity in oth as
wis Rie sh ce to suit the convenience and fortune of
P cin} politicians, It was maintained that persons on a
are scale were purposely registered as bogus voters in the
electoral rolls and made to vote under undue influence
‘coercion and inducements of all sorts, Ballot boxes . . . were
surreptiously forced open and clandestinely stuffed. . . .
Officials at the bidding of the party in power interfered with
the free exercise of ballot and that hosts of tricks were played
upon the electorate. ... Rival candidates were kidnapped;
political opponents were . . . harassed and thrown Lehind
ars On the pretext of their being dangerous to the
Illegal tactics constituted a blot on the fair name of demo-
cracy . . . and created serious doubts and fears in the mind
_ ofthe general public as to the fate of democracy in Pakistan.?
The Commission. made a comprehensive list of recommen-
dations in order to avoid these malpractices, and concluded:
“If we honestly wish to work democracy in this country, we
‘should let the democratic evolution and ideals take their
shape.”* But the country had no free elections. Soon parlia-
mentary democracy was abolished, and the country was
governed under martial law from 1958 to 1962. It has to be
added, however, that there was one fair provincial election in
East Bengal in 1954 when the ruling party, the Muslim League,
. was completely routed: it was only able to capture nine seats -
in an assembly of 304 members, There were 1,285 candidates
for the 304 seats. The percentage of voters participating in the
election, including women voters, was fairly high judged by
the criterion of an election in a new Asian democracy.
When Ayub Khan came to power in 1958 he introduced
| an indirect method of election through the Basic Democrats.
The will of the electorate is not properly reflected in an in- .
direct method of election,- which is why most of the demo-
cratic states have abandoned it in favour of direct elections -
except in some cases for electing an upper house. Ayub’s system
of election demonstrated clearly, in the presidential election of
1965, that there was a big gap between the verdict of the
people and the actual results of the election. ‘As I have already
pointed out, one of the major complaints against Ayub’s politi-
|

108 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
cal order — if not the major one — was the indirect method of
election which failed to reflect the people’s wishes in the elec.
tion results.
So Yahya’s pledge of “free and fair’ elections on the basis
of direct voting and giving the Bengalis, for the first time,
their due share of representation on the basis of “one man,
one vote” was in a sense a revolutionary development in
Pakistan’s politics.
The Election Machinery |
Yahya in his speech of July 28, 1969, announced the formation
of an Election Commission headed by a Bengali judge of the
Supreme Court of Pakistan, Justice A. Satter. I had frequent
and regular meetings with him and can say that he was abso-
lutely free in his assignment to arrange a fair election; at'‘no
stage was the Election Commission subjected to any pressure
or even given any hint as to how it should function. Justice
Satter, like myself and others who sincerely hoped for a politi-
cal settlement between East and West Pakistan, was optimistic
and seemed to be fully satisfied in the free and independent
role he was exercising. Yahya used to show him all courtesy
and respect; sometimes Justice Satter was specially invited to
attend cabinet meetings when any important decisions relating
to elections were to be made; his views and recommendations
were always given high priority and attention.
The Election Commission’s first task was to decide whether
to accept the electoral rolls already prepared under Ayub’s
system for the 1970 elections. The main objections to accepting
the existing rolls were that Ayub’s method of election was
indirect, and therefore these electoral rolls had been prepared
for electing the members of the electoral college, the Basic
Democrats, and not the members of the legislatures, central -
or provincial. Yahya, as already pointed out, had pledged
, direct elections on adult franchise. Secondly, the Election
Commission under Ayub had not been headed by a judge of the
Supreme Court but by an executive officer, who was Ayub’s
principal secretary for a number of years and a member of his
inner cabinet. The work of Ayub’s Election Commission could
not inspire public confidence, which was badly needed to
LS

THE F 7
TRST AND LAST GENERAL ELECTION 109 ;
remove doubts as to whethe 2
intended to transfer r the military régime sincerely
| So after careful come rough “free and fair” elections.
. consideration Justi : “bi
ahead with the prepaiation ? ustice Satter decided to go
| an easy task to prepare a ee electoral rolls. It was not
| population of about al rolls for a country with a
| sus), the v Sg, COND (according to the 1961 cen-
| sos ast majority of whom were illi vine a
villages where the means of co Pa
| Yet the Election Commissi eS Ht pis ep
| able speed and with as rene ps d the job with commend-
sible criticiem thas. * a8 possible to avoid any pos-
as had been the case in Pakistan in Pin ee mo cian
cautions were taken and an elaborate a ne age
285 registration officers, 1,404 ene ae
14,12 supervisors and 45,766 nominee noc
carry out the gigantic task of enumerating fe. ae
| voters throughout the country. The Election
| completed the task by June 15, 1970 - a remarkable feat; |
| _ the preparation of new electoral rolls began on August 2
| 1969. The electoral rolls were published with a view to ime i
| any claims and objections, which would then be promptly
| a ay of by 315 “revising authorities” recruited with the
| elp of the High Courts of East and West Pakistan. The total
| number of “applications” against the published rolls in East
Pakistan was 20,650, of which 15,007 were accepted while 3
| - 5,643 were rejected. Corresponding figures for West Pakistan ©
were 6,904, of which 5,776 were accepted while 1,128 were
rejected. Of the total number of registered voters, 31,214,935
_ were from East Pakistan and 25,206,263 were from the West.
The number of registered voters was about 50 per cent of the
country’s population, which was regarded as an “ideal” pro-
portion. 3
Another important aspect of the elections in 1970 was
that adult franchise was extended to some of the tribal areas,
which had always been excluded in the past. The people of
“Azad” Kashmir — the part of the disputed state Jammu and
Kashmir under the control of the government of Pakistan since
the ceasefire in 1948 — were also included in the voters’ list.
The next job for the Election Commission was the delimi-
tation of constituencies, which could begin only after Yahya’s

110 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Legal Framework Order of March 1970 had allotted the
number of seats to East Pakistan and the four provinces of
West Pakistan in the National Assémbly, and the number of
seats for the provincial assemblies in the four provinces and
in East Pakistan. The schedules as given in the L.F.O. were
as follows:
THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY OF PAKISTAN®
General Women
East Pakistan oe
The Punjab Be. 8
Sind ai 5
Baluchistan 4 I
North-West Frontier Province 18 I
Centrally Administered Tribal Areas
TOTAL goo 13
. PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLIES®
General Women
East Pakistan goo 10
The Punjab 180 6
Sind 60 2
_ Baluchistan 20 I
North-West Frontier Province 40 2
A Delimitation Commission was set up with Justice Satter
as chairman and two judges — one each from the High Courts
of East and- West Pakistan respectively. Objections and sug-
_ gestions in respect of East Pakistan constituencies were heard
by the Commission from May 11 to May 22, 1970. Modifica-
tions were made in respect of 58 constituencies for the National
Assembly and 96 for the East Pakistan Provincial Assembly.
The final list of constituencies both for the National Assembly
and for the provincial assembly in East Pakistan was published
on June 5, 1970. A similar process was carried out in the four |
,provinces of West Pakistan by the Commission from May 26
‘to June 20. Modifications were made for 39 constituencies for
the National Assembly and for 8g constituencies for the four
provincial assemblies in West Pakistan, The final list of con-
stituencies in West Pakistan, both for the national and provin-
cial assemblies, was published. on June 25, 1970.
The work of the Election Commission in preparing elec-

THE FIRST AND Last GENERAL ELECTION III
. toral rolls and of the Delimitation Commission in setting up
ee was well received in the country. Neither any
an tie pool Gee a. em ne cast any reflection or doubt
© “ommissions headed by Justice
Satter. seemed to be happy with the procedural
arrangement for holding the country’s first general election.
The Longest Election Campaign : January to December, 1970
= Out earlier, Yahya did not ban political parties
when he imposed martial law on March 25, 1969. As he said
in one of his speeches in 1970: “This caused both surprise and
relief. .. . The first action of any martial law régime is to ban
political parties, for the existence of a martial law régime side
by side with political parties is a most unusual phenomenon,”’¢
. After many years of controlled or quasi-controlled democracy,
in which political parties had been denied the freedom to
propagate their views and explain their policies and. pro-
_ grammes freely, full political activity was revived in Pakistan
from January 1, 1970. The Martial Law Regulation 60, pro-
mulgated on December 21, 1969, allowed unrestricted political
activity in the country. It is true that Regulation 60 provided
certain “guidelines” for political activity, as they were called,
such as that no political party or group nor any individual
would be permitted to preach violence or regional hatred, or.
' speak at all against Pakistan’s ideology, i.e. the Islamic ideology ©
on which it was claimed that Pakistan had been established.
| But the Regulation was only honoured in its breach. There
was open and violent preaching of regional hatred, mainly by
Mujib’s party in East Pakistan. The younger and militant |
groups, mainly students and industrial workers, adopted seem-
ingly fascist techniques for disrupting the political meetings
and processions of other parties. Various parties made charges
and countercharges of hooliganism and vandalism. The
Government was accused of being too weak, particularly in
East Pakistan towards Mujib’s party. Yahya pointed out the
real dilemmas facing his régime:
1 nder which the martial law authorities had, on
The p - ignore breaches of martial law regulations and
|
|

