|
122 THE LAST DAYS ¢F UNITED PAKISTAN
tea than as a minis(r. From my talks with these young
ok and with local pol:tical tzaders, I had serious doubts
the viability of Pakistan as a united country. Trends
in West Pakistan, to which I shall turn later, were no less
discouraging. It was a frustrating experience for persons like
myself who cherished and valued the driving forces wh'ch led
the Indian Muslims to establish Pakistan.
Bhutto and his Programme
Bhutto told me once: ‘‘Mujib has only one slogan: Prevent
exploitation of Bengalis by giving votes to my party’.’ Bengali
nationalism, as pointed out earlier, had already acquired
sufficient momentum from various factors as analysed in
earlier chapters. But Bhutto had no such simple path. The
Bengalis of East Pakistan constituted a homogencous group,
but in West Pakistan there were sub-regionalisms in Sind,
Baluchistan and the North-West Frontier province. Then in
West Pakistan, the rightist elements were not altogether dis-
credited as they were in East Pakistan. Being a non-Punjabi,
Bhutto also had to capture the imagination of Punjabis, who,
to quote his own words, were the “bastion of power” in
West Pakistan, if not in all Pakistan,
To give one example of the complicated issues facing Bhutto, .
“one unit” was still popular with the Punjabis but was an-
athema in the smaller provinces of West Pakistan. Then in the
Punjab, Bhutto could give hours-long speeches on “confronta-
tion with India” and ‘“‘a thousand years war with India”,
and on Ayub’s alleged sacrifices of the national interest at the
Tashkent Conference of 1966, but such emotional issues did
not have much appeal in Baluchistan or the North-West
Province or even in Bhutto’s home province, Sind. Finally,
in West Pakistan the big landlords still constitute a pressure
group while in East Pakistan, where they were mostly non-
Muslims, their influence was a thing of the past. Bhutto had to
speak of “land reforms” and “Islamic socialism” with the
object of gaining the support of newly awakened have-not
groups, particularly in industrial cities, while he had to be
careful not to push the big landlords or businessmen too far.
His task was formidable. Finally, as pointed out in the pre-

as ae TBE NS: er 123
ce apter +
sa “ member flea ares cultivating his links with
ulto’s i te .
si alin policys ae were: “Islam is our faith; democracy
pledged radical] ism 18 Our economy,” His party’s manifesto
throw of ca me charges in the system, the ovcr-
of onif alism and the ushering in of Islamic sociz‘ism,18
six-point -plan, 20t Oppose or try to expose Mujib's
war that he des a trae only after the outbreak of the civil
“In essenc aba ed Mujib $ plan with the significant words:
ts of ©; the six-point formula was meant to strike at the
roots Of Our nationhood.” He also disclosed that, several
months before the elections, he had told General Peerzada
one of his best friends in the junta and Yahva’s de facto
Minister, that Mujib’s aim was nothing less than “‘separa-
bom + fis accused Yahya and his Government of tolerating
Mujib’s preaching of his six-point plan. In a sense, Bhutto’s
charge against the Yahya Government was correct, but
Yahya relied on Mujib’s repeated and firm pledges that
he would modify his six-point plan as soon as the elections
were over. But was it not a duty on the part of Bhutto as the
leader of an important party to warn the nation of the serious
threats to its territorial integrity, which he claimed to have
discovered before the elections? In one of my lengthy talks
with him at his luxurious home in Karachi, I urged him to go
to East Pakistan and address the people there, and warn them
of the dangers of separation and of the “foreign influences”
working in East Pakistan. Both Bhutto and I agreed on the |
impending crisis, but he ignored my sincere appeals to take
up the issue. He preferred to devote all his efforts and energies |
to capturing as many seats as possible in West Pakistan. He
even castigated the rightist parties, such as the Muslim League,
who spoke of the dangers facing the country. What did Bhutto’s
election strategy prove? Was he not more interested in power
politics than in the unity of Pakistan? a
The rightist parties’ position seemed better initially in
West Pakistan than in East Pakistan. The same was the case
with the centre parties like the Council Muslim League and
the P.D.P. But the “old guard” of these parties belonged to the
past rather than to the Pakistan of today; half the country’s
population was born after its creation in 1947. The old guard’s
E*

124 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
-ppeals to “Islamic ideology” and “strong central govern-
cent” were of little interest to the newly awakened masses
in West Pakistan. The political awakening based on socio-
economic factors was hastened during the four-mor.-h
tion against che Ayub régime in 1969 and during the year -long
election campaign in 1970. During both these periods Bhutto's
performance was more successful than that of the old guard 8
out-dated programmes and policies. Though Bhutto's elec-
toral success in West Pakistan was less than Mujib’s in East
Pakistan, his achievements — in view of the more formidable
forces, more complicated issues, and sub-regional and linguistic
tensions which he had to tackle — were no less remarkable.
The Government decided to give facilities to the leaders of
various parties to project their political manifestoes and policics
through television and radio. This was the first time that politi-
cians were freely and impartially given the chance to use the
government-owned radio and _ television for their political
activities. During the presidential election of 1965, the candi-
date of the combined opposition parties (C.O.P.) was denied
the use of this facility by Ayub, while he himself utilized
radio and television in his own election campaign. Similarly,
during the parliamentary era (1947-58), when provincial
elections were held in the 1950s, the politicians were never
given the use of such facilities — television was not yet there in
the 19508 but radio did exist and could have. been made
available to the opposition parties, as is the well-established
practice in Western democracies.
In their television and radio speeches, the various leaders
did not add much to what they hae been saying in their
public meetings and rallies. Political broadcasts began on
October 28 and continued until November 19, 1970, during
which time the leaders of fourteen parties made speeches. The
series began with Mujib, who was given the chance to speak
first, and ended with the leader of the Sind United Front,
G. M. Syud. By this time there was no doubt as to who among
the leaders had real political support: Mujib, Bhutto and a
few others in West Pakistan such as Wali Khan and Qayyum
Khan, leader of one of three factions of the Muslim League;
both of the latter two leaders had chances of success in the
North-West Frontier province.

oe AND LAST GENERAL ELECTION 125
at the rightist groups like
went be ne
certain. Two of the rightist grou: 2 oe ee TS Fe
: st groups, All-Pakistan Jamiat-e-
Ulema--Islam and Markazi Jamiat-e-Ulema, did bett th
the older and better organ‘zed Jamiat-e-Islam ne tage
. : ong the
three factions of the Muslim League, the Qa
did better in the North-West Province while ‘the Counell
Muslim League’s performance was better in the Punjab ig
Though Bhashani had by this time almost given = shee
of participating in the elections, yet his speech was listened
to with great interest. He alone spoke in two national lan-
guages: in Bengali from the Dacca radio station and in Urdu
from West Pakistan. His speech was a masterpiece and it
met with a good reception in both wings. Mujib is not good
in television and radio broadcasts; he excels as a demagogue
in a mass rally. Yet his speech was listened to with great
attention in both regions, as he had already emerged as the
Bengali leader who spoke for the majority of the country’s
population. Bhutto had appeared on television previously,
both at home and abroad, so his performance was better than
that of Mujib. His voice was also listened to with interest
as he was seen as the emerging leader of West Pakistan,
though even at that time, i.e. six weeks before the elections,
nobody could expect that he would gain such a big success.
The leaders in their speeches dealt with almost all the issues
facing the electorate: democracy; basic civil rights; socialist
_ or any other state-controlled economic order ensuring a just —
distribution of the fruits of economic growth; educational
reforms; agricultural improvement and land reforms; the
role of Islam in the new Constitution; the nationalization of
banks and insurance companies; foreign policy, and so on.
Mujib’s main theme was regionalism or emerg.ng Bengali
nationalism, though he also talked about socio-economic
reforms. Bhutto’s main emphasis was on his concept of “Islamic
| socialism” and on foreign affairs, including Indo-Pakistani ”
disputes such as the Kashmir problem. The rightist groups
emphasized Islamic ideology and threats to it from foreign
“isms” like Wali Khan’s basic 5 was secular
litics’ and the regional problems of his home province.
Bhashani’s speech fina for hs “have-nots”; he talked little of

126 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
constitutional or political issues, his main stress be-=g on the
improvement of the lot of the poorest section of socicty.2®
The television speeches by political leaders on the whole pro.
vided an additional impetus to election campaigning, though |
a number of them were dull and boring. In an atmosphere
full of tension and poli:'cal activity, the speeches provided
the Pakistaz.is, part'cularly the ws van population, with a good
picture of the intensifying election which had
now been going on in the country for about a year.
Finally, on December g, only four days before the elections,
Yahya made a passionate appeal to the political leaders
“for a spirit of give and take and trust in each other ..... at
this particular juncture of our history”. He recalled that
“many doubts are expressed regarding the sincerity and in-
tentions of this régime, but despite this we remain steadfast
in our aim of bringing back democracy to our land’’.®°
In a press conference at Dacca on November 27, 1979,
Yahya reaffirmed his pledge for “maximum autonomy for
East Pakistan”. He said that he would not stand in the way
of maximum autonomy for the people of East Pakistan, but
would rather encourage it so that they could have “full
charge of their destiny, planning and utilization of its re-
sources within the concept of Pakistan”. He added that because
of its geographical distance, ‘‘East Pakistan must have maxi-
mum autonomy to run her own affairs within the overall
framework of one Pakistan”."! Could there: be a more un-
qualified pledge for autonomy for East Pakistan? If Mujib
had only been interested in autonomy, as he told the Bengali
Muslims while he was campaigning for their votes, there
should have been no conflict; Yahya could not have been
more explicit on the granting of autonomy. But the vital
question was whether the issue was one of auto-
nomy” or a conflict over the dismemberment of the country. .
Election Results .
Elections were held on December 7, 1970, and were by any
standard free and fair — ironically the first and last genuine
election in united Pakistan. Contrary to views expressed in
many places, the results of the electicus, in so far as they

126 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
constitutional or political issues, his main stress bets 3 On the
improvement of the lot of tlie poorest section of society.
The television speeches by political ]-aders on the whole pro.
vided an additional impetus to election campaigning, though
a number of them were dull and boring. In an atmosphcre
full of tension and poli:‘cal activity, the speeches provided
the part’cularly the u: )an population, with a good
picture of the intensifying election campaign which had
now been going on in the country for about a year.
Finally, on December 3, only four days before the elections,
Yahya made a passionate appeal to the political leaders
“for a spirit of give and take and trust in each other... at
this particular juncture of our history”. He recalled that
“many doubts are expressed regarding the sincerity and in-
tentions of this régime, but despite this we remain steadfast
in our aim of bringing back democracy to our land”.?°
In a press conference at Dacca on November 27, 1970,
Yahya reaffirmed his pledge for “maximum autonomy for
East Pakistan”. He said that he would not stand in the way
of maximum autonomy for the people of East Pakistan, but
would rather encourage it so that they could have “full
charge of their destiny, planning and utilization of its re-
sources totthin the concept of Paktstan”. He added that because
of its geographical distance, “East Pakistan must have maxi-
mum autonomy to run her own affairs within the overall
framework of one Pakistan’”’.24 Could there, be a more un-
qualified pledge for autonomy for East Pakistan? If Mujib
had only been interested in autonomy, as he told the Bengali
Muslims while he was campaigning for their votes, there
should have been no conflict; Yahya could not have been
more explicit on the granting of autonomy. But the vital
question was whether the issue was one of “maximum auto-
nomy” or a conflict over the dismemberment of the country. .
Election Results
Elections were held on December 7, 1970, and were by any
standard free and fair — ironically the first and last genuine
election in united Pakistan. Contrary to views expressed in
many places, the results of the electicns, in so far as they

THE FIRST AND LAST GENERAL ELECTION 127
related to East Pakistan, caused no surprise to the ruling
elite or to any serious observer of political developments
there. After Yahya’s decision to hold the elections following
the violent anti-Pakistan feelings which had arisen after the
cyclone in East Pakistan, there was not the slightest doubt
that Mujib would monopolize 2!1 the seats there. Bhashani
and many other political leaders had withdrawn from the
contest as a protest against Yahya’s decisicn; only Nurul
an oC and won a solitary seat and another seat
was won by a “raja” of the C! ibe i i
Hall Teaser y e Chakma tribe in the Chittagong
However, it was the results of the election in West Pakistan
which caused surprise, particularly the total defeat of <he
right-wing and orthodox parties there and the emergence
of a non-Punjabi, Bhutto, as the leader of West Pakistan or,
more precisely, of the Punjab. The detailed election results for
both the national and provincial legislatures and the statistical
data showing the number of votes secured by each political
party and its percentage of the total votes polled are given in _
Tables 5.3 and 5.4.
These data and figures reveal that Pakistan emerged after
its first free election as politically split. The Awami League
won 160.out of the 162 seats allotted for East Pakistan and
secured 74-9 per cent of the votes polled in East Pakistan.
But in West Pakistan it could not secure a single seat and the
percentages of votes secured by the Awami League in the
_ four provinces of West Pakistan were: 0-07 (Punjab), 0:07
(Sind), o-2 (North-West Frontier Province), and t-o (Balu-
chistan),
Similarly, Bhutto’s party, the P.P.P., which won 81 out of
the 138 seats for West Pakistan, did not even dare to set up a
candidate in East Pakistan. Those West Pakistani parties
which won the remaining seats (fifty-seven seats — shared
among seven parties and fifteen independent candidates)
were likewise unable to get a single seat in East Pakistan.
In fact, these seven parties, none of which could even get
ten seats in the National Assembly, could not be regarded as
representing West Pakistan. .
To say that Mujib’s success upsct Yahya’s plans or cal-
culations would not be fair. When he decided to go ahead

| Fei |
128 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
with holding the elections after the cyclone in November
I said to Yahya: “I hope you fully realize the implications
of your decision.” His answer, in the usual non-serious way,
was: “You mean, it will ensure Mujid’s total success? Yes,
I am aware of it and have no worries about it. Ahsan and
Peerzada had long sessions with Sheikh [i.e. Mujib] and they
assured me, as Mujib assured me i.imself, that he would
modify his six-point plan. Jnshai/ h [by the grace of God],
Pakistan will be saved. Don’t worry.”
Table 5.3
(a) PAKISTAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS, 1970-1
Baluch= Wrest East
Party Punjab ‘Sind NWFP istan Pakistan Pakistan Total
AL _ —_-_ — -- -- 160 160
PPP 62 18 I —-  £& -- 81
oe I 7 - 9 — eS
CML 7 _ —_ _ 7 — 7
JU(H) ee oS I 7 to 7
MJU 4 3 mes = 7 — ”
NAP(W) —_- — 3 3 6 _- 6
ji - I 2 I — 4 — 4
PML(C) ee — 2
PDP _— _- —- — _ I I
Ind. 5 3 7 — £15 I 16
TorTar 82 27 25 4 138 162 300
(6) PAKISTAN PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS, 1970-1
Baluch- West East
Party Punjab Sind NWFP istan Pakistan Pakistan Total
AL ae a" Ta — — 268 288
PPP 13-28 3 _ 144 144
PML(Q) 6 5 10 3 24 = 24
NAP(W) —- — 3 8 21 I 22
CML 15 4 I — 20 — 20 .
MJU 4 7 = —_ II — 6
JU(H) 2 — 4 2 a :) — 8
PML(C) 6 — 2 = 8 — &
PDP 4 - = — 4 2 6
ji 1 I I _ 3 1 4
Others I 2 4 I 5
Ind. 28 = 4 6 5, 53 7 60
Tora. 180 60 40 20 300 300 600

Dall ee =
THE FIRST AND LAST GENERAL ELECTION 123
z
4 1 w nm = ow Ww a
oss + Re Sex a oO 2 3. 3.3 wl:
Sage 2eSel Ales
Sab" 1339 BY
Ps
eee 4 i=) wo N i‘ “4 °
S583 3 2 a 4.3 2 tol.
SSERR FSsgrsSlss
KL
3 roe S-r> op & £ Big 8 le
3 Ged ag € 2 8 FF 12
RS Besse SOankeae ered s
Sa Salk SERS Re Se Oe oO PSS
moro - OF a B&B + @ o n ww |S
a 28d Beh 2 2 88 8
Dow . 5 DO = = et a ° i]
SESS
ess = & -“ - oo g
41> = = -_ 5
rr ee ein Re SG hae ae a) ee
+ Z 3
Stl g 2 BR $9.3 5.2.2 |5
$6 Ros Oo CM RTO
eae 1 Beaedesss
Pay ise 5
Aa :
Os| | son, fs bee 828828 & is
23) |BSSSS CSE GS RASS aAl
¥ a Si Hen i ile. i SN SR a of
om: Be neo Se ee Re = g
BE no =
ETT tie a cit ly? oem
a . F
32 i$ iis ts 5
Ss yy 8 Si Bo
E fis og 3 é E bee 3
Fag ee eee Poe. hoe.
S83 8 3 923 38 $34 5 5 2
Sue 8 5 352,59 0 & :
Bua k Stes Gos. g eR |e
Sais 2 9 ai
>. ; ; =
o
sess 3 2 228 4 2 & |!
a de Be So A Oe OG OS oe. Ne
NRE RE &

130 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
The intelligence reports, particularly the military one by
General Akbar, had clearly indicated Mujib’s total victory
in East Pakistan, One of my speeches, made in Leadon on
September 10, 1970, taken out of its total context, was quoted
in two books afier the creat’ on of Bangladesh to give the
impression that I, as Yahya’s constitutional adviser, hed
miscalculated the election results. The speech was given at the
Pakistan Society in London, and a student from West Pakistan
asked me whether by advising Yahya to grant “one man,
one vote’ I had not arranged a ‘>erpetual domination”
of East Pakistanis over West Pakistanis. My answer was that
if a “confrontation” took place between East Pakistanis as a
single group against all the West Pakistanis, it would “mean
the end of the state”. This particular remark of mine expressing
my concern over the unity of Pakistan led the writers of the
two books to state that Yahya and his advisers did not under-
stand the people and their prevailing mood.*? This was
unjust. After my extensive tours in East Pakistan during the
serious floods in August 1970, I had no difficulty in under-
standing political realities in East Pakistan, and I was always
candid and frank in my talks with, as well as in my written
notes to, Yahya. Yahya’s whole plan was based on his faith in
- Mujib’s repeated and unqualified assurances that he would
modify his six points after the elections. It will be recalled
that it was on this expectation that provincial elections were
also held, so that Mujib might take a flexible attitude.
REFERENCES
t. From the unpublished Report of the Electoral Reform Commission,
1955, Government of Pakistan.
2. Ibid. ;
. These figures are from t i toes one
se
aie F k Ord
§. 4he ramewor eri i i
Government of Pakistan, Sadi we. 1 ee No: of
6. See Yahya's Broadcast on July 28, 1970.
4. Ibid.
8. See Chapter 4.
g. See Legal Framework Order, op. cit., p. 5.

