DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN, 209
7, 1970, full of critical and hostile comment at a time when
the Pakistan Government was engaged in serious political
"negotiations with the Bengali leader Mujibur RaMinan for a
political settlement between East and West Pakistan and to
avoid confrontation. The New Times article reflected the
hardening’ Soviet attitude towards Pakistan at this time;
Pakistan’s Ambassador in Moscow also began to send reports
~ in 1970 of the Soviets’ “increasing pressures” and “hardening
attitude” 1* This was the Soviet attitude and policy towards
Pakistan on the eve of the Bangladesh crisis‘and it should pro-
vide some background for understanding Soviet concern for
“suffering humanity in Bangladesh”. It would be naive to
think that the Kremlin leaders were moved solely by suffering
humanity in Bangladesh if one recalls the Soviet atrocities in
Hungary in 1956 and in Czechoslovakia in 1968, not to speak
of Stalin’s ruthless policy of suppression in the Central Asian
republics of the Soviet Union,
Pakistan’s relations with China began to grow closer after
the boundary agreement. between the two countries in 1963.
Pakistani-Chinese ‘friendship reached its zenith during the
1965 Indo-Pakistani war; then their relationship was affected
somewhat by Ayub’s acceptance of the Soviet mediatory role
at the Tashkent Conference in 1966 and moving closer to Mos-
cow in 1967 and 1968 for getting Russian arms for Pakistan,
China was also in the midst of the upheaval caused by the .
Cultural Revolution, which had created some fears in Ayub’s
mind about Chinese help, though China continued to send
arms supplies to Pakistan ‘in 1967-8 notwithstanding the dis-
location and disturbances it was suffering at the time, Then in
1969, when Yahya Khan began the grand assignment given
him by Nixon to act as “courier” between Washington and
| Peking, Pakistan’s relations with China again became close
and intimate. Y ahya’s role also improved Pakistan’s links
with Washington, Particularly as Nixon had a good apprecia-
tion of the realities and dynamics of the subcontinent in the
Context of the Indo-Pakistani relations, When Yahya visited
Peking in November 1970, China warned him of “outside
factors” working in East Pakistan for a secession movement,}7
The Pakistani intelligence services, both civil and ‘nilitary,
also reported “outside forces” Operating in East Pakistan in
“

210 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
1970 when Pakistan was seeking a viable political order for
removing the East-West Pakistan tensions.
This was the picture of the South Asian Triangle on the
eve of the crisis on Bangladesh. The Soviet Union was hostile
towards Pakistan for its refusal to join in “the Soviet version
of SEATO” and other anti-China moves. The Pakistan—
China and Pakistan—U.S.A. relationships were cordial, and
had improved in the context of Nixon’s new China policy in
which the Pakistani President was playing 4 significant role,18
India’s relationship with Moscow, which had a history of
fifteen years of friendly ties behind it, was getting closer
in their common objéctive of containment of China; India
was also suspicious of Nixon’s alleged ‘pro-Pakistan”’ attitude.
When the civil war over Bangladesh began on March 25,
1971, the picture as presented in the world press seemed to be
that the Soviet Union and India were on the side of justice,
democracy and humanitarian principles while the United
States and China were supporting a military junta in
Pakistan against a national liberation movement based on the
democratic aspirations of the Bengalis. But the real situation
was not so simple as presented in the press. The Realpolitik
prevailing in the area had to be considered. Diplomatic con-
siderations were given priority over any ideological factors
by the great powers in the crisis on Bangladesh, as is always
the case in any international crisis. The Bangladesh War in
1971 provides an example of how the major powers wage
their many-faceted struggle in the Third World through
proxies as well as of how the Third World might become the
“tinder box” that could consume the major powers’ hopes for
a A later example was, of course, the 1973 war in the
Middle East. . .
India and the Bangladesh Crisis |
. India’s interest and involvement in political happenings in
East Pakistan during 1969-70 were closely linked with her
constantly tense and bad relations with Pakistan. As the
U.N. Secretary-General U Thant pointed out in his Annual
Report of 1971: “The relations between the Governments
-of India and Pakistan are also a major component ‘of the
|

DISMEMBERMENT op PAKISTAN, 1971 oe
problem [the Bangladesh crisj isis 3
in the context of the - » » The crisis is unfolding
which gave rise to nue ding and unresolved difficulties —
1965]”.* From the very fare only six years ago [i.e. in
complained of India’s rete of, the ‘crisis, Palcistan
dismember Pakistan. Her fears ent and calculated wish to
expressed at a symposium o were confirmed by the views
World Affairs on March by the Indian Council of
outbreak of the revolt in Fc, at (i.e. within six days of the
agreed with the candid “ag at which — Indians
tor of the Indian Institute of te: mae Direc-
must realize is the fact that ig = pret What India
interest, an opportunity the kk “up of Pakistan is in our
again.”’*! It was further stated re a ee
Bangladesh crisis provided Tndia eis te Semen
the century” to destroy her number o ile po rs Son
Through me enemy, Pakistan.22
ughout 1970 All-India Radio had been broadcastin
a programme every evening entitled Apper Bangla and O :
Slap and the Other Side of Bengal), te
aging the secession movem i i -
India Radio is an official organ, ee ea
Even more significant, however, was the Indian Govern-
ment’s immediate reaction to the crisis. Less than forty-eight
hours after the Pakistan Army action, Mrs. Gandhi said in
Lok Sabha: ““We are deeply conscious of the historic impor-
tance of this movement: .. . . I would like to assure the honour-
able members who asked whether decisions would be taken
on time [my italics], that obviously is the most important
thing to do. There is no point in taking a decision when the
time for it is over.”** The “thonourable members” were pres-
sing for a decision for Indian intervention and Mrs. Gandhi’s
answer was self-evident. In  Rayja Sabha on the same day
she stated: “We are interested in the matter for many
reasons. Firstly, as one member has said, Sri Mujibur Rahman
has stood for the values which we ourselves cherish. . . .”*4
The head of a foreign government commented that just be-
cause the rebel leader subscribed to India’s “cherished values”,
‘India must therefore “‘be interested” in the internal affairs
of a neighbouring country. Then on March 3t, 1971, the
Indian Parliament passed a resolution introduced by Mrs.

212 | THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Gandhi pledging full support to the rebel group: “This
House expresses its profound sympathy for and solidarity
with the people of East Bengal in their struggle. . . . This House
records its profound conviction that the historic upsurge of
the 75 million people of East Bengal will triumph. The House
wishes to assure them that their struggle and sacrifices will
receive the whole-hearted sympathy and support of the people
of India.’’*5
What justification, if any, did India have for assuring “‘sup-
port” to a federating unit which was rebelling. against the
national government in a neighbouring country? Was it not
contrary to the U.N. Charter and to the 1950 and 1966
bilateral agreements between India and Pakistan, pledging
not to interfere in each other’s internal affairs? As pointed out
earlier, the support of the Indian Government, press and pub-
lic for the armed uprising in East Pakistan was given long be-
fore her economy or society was burdened with the entry of a
single refugee.
India is never tired of preaching mediation, conciliation,
good offices and other peaceful methods of settling disputes
to other nations, particularly the Western ones. But when her ©
own national interests are involved in any matter, whether
Kashmir or Goa, or the Himalayan kingdoms of Bhutan,
Sikkim and Nepal, India has refused any counsel
of mediation by the U.N. or by any third party. The same was
true of India’s record in the Bangladesh crisis. U Thant ad-
dressed letters to Mrs. Gandhi and President Yahya Khan
on October 20, 1971, offering his good offices in the settlement
bf the crisis. The Pakistani President’s reply was the immediate
and unqualified acceptance of the U Thant offer: “I fully
agree with your appreciation of the gravity of the situation
which is worsening rapidly on the Indo-Pakistani borders.
... It is a pity that the Indian Prime, Minister has summarily
rejected the proposal for withdrawal of forces of both countries
, from the borders. . ... I recommend that the U.N. observers
_ on both sides should observe the withdrawal and supervise the
maintenance.of peace. . . . I also welcome the offer you have
‘made for making your good offices Whereas
_ Yahya replied to U Thant’s letter the same day, October 20,
1971, it took Mrs. Gandhi nearly a month to reply. She wrote

DISMENBERMENT OF PAKISTAN, 1971 213
on November 16, evading the Secretary-General’s offer of good
offices; on the contrary, she accused the U.N. of “the present
attempt to save the military régime”, and of an attempt to
“side-track this main problem and convert it into an Ihdo-
Pakistani dispute”, She further told U Thant: “If you are
prepared to view the problem in perspective, you will have
our support in your initiatives,’*2?
 U Thant, in’ his reply of November 22, expressed
surprise over Mrs. Gandhi’s remarks: “I am puzzled by the
reference in Paragraph 5 of your Excellency’s letter to “the
present attempt to save the military régime of Pakistan’
and ... to ‘side-track this main problem and to convert it into
an Indo-Pakistani dispute.’ >: . I am also puzzled by the state-
ment in paragraph 8 that if I am “prepared to view the
problem in Perspective’ I shall have the support of the Indian
Government.”28
No observer of India’s record at the U.N. whenever any mat-
ter involving her interests was taken up would be “puzzled”’,
While India made a hue and cry about her “terrible burden”
as a result of the influx of millions of refugees, she repeatedly
refused to allow U.N. observers to facilitate the return of re-
fugees to their homes. India insisted that only after a political
settlement, which must be the dismemberment of Pakistan and
the creation of a new country, could the refugees return.
It was an extraordinary demand.
On November 23, 1971, Yahya made an urgent appeal to
the UN. Secretary-General: “I am addressing this message -
to you with a deep sense of urgency in view of the grave
situation which has arisen in my country as a result of
unprovoked and large-scale attacks by Indian armed forces on
various parts of Pakistan,’?2 On November 22 Indian troops
began to cross the international boundary of Pakistan in its
castern region on the pleas of and “self-defence”
~ dangerous doctrines if applied in international relations.
If it is accepted, the territorial] integrity of any smaller country
will not be safe and it will be a negation of all the principles
and premises of the U.N. Charter. It is a great pity that the
same liberal point of view in Western countries which was
snost opposed to the U.S. involvement in the Vietnamese
War did not condemn the Indian invasion of East Pakistan,
| a 2

214 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
That India invaded East Pakistan is conceded even by
scholars who made the most charitable interpretation of the
Indian role. Thus in his assessment of the Bangladesh crisis
Norman Brown candidly states: “The victory of the forces for
independence was achieved through aid India rendered the
East Pakistanis. This turned out to be of two kinds: one was
arming of the guerrilla force known as Mukti-Bahini, ‘the
liberation Army’; the other was the invasion [my italics]
of East Pakistan by the Indian army.’
The U.S.A., the Soviet Union, China and the Bangladesh Crisis
The Soviet’ hardening towards Pakistan in the preceding two
years (1969-70) has already been noted, and as the Bangladesh
crisis turned out to be another important issue in the Indo-
Pakistan relationship, Sovict support for India on the Bang-
ladesh crisis was almost certain. |
Tht Soviet Union’s overriding strategic interest. on the
subcontinent has been to maintain close relations with India
with the twin objectives of protecting its southern flank and |
maintaining enough pressure on China. The prompt Soviet
reaction to the crisis was expressed in Podgorny’s letter to
Yahya on April 2, 1971, within less than ten days of the out-
break of the civil war. The tone and content of the letter
revealed that the Soviet posture of neutrality in Indo-Pakistani
disputes, which she had adopted from April 1965 and which
enabled her to play the role of peacemaker in the subcontinent
at the Tashkent Conference in 1966, had been sacrificed “‘in
the hope that in the long run it will pay political dividends”.
The Russians were also most conscious, above all, of the inroads
made by China in Pakistan and this had a great impact on their
policy alternatives in the area because of the geopolitical
proximity of Pakistan to the Soviet Union.*! Moscow seemed to
have made the choice between a stable and friendly India
under Mrs. Gandhi, whose electoral victory in the 1971 Indian
elections was hailed in the Soviet Union, and a tottering Paki-
stan increasingly under the sway of Peking.
Then came the dramatic announcement of Nixon’s trip
to Peking and Pakistan’s role in improving the Sino-American
relations. The latter greatly offended the Kremlin leaders,

DISMEMBERMENT oF PAKISTAN, 1971 215
and gave the Soviet Union Opportunities to bring India closer
under a “treaty of friendship” «i in August 1971, As
Robert H. Donaldson ein ‘ee Tcl
For the visit of the American President to the capital of
India’s adversary number two had been faciliated
the Co-operation of her enemy number one” ~ a fact of some
concern to Mrs. Gandhi as she faced the prospect of yet
another war with Pakistan, For it seemed as. though the
| convergence of interest of the two super-powers
Nae 1960s 1m supporting India as a bulwark against
a re a was being outdistanced by the events of
The Soviets, no less concerned over the propect of Sino-
American Tapprochement, saw the Indian dilemma as an
opportunity to gain influence in New Delhi. . a
With the signing of the “treaty of friendship”, Indo-Soviet .
collaboration on the Bangladesh crisis became palpable.
The Soviet Government began to adopt a partisan attitude in
contrast to its neutrality during the 1965 Indo-Pakistan
war. There were exchanges of visits between the Soviet and
Indian foreign ministers; Mrs. Gandhi also went to Moscow
in September 1971. The flow of Soviet arms to India increased;
India was assured of Soviet help if China were to intervene
| in any Indo-Pakistani armed conflict. The Soviet press, in
tune with official policy, joined in a chorus of condemnation of .
Pakistan. An article in on November 15, when Indian
troops had already begun to violate Pakistan’s boundary in the
East, put the entire blame on Pakistan. When the full-fledged
Indo-Pakistan war began on December 3, the Soviet Union
warned Pakistan of “grave responsibility” and said that it
could not “remain indifferent to the developments in the sub- °
continent, as they affected her own security. ...”8§ Other powers
were firmly told to stay out of the conflict. For China an im-
portant question was whether the Soviet Union contemplated
a military intervention in Pakistan’s affairs on the Czecho-
slavak. pattern; the developments in Czechoslovakia had also
been regarded by the Kremlin leaders as “affecting her secu-
rity”, China remarked that “the present sudden invasion of
Pakistan by India with the support of the Soviet Union ig
precisely a repetition on the South Asian subcontinent of the

216 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
1968 Soviet invasion and occupation of
The Soviet Union, however, did not have to resort to direct
military intervention. Her vetoes in the ‘Security Council
on any ceasefire till the Indian forces occupied Dacca ~ a
ceasefire resolution was also adopted by the U.N. General
Assembly by an overwhelming majority of 104 to 11 — were
enough to give the Indians time to carry the Bangladesh
operation though to a conclusion. The Chinese Government
said: “The Soviet Government has played a shameful role
in this war.of aggression launched by India against Pakistan,
The whole world has seen clearly that it was the backstage
manager of the Indian expansionists.”*5 The United States
President also stated: “Soviet policy, I regret to say, seemed to
show the same tendency as we witnessed before in the 1967
Middle East war and the 1970 Jordanian crisis — to allow
events to boil up towards crisis in the hope of political
China and the Bangladesh Crisis
Just as China condemned the Soviet role in the 1971 crisis
of the subcontinent, the Soviet Government and its press
also made polemical attacks on Chima’s policy and role.
Pravda wrote on December g that China provoked the war
between India and Pakistan “to further its chauvinist great-
power line in Asia”, while Red Star wrote on December 14
that China’s foreign policy was based on ideas “dug from the
garbage pit of history among obsolete geopolitical doctrines
which in their days fed Nazism”. Though such mutual re-
crimination was nothing. new in Sino-Soviet relations, the
debate on the Bangladesh war in the Security Council and the
General Assembly. carried the polemical exchanges of words
into the forum of the United Nations. Other novel phenomena
in the United Nations were the Sino-American identity of
_ ‘views and the voting on the crisis The Bangladesh crisis pro-
vided the first example of co-operation at the U.N. between
the United States and China. It was also the first demonstration
. of relaxed Sino-American relatiéns.
Was the Chinese policy opposed to the legitimate hopes and
aspirations of the Bengalis and did the Chinese actions and

DISMEMBERMENT op PAKISTAN, 1971 217
votes at the U.N. reflect her conflicts Gaal
Soviet Union and India or any real silo pn on
of Bangladesh? Was there any dichotomy between the
Chinese ideology relating to the national liberation move-
ment and her actual role during the Bangladesh crisis? These
questions agitated the minds of many. First, as regards ideo-
logy, the Chinese views on national liberations eon reted
in the Maoist doctrine are clear.37 According to the Chinese
interpretation, the movement for Bangladesh was not trul ;
one of “national liberation” ; it had the potential of being so e
the liberation war were to continue for a long time and
ship were to pass to the real representatives of the “have nots”
in East Bengal. But the movement as it had started, with Indian
and Soviet support under a bourgeois party, the Awami -
League, was not a true national liberation one. Its leader |
Mujib was a bourgeois leader supported by Bengali industrial- ‘|
ists and businessmen, supplemented by the resources of their |
counterparts in West Bengal (India), From the standpoint of |
Peking it was a conflict between two bourgeois élites - one in
West Pakistan and the other in East Bengal. Obviously China’s |
preference was for the one which had Supported her faithfully |
in the Sino-Soviet rivalry in the area.
Leaving aside ideology, it was futile for Mujib to expect °
any sympathy from Peking; in fact, he never cared about
it. Mujib was highly critical of what he used to describe as the
“provocative friendship* between Pakistan and China. His - i
single-track devotion to New Delhi blinded him to Peking.
When Chou En-lai addressed letters to Mujib and Bhutto ‘
after the 1970 elections in Pakistan urging both to make a |
political settlement between East and West Pakistan, Mujib a
received the Chinese ambassador who carried’ Chouw’s letter
coolly and paid no attention to the Chinese counsel of restraint
and moderation, He seemed to have decided to put all his eggs |
in one basket, New Delhi. . |
China was criticized for a lack of sympathy for the Bengali |
cause and for supporting a military régime. But those who
knew the inside story of the political developments in
Pakistan as I did can vouch that China never opposed the
rights and demands of the neglected people of East Bengal.
China, like any other friend of Pakistan, wished the people of
H*

218 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
both East and West Pakistan well. China was great!
: “ee y
dismayed by the tragic happenings in East Bengal from March
- 25, 1971, and behind the scenes advised the Pakistan Govern.
ment to seek a political settlement of the conflict. In her various
_ Statements of verbal support for Pakistan, China did not approve
of the policy of repression by the Pakistani Army nor did she
oppose the demands for genuine regional autonomy,
China, like any other great power, could not, however
be expected to support an emerging régime in Bangladesh
which was solely dependent on India and, via New Delhi
on Moscow also. One of the prime considerations behind
India’s quick military action in East Bengal, supported by the
Soviet Union, was the possibility of transforming the move-
ment into a real people’s war. Neither the Soviet Union nor
India wanted a genuine revolutionary movement in East
Bengal which would have a great impact on other parts of the
subcontinent. eS Shite
As regards Chinese help to the Pakistan Government
during the 1971 war, it was far from her pledged role in the
1965 war. China did not wish to be involved in a suicidal
civil war among the peoples of the two parts of Pakistan whose
friendship Peking valued. It is also unfair to say that China
“provoked” the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971. Ever since the
serious border clashes with the Soviet Union in 1969, China
was worried about a Soviet pre-emptive strike on her frontiers
where the forty-five Soviet divisions were placed. This is a
constant threat to China’s security. Given the present military
balance of power, it was uncharitable to say that China would
encourage a war in the subcontinent and thereby incur the risk
of a Soviet threat, particularly after the signing of the Indo-
Soviet treaty of 1971 which, notwithstanding its high-sounding
nomenclature, was in reality a military pact.
How could China provoke a war in such unfavourable
circumstances? China was mainly interested in checking the
, Soviet influence in the area, and as the Bangladesh movement
was nursed by India directly and had indirect blessing from
could hardly look upon it with favour. In
fact, no great power would support a movement which had the
blessing of’ its adversaries and which was against a friendly
neighbour; it would be contrary to the general rules of inter-

