82 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN |
autonomy could be given to East Pakistan; as pointed out ear. |
, lier, they did not approve of Mujib’s six points but were
strongly in favour of much larger autonomy than in the 1956
Constitution; they also favoured the representation on the
basis of population and not on “parity”.
The rightist parties in West Pakistan were in favour of a
_ central government and an Islamic constitution; they
did not oppose East Pakistan’s demand for autonomy, but their
concept of “regional autonomy” was out of tune with the pre-
vailing demands in East Pakistan.
Bhutto’s was also not happy with the 1956 Constitution,
mainly because of its parliamentary form of government. He
_ seemed to agree with Ayub that Pakistan could not afford the
Westminster variety of parliamentary democracy which,
according to him, would lead again to political instability
like that of the pre-1958 period. He kept his options on the
centre-provinces relationship, the Islamic character of the
constitution and on “one unit” in West Paldstan open for his
political strategy; he was in favour of Yahya deciding these
Re in the light of his discussions with East and West Pakistani
leadétrs.
The leaders of the smaller provinces in West Pakistan were
almost unanimous in demanding the break-up of “one unit”
and the restoration of the four old provinces — Punjab, Balu-
chistan, the North-West Frontier and Sind — while the Punjab
leaders were in favour of the retention of “one unit” but
did not press it too far; they could realize the depth of the
feelings in the smaller provinces.
Bhashani and both pro-Moscow and pro-Peking groups
were stressing the social and economic demands of the people;
but Yahya pointed out to them that he was not drafting a
constitution; all he was trying to do was evolve a legal pro-
cedure whereby elections could be held and a constitution
could be framed by the elected assembly. To this Bhashani’s
reply was that he was not interested in such “secondary
issues”; to him the basic problem was the economic uplifting of
the “have-nots”. The pro-Moscow group had some ideas on
constitutional issues but the East and West Pakistani factions
within the pro-Moscow elements were divided — there were
differences between Wali Khan, the National Awami Party

ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 83
chief in West Pakistan, and Muzaffar Ahmad, his counterpart
in East Pakistan, The pro-Peking group and Bhashani were not
interested in the immediate constitutional facade; they were
busy in the long-term objectives of politicizing the rural
masses for real national liberation. There were also divisions
and factions within their party,
There were three basic issues which Yahya had to decide.
The first was the Bengalis’ demand for representation on the
basis of “one man, one vote” in an unqualified way and with-
out any reservation such as a second parliamentary chamber
or a special voting procedure requiring more than a simple
majority in the national assembly, The second and most com-
plicated issue was the relationship between the cent*e and.
provinces; this was the crux of the whole constitutional quest
for a viable political order in Pakistan.
- The third issue related to the break-up of “one unit” and the
restoration of the old provinces in West Pakistan.
The Islamic character of the new constitution which domi-
nated constitution-making in its first phase (1947-56) was
no longer an important or controversial one, Similarly, as
regards the method of election, direct adult franchise, which
had been hotly debated in the Ayub era, was already decided
by Yahya’s unqualified commitment in favour of it.
How did Yahya and his inner group seck to solve these
three basic problems? .
- Yahya and the majority of the junta were willing to concede &
demands for maximwin autonomy for East Pakistan, provided
were within the framework of one Pakistan. It was realized
that a stable political settlement with Bengali leaders — or the
leader who represented the majority of the population — was
essential, and there could be no doubt that Mujib and his
party represented the majority view in East Pakistan.
Yahya had no-plan like his predecessors, who tried to “‘create”
Bengali leaders either by intrigue as during the parliamentary
era (1953-8) or by “controlled elections” as under the Ayub
era (1958-69). By September—October 1969, when I had devel-
oped close contacts with Yahya and used to have lengthy |
| discussions with him on the constitutional problems facing the |
country, he told me on numerous occasions that East Pakistanis
had not had their proper share in any sphere of national Life
i D

84 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
and that this must be rectified..I became convinced that he
intended a genuine political settlement between two parts of
Pakistan by giving the Bengalis a real share in the decision.
making process within a loose federal or even a confederal
system. Yahya told me that he was opposed to any idea of a
“strong centre”, such as Ayub had often stressed. I tried to
impress on him and other members of the “inner cabinet” that
Pakistan had tried to achieve national integration from above
| by having a highly centralized government although the
4 nation was legally constituted as a federation — but the ex-
periment had proved to be a total failure. We should try the
other way: let the two wings of the country manage their own
_ affairs without any guidance or hindrance from the centre,
particularly in the economic sphere. Here the Bengalis could
say with ample justification that the all-powerful Planning
Commission, which had been entrusted with the task of the
‘country’s economic development, had grossly neglected the
economic problems and needs of East Pakistan. Pakistan, I
continued to argue, should have full decentralization in econo-
mic and financial matters. In any political process, the
Bengalis could not be made part of a Pakistani nationalism
unless they could play their full part in national affairs. They
rightly complained: hear the big decisions over, the radio
or television or read them in newspapers; sometimes we hear
Pakistan is the ‘most allied ally of the United States’; then we
hear that the same United States encourages secession in East
Pakistan. Even foreigners sometimes know the real situation in
Pakistan better than we, the Bengalis.” As regards economic
and financial matters, even a small project such as a road link-
ing district A to district B had to be finalized by a planning
commission sitting a thousand miles away and dominated by
the non-Bengali bureaucrats. No important observer of the
Pakistan political scene could dismiss the genuine. Bengali
_ complaints. There was never a single Bengali finance minister,
nor a Bengali chief of the Planning Commission. How could
Bengalis consider themselves as part of an elusive Pakistani
nationalism solely on the basis of Islamic bonds? If Islam were
the only bond, the Bengali intelligentsia might well argue that
they could create a larger Islamic state than West Pakistan.
Yahya, unlike Ayub, never pretended to be an expert on

SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 85
' constitutional or political _
the funte ok rye though some members of
hi * 90 lt was easier to argue with ;
m and convince him: he
ith : > “* approached the whole problem
with an open mind and was amenable to reasoning, although
his powers of understanding and of ives deci
dian ly limi Of taking imaginative deci-
extremely limited, which had great disadvantages
as he could be influenced by others presenti di t
picture. Yet, when Yah Ree Betton ie
ae ya was engaged in formulating his plan
In 1969, he was genuinely interested in a satisfactory solution
to the East-West Pakistan tensions and differences.
Both Ahsan and myself pleaded with Mujib that it was the
last chance for the Bengalis to be the masters in their own
affairs and to capture real power at the centre. Once I reminded
him that the Congress leaders in British India were fighting
against the British for national liberation, but when they real-
ized mm 1946-7 that the British Government was sincere in
its intention to transfer power, Nehru developed a unique :
friendship with Lord Mountbatten which paid India good
dividends; I urged Mujib to adopt the same attitude towards
Yahya and his policy.
Mujib gave the impression of being satisfied. He told Yahya
and Ahsan that his six points were not “the Koran or the Bible”:
and the plan was negotiable. One morning in the autumn of
1969, he told me, pointing at the photo of Suhrawardy which
hung prominently in his room: ‘‘How could I think of destroy- |
ing Pakistan, being a disciple of this great leader?”
So both Yahya and Mujib voiced optimism, and the pros-
pects for a political settlement of the most complicated East-
West differences within a viable political order in Pakistan
seemed bright. I was greatly encouraged by these trends and
began hopefully working out the details of the scheme for
transfer of power; there ,were almost daily meetings and
conferences at the President’s House in October 196g after a
serious threat of clashes between students and the local martial
law authorities at Dacca, which was averted with great skill
and patience by both Yahya and Mujib; Ahsan too played a -
commendable role in averting the crisis. Yahya returned from |
Dacca on October 5 and I was taken into the cabinet on Octo-
ber 8; Yahya went to Iran for a short visit at the end of October,
by which time the broad outlines of the plan were already

OE
86 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
decided. Peerzada and myself were engaged almost full-time
in giving final shape to the plan, Them Peerzada met with a
car accident in early November and the main burden fell on
me; I drafted the speech of November 28, 1969, in which
Yahya announced his proposals for the future of the
country.
The Plan
Yahya began his speech by referring to the basic issues relating
to the constitution which have already been pointed out.
He expressed regret that political leaders could not arrive at a
consensus on these three major issues, but he was careful in
_ not blaming them for their failure to do so. He said: “It is
regrettable that they have not been able to do so but one can
understand and appreciate their difficulties.”"* In not putting
all the blame on the politicians he differed from Ayub; this was
a wise gesture. He then referred to the four possible alter-
natives to the holding of elections. These were: (i) “to have an.
elected constitutional convention whose task would be to pro- |
duce a new constitution and then dissolve itself”; (ii) “to
revive the 1956 Constitution’’; (iii) “to frame a constitution
‘and have a referendum on it in the country”; and (iv) “to
evolve a Legal Framework for general elections on the basis
of consultations with various groups and political leaders,
as well as the study of past constitutions of Pakistan and the
- general consensus of the country. This proposal from me would
only be in the nature of a provisional Legal Framework.”’
After pointing out the merits and demerits of the various
alternatives, Yahya opted for the fourth alternative.* Turning
to the three basic issues: “First, the question of ‘one unit’;
secondly, the issue of ‘one man, one vote’ versus parity; and
thirdly, the relationship between the centre and the federating
provinces.”’® Yahya rightly pointed out that the first two issues
/ were connected with the holding’ of elections and must be
‘solved before the election. So he decided these two issues:
elections on the basis of “one man, one vote” for a single-
chamber national assembly and the abolition of the amalga-
mation of West Pakistan into “one unit’’,
Yahya’s plan conceded all the demands put forward by

Reng SCHEME FOR TRANSFER 8
ujlb: representati .
sheets ae “a tg of population and single-
i . . litre, where all matters would be
decided by a simple majority, He mere] .
of pe that on constitutional matters diese ls
= Thets one mrcape = Proposed federation.
some members of the “inner cabinet” like Nur Khan aa Harel,
. Their contention was that in a legislature without a second
chamber, elected on the basis of population, the Bengalis who .
constituted the majority of the Population would be in a posi-
tion “to impose” a constitution on other federating units of
West Pakistan by what they termed “brute majority”. So they
insted on a special procedure for constitutional matters re-
quiring a 60 per cent vote. from among the total of members
of the proposed legislature. The Provision for “60 per cent”
was in the plan up to the last moment, When it was put before
the Cabinet just one day before its announcement, the “6o
per cent clause” was still there. At the eleventh hour, by most
skilful manoeuvring, Yahya dropped the clause from the plan. |
It was a real concession to the Bengalis and came as a pleasant
surprise to many in East Pakistan. It had required serious .
effort and persuasion for the “6o per cent clause” to be dropped |
at the final meeting of the “inner cabinet” on the morning of «=
November 25.
The most important constitutional issue, however, remained
the relationship between the centre and the provinces. Mujib
did not want this issue decided by Yahya but left to the legis- |
lature, in which there would be a clear Bengali majority.
On this vital issue too, Yahya complied with Mujib’s wishes,
and as a result was criticized, by the West Pakistani leaders, |
for not deciding this issue as he had done in the case of “one |
unit” and representation on the basis of “one man, one. |
vote”. Yahya, on the contrary, had pledged maximum auto- <
nomy to the provinces. He stated:
regards the relations between the centre and the pro- |
a you would recall that in my July broadcast I pointed
out that the people of East Pakistan did not have their full
share in the decision-making process on vital national issues.
I also said then that they were fully justified in being
dissatisfied with this state of affairs. We shall, therefore,

88 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
have to put an end to = ne a Of Pakistan
ap to be maximum autonomy fot fey andl ‘soli
ie as this does not impair national integrity soli-
ton yo Seats of the whole ant between
the Centre and the provinces in Pakistan today lies in the
financial and economic spheres. Federation not
only a division of legislative powers but also that of financial
powers. This matter will have to be dealt with in such a
manner as would satisfy the legitimate requirements and
demands of the provinces as well as the vital requirements of
the nation as a whole. People of the two regions of Pakistan
should have control over their economic resources and
development as long as it does not adversely affect the
working of a government at the Centre.
Gould there have been better gestures and incentives for a
confederal solution of the regional conflicts between East and
West Pakistan than that given by Yahya in his speech on
November 28, 1969? There was wide appreciation of Yahya’s
speed, both inside and outside the country. Pakistan seemed
about to show that it could carry out a peaceful transfer of
power from a military to a democratic régime. The world’s
press welcomed Yahya’s “bold” and sincere proposals for
restoring the democratic process in Pakistan and for solving
the complicated regional conflicts of the country. The New York
‘Times wrote under the headline “Pakistan sets an example”:
“Pakistan President Agha Mohammed Yahya Khan has set
a prudent example for other military rulers with his move to
restore democratic civilian rule in his country. . . . The prin-
ciple of ‘one man, one vote’ will give the restive Bengalis of
East Pakistan majority representation in the Assembly con-
sistent with their numerical strength’; while the Christian
Science Momior commented: “To his credit General. Yahya:
Khan has now announced a crisp time-table for elections
' throughout the country on a one man, one vote basis and
drafting of a constitution which should give the Bengalis
of East Pakistan virtual autonomy and a voice in national
affairs, at last commensurate with their numbers.”?2 In the
USS. Congress, Mr. Sikes said: Agha Mohammed
Yahya Khan is providing an encouraging example which other

ae oom TRANSFER OF POWER 89
policies wiser cee appreciate. His quiet but effective
Pakistan.” President io process forward in
Seok Ava lor in W'ahi bg eet ele
should be fillowed: in All Goer eee
outside the coun han -wasi = yond hem <
try, who wanted tq see Pakistan united and
stable welcomed Yahya’s plan for the transfer of power. It
was the first — and the last — attempt pods ie
. ae pt to put the complicated
relationship between East and West Pakistan on a sound politi-
cal gon and it looked as if Pakistan was set a the right
ech wes a
3 vere expected to contradict the old truth that
dictators never give way voluntarily,
Many questions may be asked about a plan which aroused
such strong expectations, Did the army — not Yahya alone but
Aen tithe 4 y ya
¢ ruling junta ~ really want to hand over power? Did Mujib
want a. settlement on the basis of a united Pakistan or
did he only intend to use elections to establish his credentials
as the sole leader of an emerging Bangladesh? What were the
aims of the West Pakistani leaders, particularly Bhutto? Were — |
they prepared to pay the price needed to fulfil the demands of
Bengalis as pledged by Yahya? The whole plan was based on
three fundamental premises: first, Mujib would modify his six-
point plan, and would be satisfied with genuine provincial
autonomy and not aim at secession; secondly, the West Paki-
stani leaders, both the politicians and the big industrialists, —
would be willing to make the necessary sacrifices and conces-
sions to satisfy the legitimate aspirations, political demands and
economic dues of the Bengalis as.a condition for keeping Paki-
stan united; and thirdly, the military junta must give up the
power to which it had become accustomed since 1958; it
must not think in terms of any “qualified” or “limited” transfer
of power of the “Turkish” type — the Turkish model sometimes
arose in conversation with the generals. I was often asked by
some ofthe generals if I consulted the Constitution of Turkey
while advising Yahya on the constitutional problems of Paki-
stan.
A single declaration — or a plan, however carefully and sin-
cerely worked out — could not solve the complicated problems
of a country like Pakistan. The plan itself was a step in the right

90 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
direction, but its success depended on many conditions, Many
of which were lacking. For the’ twenty-two years since its.
founding, Pakistan had not had a direct general election
for its governing bodies. There had been no democratic process
of representation; the majority of the country’s population
were denied their political rights and economic dues. For
much of the time, there had been either a “modernizing
oligarchy” or dictatorial rule. There were deep-rooted fears
and suspicions between the peoples of the two geographically
separated regions. If Yahya’s plan were to go through, Pakistan
would survive as a united nation but this “if” was a big one,
_ Yahya between the Generals and Mujib
One thing that was soon apparent was that some of the army
generals and the West Pakistani leaders including Bhutto
thought that Yahya had gone too far in placating the Bengalis
-at the cost of the “national interest”, as they interpreted it.
However, Governor Ahsan and even General Yakub, the Zonal
MLA in East Pakistan, were happy with the wide acceptance
of Yahya’s plan and it was a pleasant surprise to me that the
chief of military intelligence, General Akbar, and Rezvi,
the chief of civil intelligence, were giving Yahya favourable
reports supporting his plan. Many army officers, unlike senior
bureaucrats, the big industrialists and some narrow-minded
politicians, were willing to make major sacrifices to maintain
the unity of Pakistan, Among the young army officers and
enlightened generals, Pakistani nationalism was not a vague
and incoherent concept; with them, as with many patriotic
elements in both East and West Pakistan, its ideology and
its flag were too dear to be preserved at any cost; they were
determined to preserve and value the ideals and ideology which
were the driving forces behind the creation of Pakistan. I
myself shared these views wholeheartedly.
. Yet Yahya was subjected to severe pressures from some
quarters at GHQ in Rawalpindi and from Bhutto, who
was backed by some generals and top bureaucrats, to modify his
plan as outlined in his famous speech of November 28, 1969.
Between November 28, rg69, and March go, 1970, Yahya was
in real difficulty. In order “to protect the country against a

ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 9!
ey ominated assembly”, some members of the “inner
th ct _ Put forward two particular demands. The first of
see Ne O Legal Framework Order (popularly known
had to be nicer pied tae rere Aged:
minticohtain a a a d before elections could legally be held,
‘it is melt tion of the limits of provincial autonomy,
aorta was that in the new assembly, constitutional
, Matters must be decided not by a simple majority but by a two-
thirds vote or at least 60 per cent of the total membership —
the rider clause which was dropped at the eleventh hour from ,
Yahya’s plan of November 28. It was argued that there was no
reason why Yahya should not take a definite decision on the
extent of provincial autonomy, just as he had decided on the
basis of representation and on the break up of “one unit”. The
non-Awami League leaders from East Pakistan also joined
with the West Pakistani leaders in making this demand; their.
fear was that unless provincial autonomy were defined, Mujib
would have a strong edge on them by preaching the gospel of
Bengali nationalism and his six points which had become popu-
lar in East Pakistan. They feared — and subsequent events
proved their fears justified - that if the explosive issue of
regional autonomy were not defined in the L.F.O., the flood of
emerging Bengali nationalism could not be checked. They also
argued that Yahya had pledged genuine and maximum auto-
nomy, in economic-financial. matters among others; so why ©
did he not put an end to this potentially dangerous issue by
giving real autonomy and then firmly declaring “This far and
no further”?
There was good reasoning behind these arguments, How-
ever, Mujib made it clear through Governor Ahsan that if the
extent of provincial autonomy were defined or if the principle
of “one man, one vote” were modified by any special pro-
cedure of voting on the constitutional issue, it would mean an
end to negotiations and the beginning of an armed confronta-
tion. Some of the generals seemed to prefer to have a confronta-
tion before elections, i.e. before Mujib could consolidate in
East Pakistan and emerge as the sole leader of the Bengalis, —
But Governor Ahsan warned Yahya that a united Pakistan
would -not survive a confrontation with Mujib. Yahya too
at that stage seemed convinced of it. Mujib, the subsequent
D*

