THE WAR 189
of their long-cherisheg dream, In a letter on April 13 from
London, I wrote to Yahya urging him passionately stop
the forces of terror and destruction let loose by the Army’s
action. His reply was, in a Sense, Pathetic; he repeated what
he had told me at Our farewel] meeting in Karachi on March
29: He now seemed to have realized insincerity but
he had never been a Serious administrator, and he now seemed
to have lost all control, Among the large community of Asian
Mmigrants in London, there were all sorts of stories and rum-
ours. At one Stage, it was circulated there that the generals
had realized the futility of their military adventures in East
Pakistan. The number of Pakistani soldiers, including officers,
killed in the military Operations in East Bengal was rising;
Pakistan § €conomic Situation was desperate. All foreign loans
and aid for development had been stopped, The United States
had announced a ban on military Supplies to Pakistan, only
those items “already in the Pipeline” being allowed. Any sensible
régime would have tried Seriously to §ct. out of the impasse;
It was difficult for me to believe that the junta had not yet
realized. ‘the blind alley into which their military operations
had led them, Was there nobody in West Pakistan to see and |
tell them the truth ?
In the latter part of May I decided to go to both West
Pakistan and Dacca to see the situation for myself. In the
Preceding two years, from April 1969 to February 1971, I
had been an active participant in the Political process in Paki- -
‘ "stan; it was thus almost impossible for me to be in London
While my country was disintegrating; near relations and dear
friends were involved. So I decided to make the trip although
it caused unjustified comments in certain quarters that I was
still involved in Pakistan’s quest for a constitution, First,
no political realist could expect a “constitutional
for both East and West Pakistan in the summer of 1971,
Secondly, I had already declined Yahya’s invitation to become
an adviser, and accepted an academic in London,
My trip was solely to watch the latest developments both in
West Pakistan and in Dacca. I had no illusions about the situa-
tion; the Pakistan press censorship had not been able to reach
me in London,
I landed at Karachi on May 16. Yahya was there on a tour,

190 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
so I met him the next day. I told him my reaction to the
Army’s atrocities. He tried to convince me, at one stage,
that all that I had read in the British and American news-
Papers was incorrect but I told him that I was going to Dacca
to see the real situation for myself. I asked him why, as President
of the country, he never cared to visit “East Pakistan” after
a situation had developed which was causing worldwide
concern; he replied that he would visit Dacca as soon as he
could finalize “a programme to offer the Bengalis”. It was
truly a pity that the country’s President could not even now
make up his mind about the “next steps’’.
I went to Dacca, and it was the worst experience of my life.
Everywhere I went, I heard the same story: one person had
lost a son; another a husband; many villages were burnt.
The people who did not agree with Mujib’s secession plan told
how they too had been victims of indiscriminate and stupid
acts by the Army. Many people, including my close relatives
and friends, could hardly express themselves without tears
in their eyes. They urged me to tell Yahya to come to Dacca
and to see for himself the damage his Army had done. They
repeatedly asked me: “Is there no way for our survival?”
They knew of my close involvement with political develop-
ments from April/May 1969 and that I had been close to
Yahya while he was formulating his plan for the transfer
of power. But what answer could I give? I returned from Dacca
bewildered and with a heavy heart. I wrote a lengthy report
giving authentic accounts of the many cruel acts of the Army
including the raping of women. ah a
My next meeting with Yahya took place in Rawalpindi -—
in the same house and in the same room where I had spent
many hours with him in 1969-70 with great expectations
of a political solution to the growing East-West Pakistan
conflict. Yahya’s first question was what I had seen in Dacca.
My prompt reply was that no single foreign newspaper had
‘exaggerated. On the contrary, the people’s agony, suffering
and humiliation had not been fully exposed. I also told him
that it was not only the number of deaths but the manner in
_ which innocent persons had been killed and women raped that
had destroyed our cherished homeland for which the Muslims
of the subcontinent had sacrified so many thousands of lives

' THE CIVIL WAR Ig!
in 1947. I knew from past experience that it was no use giving
Yahya a lengthy report such as I had prepared while in Dacca.
So I begn to read extracts from my notes — all factual data.
He looked vacant and seemed unable to talk to me. He knew
my devotion to the concept of a united Pakistan and he also
knew that I had never Supported Mujib’s veiled secessionist
plan. He could not, therefore, dismiss my account as that of a
“typical secessionist under the influence of India” ~ the last
' thing I wanted to see was the destruction of Pakistan with the
help of the Indian armed forces. Our meeting ended in a con-
fused way. Yahya asked me to see him again before I returned
to London. : |
Then I began a round of visits to a number of other members
of the ruling élite. It was a shocking experience to see their
attitude: “The rebels must be crushed; then we can talk of
any political settlement.” It wags also agonizing for me to
see the calmness of life in the federal capital as if nothing
_ had happened, There was only concern over India’s involve-
ment in the crisis but none for the suffering humanity in East
Pakistan.
It is, however, true that some of the Army officers who had
been in East Bengal from March 25 or had taken part in the
military operations seemed to realize that Pakistan was fin-
| ished. They also were aware of India’s growing involvement.
| Some of the “fat” generals holding high positions in the
administration, who had been accustomed to a life of luxury ©
since the country’s first military coup in 1958, seemed to be
| completely out of contact with the military aspects of the
| situation. They professed ‘“‘confidence” in facing simultaneously
both the Indian threat and the secessionist challenge from East
Bengal. This group of seemingly degenerate generals thought
| they had crushed the national uprising in Bangladesh. They
| did not or could not fully realize the international implications
| of the crisis, particularly the direct involvement of India and
| indirect involvement of the Soviet Union. A group of the junta
| ‘headed by Hamid, Peerzada and Omar, thought that the
| problems of “East Pakistan” had been solved for ever by force.
So why make any more concessions to the Bengalis? Justice
Cornelius was asked to prepare a constitution giving “auton-
omy” to East Pakistan but “within limits”, so that in future

192 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
there might not be any repetition of Yahya’s mistakes of
1969-70, when Mujib was assured, according to the opinion
of this group, an “undue quantum of bordering on
secession. So the constitutioal draft prepared by the Cornelius
committee, which used to meet under the chairmanship of the
Rasputin of the régime, Peerzada, was worse than Ayub’s con-
stitution of 1962.
Before I left Islamabad for London, I had my third meeting
with Yahya and asked him bluntly if he shared the views of
some of his generals, who seemed to think that the crisis
was over and that the constitution being prepared by Corne.
lius would be acceptable to the Bengalis, when they had
already opted for independence. This time, Yahya told me
his views frankly. The Cornelius constitution, he revealed to
me, was being prepared to deal with Bhutto who had been
demanding that his party should be given effective power,
being the second largest group in the national assembly — the
largest party, the Awami League, having been outlawed.
Yahya was not willing to yield to pressure, as to do
so would constitute another provocation to the Bengalis by
giving power to a party which had not even dared to put upa
candidate in East Pakistan in the 1970 election. Moreover,
Bhutto was the most hated person in East Bengal as the Ben-
galis believed, not without. justification, that he, in collabora-
tion with the hawkish generals, had precipated the crisis,
Yet Yahya could not challenge Bhutto, who now began to
behave as if he were already the country’s Prime Minister;
furthermore, a number of generals like Peerzada, Gul Hasan
and Omar were in league with Bhutto. Yahya showed me his
correspondence with Nixon and the Chinese leaders, who
were keenly hoping that a political settlement with the Ben-
galis might be possible on the basis of a “brotherly parting of
the ways” if no solution that involved living together: with
the West Pakistanis were acceptable to them. I came away
from my third meeting with Yahya with the impression that
the initiative was no longer in his hands or even within the
control of the Pakistan Government. Outside forces were deter-
mining the final course of events. Yahya had not yet realized
the full implications of the grave international factors
connected with the Bangladesh crisis. And up till June 1971

THE CIVIL WAR 193
the Pakistani ruling élite was unable to grasp the full implica-
tions of the civil War, and “to count”, as Haykal put it, “with-
out all the Parties Participating in the struggle over
Bangladesh, their aims and their ability to intervene in this
struggie. . . . The Pakistani régime could not see beyond its
fet. This was one of the main causes of the tragedy.”!® This
was a correct assessnient of the Pakistani régime caught in a
desperately dangerous ciyi] war. ,
nis returned to London in June with no clear idea as to
how the crisis would be solved. In Dacca the situation was
desperate; the People could never be sure that they would
live through the next twenty-four hours ~ a reign of terror
prevailed everywhere. East Bengal seemed on the verge
of total collapse, while in West Pakistan the ruling élite still
lived in a world of illusion, talking of “granting autonomy”
to the Bengalis — now the autonomy was trimmed down from
“maximum”? to “reasonable”. ,
Soon, in J uly~August 1971, the situation was to take a drama-.
tic turn.and the sense of “victory” among the Pakistani generals
vanished. Grim realities seemed to have prevailed.
Towards the Final Phase ov
Fears were expressed that during the rainy months of the
monsoon period (June—J uly), the Pakistan Army would be
unable to face the challenge of the resistance forces, who were
how getting better equipment and training in India. But the
Pakistan Army, against heavy odds, brought the situation
under control by July. The Mukti Bahini (Liberation forces)
were almost eliminated.
But once the moisoon season was over and the failure of the
Mukti Bahini was evident to the Indian authorities, the Indian
Government, which had now prepared new excuses for inter- _.
fering in the*crisis because of the influx of refugees from East
Bengal, was planning direct military involvement. The Indian
Government had been fighting the Bangladesh war by proxy ..
from the beginning. But it was now realized that the Mukti
Bakini could not deliver the goods, no matter how much in-
direct help and assistance the Indian Government might give,
The influx into India of refugees, mostly Hindus ~ the exact

194 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
number of refugees was never known: India claimed “ten
million” while Pakistan gave a figure of two million, both of
which were incorrect — provided the Indian Government
with a “strong argument” to take “some actions” to solve the
crisis. India seemed to have only one solution: the total
humiliation of Pakistan through the dismemberment of the
country.
By July the Pakistan Government had received reliable
reports from a friendly great power to the effect that the In-
dians had begun to prepare for a military
The most immediate factor was Henry Kissinger’s secret trip
to Peking via Rawalpindi. Further, Kissinger was reported to
have told the Indian ambassador in Washington after his
visit to Peking that China would if India attacked
Pakistan, and the United States might not come to India’s
help as it had done in 1962 and 1965, when it had warned
China against intervention.1® This caused consternation in
‘India, as her plan to dismember Pakistan by direct military
intervention was placed in grave danger by the so-called
“Sino-U.S. detente”. Sirir Gupta of Nehru University// New
Delhi, wrote: “However great the reluctance of the’ Indian
optimists to admit it, the fact ‘is that the Sino-U.S/ rapproche-
ment has altered the international context in which India has
to conduct its local struggles and that on the specific issue of
Bangladesh, the entire weight of this development can be
thrown against our country.’’!®
This led India to sign the treaty with the Sovie: Union
which had been in preparation for more than two years -
since Brezhnev had spelt out his scheme for a collect've Asian
security system. Though termed the treaty of ‘‘pea::, friend-
ship and co-operation”, a closer scrutiny of the ter. leaves no
doubt as to its military emphasis — it was a military
pact. Once the Indians got the umbrella ot protection by a
super-power against any potential Chinese threat in her mili-
tary adventures against Pakistan to “solve” the Bangladesh
crisis, their war preparations began in earnest. Simultaneously
the trained Indians joined the Mukti Bahini in military opera-
tions in East Bengal. The destruction of bridges and sinking of
Pakistani ships at the port of Chittagong could not have been
done by the inexperienced Mukti Bahini. There was evidence

has Salle THE CIVIL WAR 195
of growing involvement by trained personnel of the Indian
armed forces in these destructive activities in East Bengal.
What was the reaction in Rawalpindi to the growing Indian
involvement? ‘There were reports, some based on sources
which could hardly be disregarded, that the military
régime in Pakistan had now realized the futility of their
military actions in East Bengal and were genuinely worried
_ about an imnrediate Indo-Pakistan war in which Pakistan was
bound to lose ~ first, because of the military balance of power
in the subcontinent, and secondly due to the Russians’ palp-
able backing of India. Further, as a result of the Indo-Soviet
treaty, the hope of help from Peking was also becoming uncer-
tain, though Yahya andthe junta expected it from both Peking
and Washington. At all events, the gravity of the situation
was now fully realized. :
In the meantime, President Nixon and the Chinese Govern-
ment advised Yahya to find a political solution to the crisis.
The White House, with the assistance of Senator Barry Gold-
water, revealed subsequently what the United States had been
doing privately over the nine months of civil war in. Pakistan
to solve the crisis by means of a political settlement, rather
than by military operations, A “background” news conference
with Henry Kissinger on December 7, 1971, which Goldwater
put into the Congressional Record on December 9, established
that the U.S. Government had been working “‘to induce political
compromise in Pakistan and military restraint in India’?,2%
Before I discuss the Nixon plan for the solution of the
Bangladesh crisis and Yahya’s willingness to accept it, let -me
turn to a number of developments. As the situation for Pakistan
worsened, the political scene in Rawalpindi became more and
more confused. In August I received an authentic report that
Yahya was making frantic moves to get himself out of the
impasse. A dialogue had begun with Mujib, as well as with the
exile government of Bangladesh in Calcutta with the help of
‘the American officials there. The dialogue with Mujib was
carried on through his lawyer, A. K, Brohi. In the meantime
there began a: “trial” of Mujib by a military tribunal, and
Brohi was allowed to act as Mujib’s defence counsel. In fact,
the “trial” was never a serious one. Thanks to pressure from
the White House, the safety of Mujib’s life was guaranteed. |

196 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
In fact, even before Mujib surrendered to the Pakistan Army in
March, there was a secret deal, again through the good offices
of the American officials, ensuring that Mujib’s life would be
protected. Whereas the Pakistan Army was out to eliminate
other top Awami Leaguers, including Tajuddin, and their
families, Mujib and his family were treated in a strangely plea-
sant way by the Army. The fabricated story of digging a “‘grave-
yard” for Mujib on the floor of his cell in the prison has been
exposed by the journalist, Oriana Fallaci, in her Mujib in
Power: a Portrait.** It is, however, true that some hawkish
generals, in collaboration with Bhutto, would have preferred
to execute Mujib if it had been feasible but Nixon’s strong
pressure made such a venture impossible. Yahya had no such.
plan. He was rather relieved to receive Nixon’s letters on
this matter which strengthened his hand in restraining the
_hawks.**
In August when I became convinced that Yahya was
searching frantically for a political solution of the crisis, and I
knew that some political dialogue had again started, 1 made
my second trip from London to West Pakistan and Dacca.
The scene in Islamabad, where I landed on August 23, 1971,
was bewildering. Cornelius was still busy finalizing his consti-
tution. A group of “experts” from Bhutto’s party had regular
sessions with Cornelius and his aides — a group of civil officials
headed by the all-powerful Peerzada. Peerzada and Cornelius
seemed “‘satisfied” with the “quantum of provincial autonomy”
to be given to the people of “East Pakistan” - which was no
longer a reality. A significant feature of the proposed constitu-
tion was the provision for a ‘“‘Bengali Vice-President” who
would exercise provincial autonomy sitting in Dacca. Peer-
zada explained to me that this was a “‘big concession” to the
Bengalis! It was difficult to control one’s laughter at the stupid
exercise. It seemed that the process of constitution-making in
Pakistan was endless — it had begun when the country obtained
independence on August 14, 1947, and it was still continuing
when Dacca fell on December 16, 1971. How could either
Bhutto or Peerzada still believe that a constitution framed by a
few West Pakistani civil and military officials sitting in Rawal-
pindi would be acceptable to the Bengalis, who had proclaimed
their national goal of an independent state? ,

THE CIVIL WAR , 197
However, the “inside” scene was quite different and per-
fectly realistic. The whole situation had changed since my
previous visit in Yahya was like a man in a trance.
The other members of the junta - Hamid, Gul Hasan, Omar
(who was busy organizing a musical performance for his son’s
marriage at which Yahya was to be the chief guest) and even
Peerzada were in the deepest gloom. The chief of Inter-Services
Intelligence (I.S.1.D.), Major-General Gillani, an intelligent
and honest officer, and his able Predecessor General Akbar,
both told me about the imminent Indo-Pakistan war on
Bangladesh and its grave implications.
I had a casual meeting with Yahya after my arrival in Is-
lamabad, and asked him about the Cornelius constitution.
Before giving any answer he asked me for my Own comments.
My reply was that it would be the final nail in the coffin of
Pakistan, Without contradicting, Yahya asked me to see him
on September 6, which had been observed as “Defence Day”
since the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war, and as such was a public
holiday. He asked me to see him alone on that day in the
morning: it was my last serious meeting with him, and lasted
three hours. I paid him a courtesy farewell call on September 22.
The following was the substance of my interview with Yahya
on September 6. There could be no military solution to the
crisis. Mujib must be released, and talks must begin with him
and his exile government in Calcutta. The Americans, with
his knowledge and approval, had already started talks with the’
exile government, and the Americans were also being given
facilities to negotiate with Mujib through his lawyer, A. K.
Brohi. When I asked what would be the basis of the political
settlement, he told me that he was not sure yet of its final shape
or outcome. All that interested him was to keep the green
and white. crescent flag intact if possible, but if seventy-five
million Bengalis would not have it, “let there be two Muslim
states in the subcontinent” — he made this comment with great
_ anguish. To my query about the procedure of political dialogue,
answer was that Mujib would be released a8 soon as
the Assembly met and passed a resolution asking him to do so.
This was a face-saving device after he had denounced -Mujib
as a “traitor”. Yahya then told me that.he was relying heavily
on Nixon for the success of this final attempt; the help of the

——
198 = = THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Shah of Iran was also referred to. When I asked what were the
prospects, his reply was that two’ persons were creating great
obstacles — “that deceitful woman” (Mrs. Gandhi) and “that
inordinately ambitious man” (Bhutto). He confessed that his
first major mistake was his unqualified faith in Mujib’s word
- and pledges before the election in December 1970, and that
when he had turned to Bhutto, he had been let down in that
quarter as well. I found him no less bitter towards Bhutto
than towards Mujib: he said that Bhutto, no less than Mujib,
was determined to destroy united Pakistan, and for petty
personal motives.
After my talks with Yahya, other generals, top civil servants,
Bhutto, Justice Cornelius and many others, I visited Dacca
and had discussions with many people there including suppor- _
ters of the Awami League. In London later I talked with people
closely connected with the Bangladesh mission there and fin-
ally had a lengthy discussion in London early in 1972 with the ©
American Ambassador in Islamabad, Mr. Farland. From all
these I gathered that a serious move was made by President
Nixon to avert a war in the subcontinent, but by the time it
was made (September-—October 1971) the Indian Govern-
ment had decided to “‘liberate” Bangladesh.
Yahya was extremely responsive to Nixon’s gestures and
attempts. The Chinese would also have been happy to see the
success of Nixon’s mediatory efforts rather than the military
victory. of the Indians backed by the Russians. The exile
government ‘of Bangladesh in Calcutta was favourably dis-
_ posed to a political settlement under Nixon’s initiative, except
for Mr. Tajuddin, the acting Prime Minister. The then acting
Foreign Minister, Mostaque Ahmad, and Foreign Secretary,
Mr. Alam, eagerly supported the American-sponsored
_ Both were removed from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
_ after the creation of Bangladesh, — _
Yahya made an earnest appeal to the Indian Prime Minis-
_ ter, Mrs. Gandhi, to avoid war. When the newly-appointed
. Indian ambassador, Jai Kumar Atal, presented his credentials
to him in mid-Novembet, Yahya gave him a secret five-point
'. peace plan in which — he agreed to release Mujib and to
arrange a referendum td determine whether or not the Bengalis
wanted an independent state of their own or to stay in a united

