THE CIVIL WAR 199
Pakistan. The other points of the peace plan included the im-
mediate formation of an all-party government ip Pakistan as
an interim measure; and an arrangement to return the refu-
gees from India under U.N. supervision and protection.*4
Could there have been constructive and liberal offer
than this? It virtually accepted the independence of Bang-
ladesh which, it was Proposed, should be established by a
referendum rather than by the invasion of East Bengal by
Indian troops.
_ The Indian ambassador, immediately after presenting his
credentials, flew back to New Delhi. His sudden dash back to
India raised many last-minute hopes that another Indo-
Pakistan war would be avoided, But all hopes were dashed to »
ground when the ambassador came back to Islamabad with
the report that Yahya’s peace plan was unacceptable to Mrs,
Gandhi on the ground that the 1970 election had already been
a referendum for the Bengalis, and that there was no need for
a new one, But how was peace obtained in Vietnam? Was it
not based on an accepted method of ascertaining the wishes of
the Vietnamese people? But who cares for international peace
or voices of restraint in a country which is guided by narrow
selfish interests and backed by a super-power intent that it
should puyue those narrow interests? How could. India
honestly maintain that the people of East Bengai had opted for
independence in the 1970 election? That election (sce Chapter
5) was held on the basis of a united Pakistan, and Mujibh ©
repeatedly told the Bengalis that he was fighting it for regional |
autonomy in a “true federal union”. Secession was not the —
_ issue. Unless Mujib already had a secret deal with New’ Delhi
whereby, on¢e the election was won, India would back him in
his hitherto veiled plan to dismember Pakistan, it was dishonest
to say that the 1970 election had already provided the Ben. |
galis with a referendum to declare indepertlence, It is little |
wonder that even liberal Western papers like the Washington ©
Post and The Guardian, which had condemned the Pakistan
Army’s actions in the Preceding nine months, criticized
_ India severely in November and December 1971 for provoking
_& war in the subcontinent. “The Indians have ey rough and
“Irresponsible; they have encouraged and directly taken part. .
in the dismemberment of a sovereign state,”’25

200 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITZ” PAKISTAN
The International Jurists in Geneva made similar com-
ments on the Indian role in the Bangladesh crisis:
In accordance with international customary law India’s
first duty was to maintain an attitude of neutrality and to
refrain from interfering in the hostilities which had broken
out in the neighbouring state. . . . The traditional rule of
neutrality in respect of belligerents engaged in a civil war
was appaicable to India up to December 6, 1971, the date
on which she recognized Bangladesh as an independent
More serious, however,\ from the point of view of inter-
national law is the military assistance given by India to the
insurgents.
¢ have already expressed the view that the pence of
' self-determination of peoples (under the U.N. Resolution
2625) can not be to this situation (Bangladesh)
and India’s assistance to the insurgents can not, therefore,
be justified under this principle. i
On the face of it, certain of India’s actions fell within the
terms of this condemnation, namely the provision of military
supplies to the insurgents and granting of facilities to recruit
and train guerilla forces on Indian soil. India’s involvement
appears to have gone further than this. There can be no doubt
that India did take military action against Pakistan before the
outbreak of open war [my italics].
We find it difficult to accept that the scale of India’s
armed action was motivated solely [my italics] by military
considerations based on the need to protect her national
frontiers and territories. .. . This is a dangerous doctrine
and would set at naught all the principles of international
law enjoining neutrality on third parties in a civil war |
REFERENCES
1, See the text of Yahya’s broadcast on March 26 in Dawn, Karachi,
March 27, 1971.
@. See press statement of Tajuddin Ahmad on April 12, 1971, published
by the Bangladesh Students’ Action Committee, London, 1971.
g. Z. A. Bhutto, The Great Tragedy, op. cit., p. 72.
4. W. H. Morris-Jones, “Pakistan Post-Mortem and the Roots of Bangla-
desh”, Political Quarterly, April-June 1972.
5. See the statement by Mujib on January 8, 1972, in London, after his
release from the West Pakistani prison,

THE CIVIL WAR 201
6. aC Haykal, “The General who was defeated”, in
ae Speaking articles in Arabic, MENA, Cairo, April 19,
7. Ibid. ; | ;
8. Fazal Muqueem Khan, Pakistan's Crisis in 7 it,
mE ae 62 Leadership, op. cit., p.. 73.
9- oar Siddiqui, Conflict, Crisis and War in Pakistan, Recap, ew York,
10. See Daily Telegraph, London, and Washington Post, March
5; , 0, 1971.
II. ae Speaks : —- of Speeches and Statements made iy Sheikh
Salas cali — Wee: — oreign Affairs, Government of Bangla-
12, Tajuddin Ahmad’s statement on the proclamation of the “Soverei
Democrati¢ Republic of Bangladesh”, issued by Bangladesh Stud te
Action Committee, London, 1971. i
13. ern s Crisis in Leadership, op. cit., p. 80.
14. "s Crisis in Leadership, op. it., p. 115.
15, Ibid. ee EG
16. een Hasanain Haykal, “The General who was Defeated”, op.
17, I was told of this by Yahya and the chief of the military intelligence in
Pakistan during my second visit to Pakistan in Sept. 1971.
18. Yahya told me of Kissinger’s warning to India.
19. 8. Gupta, “Sino-U.S. Detente and India”, India Quarterly, July-
September 1971.
20. See International Herald Tribune, December 14, 1971.
a1. See Oriana Fallaci’s letter to the Editor, Europa, Milan, in February
1972.
22. See my “Emergence of Bangladesh and South Asian Triangle”, The
Year Book of World Affairs, 1973.
23. Based on personal interviews with Bengalis in London after the creation
of Bangladesh.
24. I saw the contents of Yahya’s peace plan to Indira Gandhi from a
Pakistani official source: subsequently it was confirmed by the Bengalis
who were closely associated with the exile government in Calcutta. A
reference to Yahya’s peace-plan (in condensed form) was made in
The New Yorker, February 12, 1972 — see “The Birth of Bangladesh” by
“Reporter at Large”.
25. Washington Post, December 14, 1971 and see also The Guardian November
25-30, 1971. dahil :
26. See The Review: The International Commission of Furists. “East Pakistan
Staff Study” - “The Role of India”, June 1972.
- @6€=63S©

| 9
DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN, 1971:
ITS INTERNATIONAL IMPLICATIONS
Changes in the boundaries of states and the emergence of new
states seldom take place without outside intervention or war,
A small country, confronted with an unfriendly, if not hostile,
_ big neighbour backed by a major power, is often exposed to
external threats and can hardly enjoy the “freedom from fear”
which is a basic requirement for a country’s stability, progress ~
and viability. The break-up of Pakistan, the United States’
“most allied ally” in the mid-1950s and subsequently China’s
most friendly and informal’ally, in December I97I was no
doubt largely due to internal socio-economic and political
developments, Yet outside influences and factots were un-
deniably present in the dismemberment of Pakistan. It is
time that these external forces and factors connected with the
civil war over Bangladesh and the third Indo-Pakistani War
of 1971 were objectively assessed and their implications in the
emerging balance of power in South Asia evaluated.
The tragic happenings in Pakistan which began on March
‘ 25, 1971, and ended with the triumphant entry of the Indian
- Army into Dacca, the capital of Bangladesh, on December 16,
1971, have aroused so much emotion, and such strong feelings
of sympathy for the suffering of seventy-five million Bengalis, »
that there has hardly been any scope for a proper
‘of the external forces behind the tragedy, The Western press
did a great service to humanity by giving wide publicity to the
atrocities of the Pakistani Army in East Bengal. The result was
a natural world-wide upsurge of sympathy for the cause of
. Bangladesh, but it also successfully camouflaged the attempt
of some countries to further their narrow: national interests
202 7

| DISMEMBERMENT orf PAKISTAN, 1971 203
exploiting the tragic situation and taki e of the
pau conflict of a smaller power. eas
What role did the Soviet Union Play during the 1971 crisis
in the subcontinent? Was it interested only in the “success in
solving in a democratic manner the complex problems that
face the country Were the Kremlin leaders
“guided by the generally recognized humanitarian princi-
ples'’, as claimed by President N. Podgorny in his letter to
President Yahya Khan on April 2, 1971?! Were the Soviet
roles and moves connected with the growing Sino-Soviet
conflict in the area and Pakistan’s tefusal to be involved in it
by not being associated with the Russian moves, political and
economic, such as Kosygin’s Seemingly innocuous plan for a
regional fconomic grouping. comprising Afghanistan, India,
Iran, Pakistan and the Soviet Union and Brezhney’s deliber-
ately vague Asian Security Plan (though the Security Plan
was not @ vague one when Presented to countries like Pakistan) ?
Were not the Soviet Moves also linked to their close ties with
India? These were formally institutionalized in the so-called
Treaty of Friendship signed between Moscow and New Delhi in
the midst of the civil war in Pakistan, but had been lying ready
since 1969 when the Indian Foreign Minister, Dinesh Singh,
went to Moscow to discuss the Soviet—Asian Security Plan and
. Said: “India welcomes the proposal by the Soviet Union on the
creation of a system of collective security in Asia...
| Similarly, did India have only a humanitarian interest in the
democratic aspirations of the Bengalis? India claimed that her
involvement in the Bangladesh crisis was due to the influx of
“ten million” refugees. But the most pertinent issue, however,
is what justification, if any, India had in extending not only
|  ,Moral support, which might have been understandable, but
| also active military support to an armed uprising in a neigh.
bouring country. Her intervention in the Bangladesh crisis
| within forty-cight hours of its inception on March 25, 1971,
| when not a single refugee had gone to India, could hardly be
described merely as furthering a desire to restore the “‘demo-
| Cratic rights” of the Bengalis. A federated unit of another
| country made a unilateral declaration of independence. India
| allowed that rebel group, to form an exile government on her
soil, and aided that government in its functioning by provid-

204 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
ing all facilities including a clandestine broadcasting station,
and arming the forces of that government, the Mukti-Bahini
or liberation army. How would India react if either
China or Pakistan were to extend such facilities to a federating
unit of the Indian union like Assam or Nagaland, if such a
unit were to make a unilateral declaration of independence?
Would not the Indian Government and press call it an “‘aggres-
sion” against the country?
During the 1971 happenings in East Bengal such issues
could hardly be discussed in their true perspective because of
the wide emotional feelings which had been justly aroused
by the Pakistani Army’s excesses while trying to suppress the
secession movement, but now the true picture is emerging.
The Bangladesh crisis was not merely a conflict between Paki-
stani nationalism and Bengali sub-nationalism. Linguistic,
cultural and racial differences and tensions are not uncommon
in the new Afro-Asian countries; the social order in these
countries is characterized by a lack of integration due to the
“ethnic, religious, racial and cultural pluralism” character-
istic of these societies.? But if a powerful neighbour, backed by a
great power, intended to take advantage of such internal ten-
sions, the stability and territorial integrity of many Afro-
Asian countries would be in danger. As an American scholar,
commenting on India’s role during the Bangladesh movement,
recently pointed out: “In 1971 justifiable humanitarian con-
cern became confused with analysis of a difficult political
situation. Yet at no time in recent history have the internal
affairs of one country been used to justify the invasion and dis-
memberment of
On the Soviet role, an Indian scholar, while trying to‘justify
it, had to admit that the Soviet “objective must have been to
facilitate Indian military action in East Pakistan.” One might
ask why the Soviet Union was interested in such military
action against Pakistan. The Indian author gives the answer:
“Pakistan had become an undependable ally of any power
which wants to pursue the policy of containing Chinese
influence in this part of the world.” Then he bluntly points
out: “Kosygin supported the Bangladesh movement despite
its legal and theoretical snags because he must have thought
that he... . [was] backing a winning horse.’

ne 8 ee OF PAKISTAN, 1971 205
die ang: Crisis was i terli -
rivalry in South and South-east Agia. fe tne, Sino-Soviet
the strategic and global competition in the ad a bearing on
tween the two super-powers in spite of ay World be-
détente in American-Soviet relations. “ ent attempts at
desh was also a ns. operation Bangla-
dest Part of the operation for the Indi
in Kosygin’s global plan and h r the Indian Ocean
sweep in this 1€ seemed to have made a clean
over his rivals, President Ni
Chou En-lai, on the Bangladesh issue. nt Nixon and
| Realpolitik in South Asia
Let us first look at the patterns of alignment ; :
| on the eve of the 1971 crisis. The sie yr ee
international relations in South Asia had “i re aspect o}
| bad relations and tensions between the two aie
| __ in the area, India and Pakistan, which have always weep
| diametrically opposite directions: if one turns to Washingto
| the other tries to move towards Moscow/Peking or Peking This
is the result of their corrosive quarrels and constant
The patterns of alignment in South Asia have always been
greatly complicated by regional tensions in the area. On the
whole, South Asia has not been what is termed a “primary
tension area” involving a “big power zone”;? but there have
been a few exceptions. The first occurred during the Sino-
Indian border conflict in 1962 when Nehru, confronted with a
total military débacle, made an “urgent open appeal for the
intervention of the United States with bomber ‘and fighter
squadrons to go into action against the Chinese” on the night
of November 20, 1962. There was a real risk of a general |
| War involving the major powers, but thanks to the dramatic
| declaration of a unilateral cease-fire by the Chinese on Novem-
ber 21, a major crisis was averted. The second major risk was
during the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war when China issued an ulti-
' matum to India on September 16, 1965, threatening that
unless the Indian Government dismantled within three days
“all the military works for aggression” on the Chinese side of
the China—Sikkim ee boundary itself, it eg ,
bear full responsibility for thie Ces
Chinese ultimatum was interpreted as a “paper” one, but this

206 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
view was false. I had the opportunity to read the Sino-Pakistanj
confidential messages during the war and the minutes of
Ayub Khan’s dialogues with Mao Tse-tung, Chou En-lai
and other top Chinese leaders during Ayub’s top-secret visit
to China in the midst of the war, and can vouch that China
meant business. It was Ayub’s unwillingness or inability to
carry on a prolonged war which prevented a general war in the
subcontinent.!® The latest occasion when the area seemed to
be turning into a “primary tension area” was during the third
Indo-Pakistani war in 1971 on Bangladesh. The U.S. Seventh
Fleet, “Enterprise”, was, in a rather mystifying way, moving
to the Bay of Bengal while Indian troops were advancing on
Dacca; and the Russians were reported to have assured the
Indians of counter-measures against any move from the U.S.
Fleet.
Although South Asia has on the whole, with the few excep-
tions noted above, remained an area without ‘immediate
crises, it has been one of active diplomatic competition
between the two super-powers, and the rise of China as an
emerging major power has further complicated the South
Asian triangle. The region has been important politically
though not militarily. But thanks to the intensified Sino-
Soviet conflict, the area has also acquired military significance
to Moscow and Peking. The global policies of the U.S.A.,
the Soviet Union and China and the regional tensions and
conflicts between India and Pakistan have been interrelated.
Thus within the South Asian state system, the five most popu-
lous countries in the world were, to quote Norman
words, “jockeying and jostling” with each other in a con-
fused pattern of interrelationships.™
The presence of outside powers in South Asia has been
a big factor in the regional conflicts between India and Paki-
stan. This was also the case when the Bangladesh crisis turned
into another hot issue in their unending feuds. The crisis of
‘Bangladesh no doubt resulted from Pakistan’s failure to
achieve national integration and find a viable political order
in which the. people of two geographically separated units
could live together in a true federal or confederal union.
But this does not mean that the external factors did not com-
plicate the issue. 7

_ - DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN, 1971 207
The United States, by the time Richard Nixon came
-. to the White House in January 1969, had decided to play its
role in Asia at a low profile. During his world tour in:Aveust
1969, when he visited five Asian countries including Inwa and |
Pakistan, Nixon gave expression to his policy by defining the
role of the United States in Asia. He explained that while the
. United States would, of course, honour its: treaty commit-
ments, it must avoid the kind of policy which would make
Asian countries so dependent on the Uniter States that the
latter would/ve dragged into conflicts sv-i as the Vietnam
war. Nixon admitted that it was a difficult policy to follow,
but he believed it was one which, with proper planning,
could be developed. Nixon recalled some advice he had
ceived in 1964 from the former Pakistani President, Ayub |
Khan, who had told him that the role of the United States in
countries like Vietnam, the Philippines and Thailand - or
for that ma‘ter in any other Asian country which experienced
internal sv. dbversion — was to help them fight the war but not to
fight the war for them. Nixon thought this a good
The new U.S. policy under the Nixon Doctrine was 10
_ a low profile. The United States had already begun
a process of disengagement from the affairs of the subcoxtinent
since the ruinous wer of 1965; military aid to
both India and Pakistan was stopped; economic aid continued
but with a declining volume __ __ _ -
While South Asia under the policy became a low
priority area compared to South-east Asia or the Middle
East, the United States did not wish to leave the initiatives in
the area entirely to the Soviet Union and China. Explaining
the new U.S. policy towards South Asia in 1973, James H.
Noyes, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Near Eastern, African
and South Asian Affairs, said: ‘‘No critical U.S. security
interests are involved in South Asia. . . . Those interests the
United States does have in the subcontinent are primarily
political... .. They include a basic interest in peace and stabi- >
lity of the region and in insuring that no outside power achieves
dominance over any of the regional nations.’”®
- But the Soviet Union, thanks to its growing conflict with
China, seemed to have embarked on expansionist designs,
seemingly in accordance with the traditional Russian’interest
ees AM sett

208 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
in the subcontinent as visualized b Lord Curzon in the 1
and as disclosed in the Soviet_-Nazi documents captured by
the U.S. Government after the Second World War saying :
‘The Soviet government shared the old czarist interests in the
Persian—Indian Ocean area.”"14 The Kremlin leaders through-
out 1969 and 1970 were assiduously working for some econo-
mC, political and military grouping with the containment of
China as its object. The main objective of new Soviet moves
such as Brezhnev’s Asian collective security plan seemed to be
to isolate and contain China while serving its-own “great-
power” aspirations in the region. The Soviet-Chinese rivalry
was increasingly reflected in diplomatic moves made by the
U.S.S.R. in 1969 and 1970. After preaching against the mili-
. tary pacts for more than fifteen years, the Soviet leaders now
found virtues in the concept and reverted to “Dullesism”
because it suited their national interests against China. .
Pakistan had special difficulties and dilemmas in responding
to the new Soviet moves as she could realize that both Kosy-
gin’s plan for regional economic grouping and Brezhnev’s
Asian collective security plan were directed against her closest
friend China which, since the U.S. embargo on military sup-
plies to India and Pakistan, had become the principal supplier
of arms to Pakistan. Pakistan and China remained opposed
to a Soviet-inspired security system, and Moscow had a size-
able task in seeking to extend ties with Pakistan at China’s
expense.
When Pakistan finally expressed its inability to join the
Russian moves against China, the brief interval of so-called
“friendly relations” between Moscow and Islamabad came to
an end. The soviet press and propaganda media began similar
attacks to those Pakistan had experienced in the 1950s when
she joined SEATO and CENTO. Between 1965 and 1970
there was some relaxation in the Soviet attacks against Pakistan.
Thus Pakistan, which in the mid-1950s had been a “stooge of
imperalist powers”, was elevated all of a sudden to the status
of “the respected southern neighbour’*!5 of the Soviet Union
after Ayub’s first state visit in 1965, but by the beginning of.
. 1970 the Soviet press and propaganda media reverted to their
old campaign of vilification against Pakistan. The New Times,
for instance, wrote a lengthy article on Pakistan on February

