g2 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
founder of Bangladesh, was paradoxically the last hope
for a united Pakistan — provided he could be persuaded to
modify his six points. I carefully examined the substance of
the Yahya—Mujib and Mujib—Ahsan talks in 1969-70 and can
vouch that Mujib repeatedly assured that he would modify
his six points once the elections were over.
Another significant and encouraging development took place
in February 1970 when Mujib told me that the L.F.O. should
provide for elections not only for the national assembly
but also for provincial legislatures. I pointed out that the L.F.O,
was not supposed to be a constitution but was to be a just
modus operandi for electing a national assembly — the first task
of which would be to frame a constitution; the provincial
legislature could come into existence only after the constitution
was framed. Mujib, with a significant smile, replied: “You
are a political scientist; I am a politician; how could Yahya
expect me to modify my extreme demands?” I could appreciate
his reasoning and believed that Mujib honestly wanted an
agreed constitution on the modified version of his six points,
I considered it a very encouraging hint. From Dacca I went to
Karachi to meet Bhutto and tried to find out his reaction to the
simultaneous holding of elections for both the national and
provincial legislatures. Bhutto, with his usual style of talking,
asked me if it were Mujib’s suggestion; I avoided giving an
answer by telling him that my assignment was to talk to all
political leaders including Mujib and himself. Bhutto agreed
to the proposal, though he termed it “putting the cart before
the horse”, but he added that it would enable the political
leaders a flexible attitude. On my return to Islamabad,
I reported this to Yahya, who immediately accepted it and
asked me to draft the L.F.O. accordingly. Turning to the
two specific proposals relating to the special procedure for
voting on constitutional proposals and the definition of pro- .
_ vincial autonomy, the matters were thrashed out at a series of
meetings of the inner cabinet. Yahya was firm against any
special procedure of voting by saying that he could not com-
promise on the principle of “one man, one vote”; he argued,
with the support of Ahsan and myself, it would destroy con-
fidence in the intentions of the military régime among the
Bengalis, and once that confidence was lost, Yahya concluded,

ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 93
. the whole process might as well be given up. So the inner
cabinet had to yield.
The question of limiting the extent of provincial autonomy
was much more complicated. I had almost daily sessions with
Yahya in Ji anuary—F ebruary as to how this delicate issue could
be tackled. Finally,-in an attempt to find a way out of the im-
passe, I Proposed at a meeting of the inner cabinet in late
January that instead of trying to define the extent of provincial
autonomy, the L.F.O. should define the minimum require-
ments that were essential for the existence of a united Pakistan.
[ had prior consultation about my plan with Yahya, Ahsan,
Yakub and Peerzada; Ahsan was quick to assure me of his
full support, and Yakub said he would discuss it with “open
mind” — he had faith in my convictions regarding one Pakistan.
Yahya, though surprised initially about what I termed “de-
fining one Pakistan”, was prepared to give me a chance to
elaborate it in the inner cabinet. Only Hamid, Tikka and a few
others like Omar were angered by this “soft” policy towards
Mujib. Peerzada had consultations with Bhutto and when the
latter was reported to have no objection, Peerzada adopted a
neutral posture.
It was a big day for me; I began my discussion with an ana-
lysis of the political situation in East Pakistan; I conceded
that by not defining provincial autonomy Mujib could cause
damage if he were planning to do so. But our whole approach,
I continued, was based on expectations of a reasonable attitude -
from Mujib as well as others and therefore no step should be
taken to precipitate a crisis - a view strongly supported by
Ahsan. When I finally elaborated the “five principles” of
one Pakistan, to the great relief and surprise of Yahya, Ahsan
and myself, it was eventually accepted by the generals. But
though the crisis seemed to be over, events after the elections |
showed that it had only been postponed for a year, |
The Legal Framework Order :
The L.F.O., which was at last announced on March 31, 1971,
contained five points or principles which were regarded as the
minimum requirements for a united P akistan. (1) Pakistan
must be based on Islamic ideology - Mujib did not object to

i |
94 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
this; on the other hand, the Awami League’s election
festo pledged: ““The Awami League affirms that a clear guaran-
tee should be embodied in the constitution to the effect that no
law repugnant to the injunction of Islam as laid down in the
Holy Quran and Sunnah shall be enacted or enforced,18
It was only after the creation of Bangladesh that Mujib pro-
vided in his country’s constitution the principle of secularism
by the “elimination of granting by the State of political status
in favour of any religion and the abuse of religion for political
purposes”. Mujib won the election of 1970 by pledging a con-
stitution on the Islamic ideology because he knew that Islam
and its ideology were as dear to the Muslims of East as of
West Pakistan. Here was one glaring instance of the gap be-
tween Mujib’s professions and his practice.
Turning to other principles of the L.F.O.: (2) the country
was to have a democratic constitution providing for free and
fair elections — no one could object to that. (3) Pakistan’s
territorial integrity must be upheld in the constitution — Mujib
could not object to this because, whatever his ultimate goal,
he could not openly challenge the “oneness” of the country.
(4) The disparity between the wings, particularly in economic
development, must be eliminated by statutory provisions to be
guaranteed in the constitution — again neither Mujib nor any
other political leader, either of East or West Pakistan, could
have any objection to this. (5) The distribution of power be-
tween the centre and the provinces must be made in such a
way that the provinces enjoyed the maximum degree of auto-
nomy consistent with giving the central Government adequate
power to discharge its federal responsibilities, including the
maintenance of the country’s territorial integrity. No doubt
the intention was to set up a genuine federal system.
But since the wording of this stipulation was deliberately
_ Vague, it was capable of more than one interpretation; it
allowed Mujib to base his election campaign on his six points
while those who wanted a united, federal Pakistan could still
_ hope they had got it. This particular point or principle in the
L.F.Q. was the most complicated one, and it was agreed upon
after much discussion and debate in the inner cabinet; the
civilian cabinet was presented the final draft for mere formality
and there was not much discussion in the cabincz; there were

ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 95
only few questions seeking clarifications and the President's
interpretation was final and unchallenged.
The L.F.O. had a preamble, twenty-seven articles and two
Schedules; it looked like a provisional constitution. It was
Article 20 which laid down the five “Fundamental Principles
of the Constitution” and which was thus the vital |
The other articles related mainly to composition of the national
assembly and provincial assemblies, provisions relating to the
holding of election, qualifications and disqualifications for
membership, the election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker -
peripheral matters which were needed for setting up an assem-
bly to frame the country’s constitution.
The LF -O. provided that the national assembly must
complete its task of framing the constitution within 120 days.
This time-limit was made because of the past experiences of
constitution-making in Pakistan: it had taken two. constituent
assemblies nine years (from 1947 to 1956) to frame a constitu-
tion for Pakistan, and everyone wanted to prevent a repetition.
of this tragic delay. The time-limit also demonstrated Yahya’s
sincerity regarding the handing over of power to the elected
representatives of the people in the shortest possible time.
The political leaders agreed to the time-limit, and it was
further agreed that the majority group or groups responsible
for producing a constitution would show the draft to the
President before formally presenting it to the assembly. The .
President was given power to the constitution” -
(Article 25).
_ The L.F.O. was criticized, particularly in East Pakistan,
as a retreat from the plan put forward by Yahya on November
28, 1969. In a sense, this was true. But those who knew from
the inside how the document had been drawn up realized that
some compromise had been essential and were not dissatisfied
with the outcome. Mujib, who learned what had gone on from
Ahsan, accepted the outcome. The five principles, though not
palatable to everyone, could not be criticized openly as they |
did not violate the demands of any group or party. The
President’s power of authentication of the constitution was .
criticized as curtailing the sovereignty of the national assembly
or the constituent assembly. On April 4, 1970, soon after the
promulgation of the L.F.O., Yahya went to Dacca and de-

96 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
clared that there was no intention to curb the people’s sover.
eignty. At Dacca airport while talking to newsmen, he stated:
“I do not think there is any curb on anybody’s sovereignty. My
desire is to lead the nation, towards democracy. My action
so far does not conflict with what I have been telling the people
about sovercignty.”2? He reaffirmed it when he was leaving
Dacca on April 10; on this latter occasion, he disclosed to news.
men at Dacca airport that he had explained the authentica-
. tion clause to the various leaders during his stay in Dacca,
and that the L.F.O. had been “‘accepted and hailed” by the
vast majority of the people, and a few other people “who
are worried about one or two things here also accepted gg
per cent of it”. He said unambiguously that if the constitution
were made according to the broad principles laid down in the
framework, then there was no reason why he should not authen-
ticate it. It was unthinkable that he would refuse authentica-
tion just for the sake of refusing it. After all, during the last year
he had taken a number of steps to move the nation towards
democracy. Yahya added that if the nation had faith in him,
it must realize that “I am not doing all this for fun”. He termed
authentication “only a procedural formality” .1®
Did Yahya really mean to fulfill his pledge and restore
democracy? I asked him these questions many times and
reported to him discouraging hints dropped by some of his
generals and the doubts that still lingered in the minds of some
politicians about his ultimate objective. His answers were:
“Am I such a fool as not to be able to see the writing on the
wall?” During the four-month-long agitation in 1968-9, the
people’s revolt against the authoritarian régime of Ayub was
unqualified; he assured me that the urge for democracy
was too strong for any general to ignore. However, he would
stress again and again that as the Head of State and also as
Chief of the Armed Forces he would not tolerate any scheme |
or plan to split the country. Of course, if seventy-five million
‘ people in East Pakistan were to ask for separation in clear
terms and not in a veiled scheme (referring to Mujib’s six
points) then it was a different story. Pakistan, he added, was
demanded by the people of East Pakistan; they gave Quaid-e-
Azam more support than the people of any region of West
Pakistan during the national movement for Pakistan (1940-7).

ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 97
ji dave eet believed that if the Bengalis were given their
as no reason why they should want to see Pakistan
they, he used to tell me, would not only have
maximum autonomy j : ae
“one ey ti their own Province but, thanks to
ites. "Th one vote”, ; they would also dominate national
pe bei <n One evening in late February when the L.F.O.
“= dane hotly debated in his inner cabinet and I expressed
| ef ay at the attitude of some members of the junta, he
me categorically: “Look at the fate of Ayub for whom both
: myself have regard! What is his condition? He is
virtually ecading a self-imposed exiled life; do you want me to
have the same fate or should we not save the country from the
terrible challenge to its very existence ‘as a result of East-
West Pakistan tensions?” | confess that I was impressed by
his words, and I still believe that he meant business, otherwise
he would not have given a free and fair election, Tampering
with elections in an underdeveloped country is not a dificult
task. Yahya could have got at least fifty seats from East Paki-
stan by unfair means and could have had a fake “representa-
tive” government. I was also: present on an occasion when an
influential member of the ruling élite hinted at such a course
of action with the plea that Mujib might get out of control if,
as developments were indicating, he obtained nearly all the
seats from East Pakistan. Yahya’s reply was: “If seventy-
five million people like Mujib’s face, who am I to oppose him
provided he does not destroy our cherished homeland? .
My commitments are for transfer of power and certainly
not for splitting the country.” Then he would always advise
patience and faith. “Pakistan can be saved through mutual |
_ faith and trust between the people of East and West Pakistan
and not through fraud and unfair elections.” |
In the meantime political activities, which had been partly
| suspended, were restored from January 1, 1970. cep set
4 Inet» whee year HEME eet aut
overlong: it lasted a whole year. In one 0 Y bs >.
speeches, Mujib declared: ‘ Pakisia has come to stay and there
is no focrce that can destroy it. ti deg Sen ot Pons
In the light of all these statements happenings which
P akistan” could anybody foresee the tragic Ppemings
: ight of March 25, 1971, and ended with the
began on the night o

98 - THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
triumphant entry of Indian troops into Dacca on December
16, 1971?
Things, however, were not moving in the way that Mujib
was saying in public. When his party was debating Yahya’s
scheme of power under the Legal Framework Order of 1970,
Mujib was reported to have said to his inner cabinet that his
sole aim was to establish Bangladesh. Yahya was presented
with a tape-recorded account of these talks of Mujib with his,
close associates. Mujib was clearly heard to say: “My aim is to
establish Bangladesh; I will tear the L.F.O. [the Legal Frame-
work Order] into pieces as soon as the elections are over.
Who could challenge me once the elections are over?” He also
hinted to his colleagues about help from “outside sources’’,*
presumably from India. When Yahya listened to this “politi-
cal music” played by his intelligence services, he was bewil-
dered. He could easily recognize Mujib’s voice and the sub-
stance of his recorded talk. The next morning when I saw him
he was still in a bewildered state; but he was never a serious
administrator, so he soon recovered from his shock and told
me: “I shall fix Mujib if he betrays me.” Yahya also seemed to
have more than one contingency plan, just as Mujib seemed
to have.
The Confusing Scene
In political talks and election campaigning, Mujib and his
followers were freee to preach the idea of Bangladesh to every
house in every village without hindrance; cries of Joy Bangla!
(Victory to Bangladesh) were heard everywhere. Again,
making a comparison with the past, Mujib’s election campaign
was the same as Jinnah’s in 1945-6 for the establishment of
Pakistan. As the campaign progressed, it was clear that Mujib’s
Awami League was the only representative party in East
Pakistan; the othef parties could hardly organize any mect-
‘ings, and when they did, the militant Awami Leaguers would
disrupt them.
There was ‘a martial law regulation that anybody talking
against “territorial integrity” would be severely dealt with,.
yet a campaign for Bangladesh was freely allowed. Yahya
would make some speeches now and then reaffirming his
ents

ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR OF POWEL 99
determination to “protect” the country agai th
gainst any threat
= a trcak-up3 yet the young and student followers of Mujib
East P the gospel of Bangladesh. everywhere in
n “August 14, 1970 ~ independence _
day — the students of Dacca University had displayed a new
map showing the creation of Bangladesh, and the flag of the
emerging country was prominently displayed at a meeting to
celebrate independence day. The meeting was presided over
by the Vice-Chancellor of the University, Justice A. S. Choud-
hury, former President of Bangladesh. He was summoned by
the Martial. Law Administrator, Lieut.-General Yakub Khan,
to “explain” lis open challenge to the country’s unity and
existence. The matter ended over a cup of tea, thanks to
Governor Ahsan’s intervention. #1
All-India Radio, from its station in Calcutta, was broad-
casting a programme every evening entitled Abper Bangla,
oupper Bangla (This Side and the Other Side of Bengal), openly
supporting the cause of Bangladesh. There were reports —
not only from the Pakistan intelligence services but also from
others, including some friendly foreign countries — that Indian
money and arms were being sent to East Pakistan both for the
success of the Awami League in the election and for the even-
tual confrontation with the Pakistan army. There was evi-
dence of India’s involvement in the affairs of East Pakistan. *
The non-Awami League political leaders of East Pakistan
made similar reports to Yahya. i.e
Ahsan was the only optimistic person in East Pakistan, and ,
he used to tell Yahya: “Sheikh Sahib [Mujib] will not break
up Pakistan.” Yahya would be satisfied; he was regularly
paying visits to East Pakistan and always had “lengthy” and
“friendly” talks with Mujib; on every occasion after his talks
with Mujib he was happy and would say: “Thank God all
those reports. [i.e. those supplied by his intelligence services
and from other sources] are not correct.” My interpretation of
Yahya’s reaction is that he was not capable of understanding
the political realities or dynamics of East Pakistan. Tt was
Ahsan who was largely responsible for leading Yahya into a
false sense of optimism; but neither Yahya nor Ahsan seemed
. to have any other option. Mujib was given a long rope, and it
was now difficult for him to retreat without a confrontation,

| 100 THE LAST pAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
| which neither Yabya nor anybody who had any hope of
| preserving a united Pakistan could afford to think of.
Then came the two terrible natural calamities in East
. floods in August 1970 and a cyclone and tidal bore
in November. During the flood in August, Yahya and his
government dealt with the situation well — he and his cabinet
ministers toured East Pakistan from end to end and met the
people. Yahya’s image went up; it is not difficult to get
applause or censure from the emotional Bengalis. So no special
significance could be attached to this. Yahya had to postpone
the elections, but nobody could challenge the decision as it
was not possible to hold an election when large areas of East
Pakistan were under water. Mujib had to accept the decision.
- But the situation was different when East Pakistan was
ravaged by a cyclone and tidal bore. Yahya was in Peking when
the cyclone struck in N’ ovember 1970. On his return journey to
Rawalpindi he stopped at Dacca and stayed for two days.
Governor Ahsan and the provincial government told him that
his presence in Dacca was not needed and that newspaper
accounts of the havoc caused by the cyclone were highly exag-
gerated. So Yahya left Dacca, but soon there were cries and
protests everywhere. Yahya returned to Dacca, but the damage
had already been done. There were widespread protests and
over what was termed as “gross” if not
“criminal” negligence by the central government in dealing
| with the victims of the cyclone. There could not have been a
more favourable climate for Bengali nationalists and Mujib to
preach the idea of a separate state for the Bengalis. The centre’s
alleged neglect in handling the situation provided the most
- convincing argument for having a separate state for Bengalis,
"just as widespread Hindu-Muslim riots from August 16,
1946 (the great Calcutta killings), provided Jinnah and the
Muslims of India with powerful evidence that they could no °
longer live together with the Hindus.
The Secret Talks between Yahya and Mujtb
There were demands by all non-Awami League political
leaders including Maulana Bhashani that elections should again
be postponed. Mujib, however, was not prepared to sacrifice

Apane SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 101
su a en oO 1 . ° . °
coming the cre nef Beto his cherished aim of be-
indicate that he had now reach _ vie aa te
creation of Bangladesh was th ed the conclusion that the
| i he Aad ‘hed he only solution for the Bengalis.
M he had ad’ any reeradon oda exe ll we
Tai onde oe ot WS
, et Mui: galis.
thn ey Mui had three secret meetings with Yahya during
ys in Dacca in late November and early Decem-
ber 1970. Yahya had already decided that electi 4 uld
not be postponed — a decision which was f bl ae Mujib.
Yahya did not even grant an interview to the “el needs
of East Pakistan, including Nurul Amin iis sh te
him to postpone the election. They were bitter Ai Yahya’s
decision just as it made Mujib happy. Bhashani made it cleat 3
to Yahya through an emissary that if Yahya would concentrate
his relief operations in cyclone-affected areas by devoting his
entire administration to relief work rather than pre cn
for holding the election, and if Mujib should dia challenge
him for postponing the elections, he and his party would su
port Yahya and not Mujib; his party’s slogan at that time “2
“food before vote”. If Ayub Khan and not Yahya had been in
power, Bhashani’s offer would most likely have been accepted.
Similarly all other parties and groups were prepared to back
Yahya if Mujib started an agitation against the postponement
of elections — he openly threatened that a million people would
be killed in the confrontation if the elections were postponed.
The West Pakistani leaders, including Bhutto, were prepared
for a postponement of elections.
Yet Yahya decided to go ahead with the “free and fair
election” he had promised to the nation. His great expectation
was that this would make Mujib happy and that a compro-
mise would be possible. Before Yahya made his decision, there
were exchanges of secret messages between him and Mujib ©
which led Yahya to place trust in Mujib’s words: “Pakistan
, shall not be broken.” .
So the three secret meetings at the President’s House in
Dacca in later November and early December were held in a
most cordial atmosphere — the outside climate at Dacca at the
beginning of the mild winter was very pleasant — and no less

