52 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
tract, he first hinted at a threat that defiance of an order from
the CMLA’s office might lead to termination of my job at
“Dacca University, but he soon changed the technique and
pleaded with me to work as a team member for “important
affairs”. Finally, 1 was successful in making a compromise ~
I continued to be Director-General (Research) in the
Foreign Ministry but would also work as a part-time
member of the planning cell. I soon found myself a full-time
member of the planning cell and only part-time in the
Foreign Ministry. I must confess that the work at the plan-
ning cell was both interesting and challenging. I was given the
task of helping the President on political and constitutional
matters. However, it was Nur Khan’s educational reforms
which gave me the first contacts with President Yahya Khan.
I began to attend the meetings of the Council of Administra-
tion and witnessed the interesting sight of top bureaucrats
being heckled by Nur Khan’s “whizz kids”. The bureaucrats,
however, knew well how to bide their time and adjust to the
new situation. Nur Khan soon became the target of “palace
intrigues”; Yahya wanted to “kick him upstairs’.
By June 1970 Yahya had begun to think in terms ofa civilian
cabinet and had already started his political dialogue with the
leaders of the various political parties, which I shall describe
in the next chapter. In order to get rid of Nur Khan and some
of his ill-planned reforms, which alarmed the powerful pres-
sure groups (big business, the bureaucracy and most important,
some of the generals including Hamid and Peerzada) Yahya
made new moves. Unlike Ayub’s system, Yahya operated
under a “‘collective leadership”, where army generals con-
stituted an “inner cabinet’. Nur Khan antagonized many of
the inner cabinet.
When martial law was introduced on March 25, 1969,
the legislatures, both central and provincial, the cabinet and
, the provincial governors were all gone as the Constitution
itself was abrogated. In the two provinces, the zonal
Martial Law assumed the role of pro-
vincial governors. At the provincial level, the zonal MLAs
had to rely exclusively on the top civil officers —- “the CSP”.
So the order of “Junior or concealed partnership”, as J. C.
Hurewitz described the Ayub continued in the provin-

| YAHYA BEGINS ANEW 53
there were no “whizz kids” attached to
Ayub’s Basic Democracy was one of the main targets of
attack. The new régime abolished the electoral role of the
Basic Democrats but their functions as local councils for
rural development could not be abrupt! ded. So aft
analysis and thought, Easi ii eon co ie
ught, Lasic Democracy continued to play its
role in local affairs.
_In the meantime, the working of the Council of Administra-
tion became more and more complicated as a result of the
Yahya-Nur Khan differences. Yahya, Hamid Peerzada
and the majority of the generals, as well as Ahsan, were
rather conservative and were not prepared to move fast, while
Nur Khan and a few others were eager to play an important
modernizing role as “harbingers of progress”; they seemed to
share Ayub s view that in the new states “the military organi-
zation represents the most effective public institution available
for leading the modernizing effort”.* But the Yahya régime
had neither the abilities nor the opportunities to play such a
role in modernization or progress. The result was a withering
away of the Council of Administration.
Nur Khan and Ahsan ceased to be Chiefs of the Air
Force and the Navy and became respectively provincial
governors of West and East Pakistan. At the centre, Yahya
announced his decision to form a civilian cabinet — with five
nominated members each from East and West Pakistan -
to replace the Council of Administration. In the provinces,
a dyarchic pattern of administration developed. The zonal
MLAs were supreme in martial law affairs and were directly
in contact with the -CMLA and President Yahya; while the
newly appointed governors were given the same functions and
role as under Ayub’s Constitution of 1962, which was revived
under an “ordinance of continuance”. Parallels were being
drawn with similar actions of the previous military régime.
There was speculation and rumour about the meaning of these
new moves. Was the new régime trying to prolong its stay
and move backwards from the pledge of an early transfer of
power? There were, however, no signs of this. Yahya continued
to emphasize, rather too often, the “temporary” character of
his régime. However, I gathered from my talks with some

54 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
generals, that the word “temporary” was not liked, Their
arguments, however, were not against the transfer of power
itself, because even the hawkish elements in the junta realized
that some big moves had to be made. Their objection was that
too much emphasis on the “temporary”’ aspect of the régime .
was detrimental to its effective functioning. ;
The role of the bureaucrats, which reached its zenith during
the Ayub era, suffered a temporary eclipse. Peerzada was
reported to have said: “We took the blame last time when
everything was done by the civilians. This time we will do
everything and take the credit too.”? In my talks with Peerzada,
I could discern bitter feelings and prejudice against the senior
civil servants. He could never forget his removal from the Pres-
ident’s-House as Ayub’s military secretary which, according
to him, was not due to his heart ailment but to a “‘plot” by the
civil servants against an army officer who was trying to mini-
mize their influence with Ayub. The new régime terminated
the services of 303 civil servants, including some top CSP
officers. Most of Ayub’s close associates were removed uncere-
moniously. Although there were charges of “corruption”,
no proper judicial process was allowed and in many cases
decisions were made arbitrarily at the CMLA’s office by
Peerzada and his two “super secretaries”, Brigadiers Karim
and Rahim. Some of these unlucky 303 are now restored in the
service under Mujib’s government in Bangladesh and under
Bhutto in “New” Pakistan.
Yahya, in order to give the Bengalis some share in the top
positions of the administration, made six Bengali CSP officers
“central secretaries”, the highest civil service rank in Pakistan,
This accelerated promotion of the Bengalis was a step in the
right direction but it came too late; it should have been taken
in the early 1960s when Bengali nationalism was still inarticu-
late and undefined. By 1970 measures like this, though com- -
mendable, were not adequate to meet challenges to Pakistan’s
viability as a united country. Yahya also gave directions to all
the ministries that whenever a senior post became vacant
Bengali candidates for it should be accorded priority, even if
this meant disregarding the principle of seniority. The quotas
for Bengali recruitment in the Pakistani armed forces were
doubled — again a pious but ineffecti i '
| ve move, given the pre-

YAHYA BEGINS ANEW 55
vailing mood of the Bengalis, who demanded to be masters
in their own house and were not satisfied with some “special
favours” or “grants”, as these moves were interpreted among
the Bengali intelligentsia. The Bengali civil servants were the
most vocal group in expressing nationalism", just as
the Muslim officials in undivided India had been great cham-
pions of a separate Pakistani state. The Bengali officials’ ex-
pectations were centred on rapid promotion; they were guided
by their own interests and had no broad vision or perspective.
Some of these officials were supporters of Mujib’s scheme of
secession, The Pakistani intelligence service was full of reports
on their alleged political activities, but the Government could
do hardly anything unless it was prepared to sack the entire
group of top Bengali civil servants.
Turning to the formation of the Yahya cabinet, I had my
first opportunity to observe at close quarters the process of
“selecting” a minister in a military régime. Yahya went to.
Dacca in July 1969 to select his from East
Pakistan. As I was the member of his “planning cell” dealing
with political matters, I was asked to accompany him. The
President used to “grant interviews” to the prospective candi-
dates, talk to them informally and then make inquiries con-
cerning them from various sources including the intelligence
services. Ayub used to follow the same procedure. By August,
nine of the ten cabinet members were “nominated”. Peerzada, |
Hamid and other top generals were consulted while Ahsan
had the role of selecting from East Pakistan. Most of the minis-
ters were older, the average age being sixty. The selection and
formation of the cabinet, like its predecessors in the Ayub
era, evoked very little interest or comment. It included one
retired major-general; one former Chief Justice; one member
of the wealthy “twenty-two families’, one belonging to a big
landlord and industrial i i The Bengali ministers were two
former civil servants, one former politician and one from a
private firm, hardly known.
My own inclusion in the cabinet as the latecomer in October
was a big surprise for me. The political dialogue with Mujib
and other Bengali and West Pakistani leaders had already
begun. I was constantly associated with these talks as a member
of the “planning cell”. When Yahya was in Dacca in July

56 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
selecting or nominating his ministers, he first hinted that he
would like me to join the cabinet. I explained my unwilling.
ness as I was apprehensive of being directly involved in politics,
but I soon realized that my role in the planning cell had already
involved me. By this I was also convinced of Yahya’s
sincerity about transferring power to the elected representatives
of the people. Between July and October, when J finally joined
the cabinet, I had more meetings and discussions with him
than any of his cabinet ministers. .
The Role of a Cabinet in a Military Régime
As a political scientist, I had unique opportunities of watching
and participating in the political process of a military régime.
I had watched the phenomenon during the Ayub era also: I
recollect that in November 1967 Ayub asked me to see him on a
date when the “Governors’ Conference”, which was described
recently by a Bengali author as “the highest decision-making
body”,® was due to meet. All the high dignitaries — the Gover-
nors, the cabinet ministers, the secretaries — were assembled in
the committee room of the President’s House. I thought that
my interview would either be cancelled or be a very short one.
But, to my surprise, Ayub kept the “high dignitaries” waiting
whule talking to me as if no important meeting or engagement
was scheduled for him. Finally I interposed politely: ‘The
Governors’ Conference is perhaps due to meet.” Ayub, with a
smile, asked me to continue my business. This is how he used
to treat the cabinet and other high-level bodies.
Now it was my turn to participate in the drama. The cabi-
net used to discuss, sometimes quite lengthily, such issues as
labour or education policy. The chief of the civil intelligence
service, Mr. Rezvi, used to present to the cabinet a picture
of the “current political situation” in the country, but Rezvi’s
real report was never before the cabinet; that was meant for
Yahya and the inner circle of the junta, I had occasion to see
some of these “sensitive reports”, not as a cabinet minister but
in my role as constitutional adviser to the President. Then the
cabinet would discuss the food situation, the jute
prospects and other such peripheral matters. Never in my two
years as a member of the cabinet did I find any real and mean-

YAHYA BEGINS ANEW 57
| ul a on vital matters such as defence, foreign affairs,
bi or political policies and programmes. The
gs was a ceremonial body, its members often touring as
in the four principal cities, Karachi, Lahore, Islamabad
and Dacca, inaugurating public functions, presiding over
innocuous meetings, sitting at the head table at banquets in the
wresident’s House, To an outsider, a cabinet minister would
: ' emely busy and important n. But
‘In reality, his role in the military régime petnacily
on his relationship with the President, the President’s own
assessment of the minister’s effectiveness and ability to do a
particular assignment or assignments, as well as the minister’s
links with other influential members of the ruling junta.
Socio-economic Problems and Dilemmas ;
Bhutto compared Pakistan when Yahya came to powér
in 1969 to “a patient in the last stages of tuberculosis”.®
Although he made this remark two years after Yahya had
come to power and when the country was already heading
towards break-up on the issue of Bangladesh, the remark
contained truth. Apart from complex political and constitu-
tional issues which will be referred to shortly, the country was
beset with gargantuan problems in the socio-economic sphere.
Whether the new military régime was capable of providing
effective political leadership to meet the formidable challenges —
was very doubtful. In recent years, the social scientists in their
new jargon have discussed extensively the role of the military
in political development and modernization in the new coun-
tries of the Third World.!° One conclusion drawn from a study
of these recent volumes on military rule in new states was
summed up by Robert Price:
A striking characteristic of the literature on military rule in
developing countries is the gap between theoretical expecta-
tions and political, social and economic reality. On the one
hand, practitioners of comparative social and political theory
have tended to view the military, at least in the non-Latin
American area, as an organization capable of playing an
important modernizing role. On the other hand, empirical
researchers, often the very same individuals, who at a

58 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
different time wear the hat of theoretical practitioner, have
found the performance of the military as political agents of
modernization to have been rather dismal.”
Political and socio-economic realities in Pakistan in 1969-71
were not conducive to the Yahya régime performing any signi-
ficant role. Further, the régime had its own weaknesses and
deficiencies. One requisite for a military régime to achieve
success is either to get broad support from the people as Nasser
had done in Egypt and Ayub also in the initial years, or to have
the co-operation and assistance of powerful segments of society
such as the bureaucrats, the business community and other
important groups among the urban élite. The Yahya régime
had the full support of the army, though the junta was a divided
house from the beginning, with Peerzada at odds with Hamid
and Yahya with Nur Khan. Yahya was never the big boss
among the armed forces as his predecessor had been.
The great debate on the synthesis of economic growth and
social and distributive justice had already begun. The pertinent
issue was whether such a synthesis could be achieved without
fundamental changes in the political and economic order.
Yahya’s government, being a “temporary” one, was neither
capable nor willing to undertake such revolutionary changes
in the economic system. As the former chief economist of the
Planning Commission, Dr. Mahbub U1] Hag, rightly pointed out,
A mere reform of the capitalistic system is no longer a viable
solution. The capitalist structure was rejected by the mass
upsurge of 1959. The “reformed” system which is being
demanded by the public and the politicians - with minimum
wages for all workers, participation of the workers in profits,
social responsibility of the capitalists, etc. - may be in
operation in Sweden or Yugoslavia but cannot be built in
Pakistan through an evolutionary process.¥
Yet Yahya with all the limiting factors, the internal and
‘external determinants of his programme, had to take some
steps toward planned economic development. At his first press
conference on April 10, 1969, Yahya, after reviewing the
.demands of the various sections of society (labour, peasants,
students) and ‘the general economic conditions prevailing in the
country, said:

YAHYA BEGINS ANEW 59
In our circumstances, there ;
economic development, But are
be isulated from the demands of social es The wide
gap which separates the different sections of society must
be narrowed, and the imbalance which led to ae strife
and discontent must be removed. - « « The objective of
planned economic development should be the general raisin
hes — of ving all over the country and not hi
up of a privile :
disadvantage of other” Go Le i and
This was an admirable goal but was most difficult to achieve
without radical changes in the economic and political spheres,
Piecemeal measures, such as increased allocation in public
health, education and housing, a limited scheme of minimum
wages as reflected in Yahya’s two budgets (1969-70 and 1970-
1) were not adequate for meeting the new and growing de-
mands for distributive justice. Prospects of foreign aid and
assistance were also not bright. When the U.S. Secretary of
State, Rogers, came to Pakistan in May 1969, Yahya made
strong pleas for increased U.S. economic assistance, but without
much success. The climate for foreign aid in Washington was
unfavourable; the bargaining strength of the countries of the
Third World was on the decline. With little scope for raising
internal resources and poor prospects for external aid, Yahya’s
hands were tied in any comprehensive scheme of distributive
justice. There could be some “‘distribution of but not ©
much scope for raising the living standards of the people,
which was the objective as spelled out by Yahya. When the
budget for 1969-70, which was already being made up at the
time when Yahya came to power in March 1969, was rejected
by the new régime on the grounds that it must make more
allocation for social justice, the planners’ reply was: “No money
for increased allocation.” The planning commission finally
made some adjustments. ~ -
But the explosive and vital problem on the economic front
was that of regional distribution rather than social distribution.
The economic disparity between East and West Pakistan had
been given free and articulate expression during the political
upheaval against Ayub. The new régime did not make any
attempt to censor or restrict the great debate on the economic
c

60 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN .
: i the
inn East and A reading o
Bon prom both English and vernacular, in
was its dominant
would reveal that “economic disparity’ ‘tical affiliation was
theme, regardless of whether ® pe Ee eon those who
rightist, leftist, moderate or
ined ith Ma So aot une
in raising the issue as a sine qua non lor
and rightly so. Political factors had yong a See
this disparity into a deeply resented grievance. ae
had already gone too far to be removed such a short peri bee
say, ten or fifteen years. It was recognized by foreign expe! be
yet, if Pakistan were to remain united, this disparity must be
removed, or at least the gap must not be allowed to widen
any further. But the crucial questions were: first, would West
Pakistan pay the economic and political price needed for the
viability of a united Pakistan? The bulk of the rupee capital
could come from only one source: West Pakistan. And West
Pakistani industrialists were also expected to bear the burden
of the new measures to correct social inequities. So the prospects
as one foreign expert pointed out, were not hopeful: “At best,
East Pakistan development will be painful. At worst, the task
may be completely impossible even with a monumental
effort.’’15
Secondly, would the Bengalis be prepared to wait for an
evolutionary process to remove the economic disparity by
“step-by-step concessions’? The political climate in East
Pakistan in. 1970 was not indicative of any compromise
or waiting. Yet there was no “magic lamp” to remove the
disparity by one or two five-year plans. The alternative
was the division of the country. So the problems and issues
connected with economic disparity were very grave.
Pakistan’s Fourth Five-Year Plan (1970-5) had to be
formulated, although it was objected to in some quarters,
particularly by Mujib, on the grounds that the new military
régime was “temporary and a caretaker government”, But
It was soon recognized that the plan must be made if the
economic growth of the country was to be maintained,
Foreign aid, whoever might be the donor, would not be
available if the plan were not finalized. The Annual Develop-
ment Plan for 1970-1 had to be launched in any case, So

YAHYA BEGINS ANEW 61
the preparation of th . .
midst of a turbulent pa Year Plan began, in the
and lack of mutual trust and unde ate, with regional tensions
West Pakistan. rstanding between East and
The National Econom} . : .
manship on February 4, 1970, Eveh the devo ne
ated cabinet” reflected the widening ga b se os een
and the economic ves themes gap between the ministers
ane expe onging to the two wings of the
country. Sometimes the debate was acrimonious; there were
few voices that could approach this grave issue ‘with proper
appreciation and a broad perspective. While the Bengali
munisters, aided and supported by the Bengali bureaucrats
were urging a big push for the development of East Pakistan,
the West Pakistani ministers, aided by top officials of the
planning commission who were mostly non-Bengalis, presented
the same old arguments against a substantial redirection of
resources and development expenditure to East Pakistan —
such as lack of absorbing capacity, inadequacy of administra-
tive machinery and the difficulty of measuring actual regional
disparity, and so forth. It was a pity that, even at this stage,
they could not understand properly the depth of the Bengalis’
feelings on the question of economic disparity. Finally Yahya
gave two commendable directives to the planners. The plan-
ning commission should recast and firm up the plan, keep-
ing in mind the following guidelines: first, greater emphasis .
on social justice and secondly, a substantial reduction in
the economic disparity between the various regions of the
country.
The plan was also submitted to panels of economists in
East and West Pakistan respectively for their comments and
recommendations. The economists were divided, and submitted
two separate reports — oie from the East Pakistani economists
and the other from their counterparts in West Pakistan.
This was not an unusual or unexpected phenomenon. Politics
rather than economic issues dominated the Bengali economists.
In fact, they had close links with Mujib and his associates.
They used the opportunity to ventilate the grievances of the
Bengalis and, of course, their findings and analysis were based
on past facts which could not be challenged. The Yahya régime,
unlike its predecessor, was not critical of any such appraisal

