2 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
more on racial or religio-cultural peculiarities! While
discussing the nature of nationalistic movements Professor
C. J. A. Hayes distinction between two types of
nationalism. One is “a veritable religion, a belligerent, expan.
sive and intolerant one”: the key-note of this type of national.
ism is “intolerance”.® Any groups which do not conform are
regarded as suspect and are treated as inferior and second.
class citizens, if not as downright traitors, As compared with
this militant and intolerant nationalism we have the examples
of what has been termed “human and idealist nationalism”,
which was given expression by John Locke, Milton, Mazzini,
Renan, J. S. Mill, Woodrow Wilson and Thomas Masaryk,
This type is based on a free individual choice with a conscious-
ness of the inherited traditions and values of community life,
The beliefs in this type of nationalism and democracy are
intermixed, !
When nationalism assumes intolerant and extreme postures,
as did the nationalism of the majority community in undivided
India, nationalistic movements take new turns, and what
Professor Miller calls nationalism” emerges
to safeguard the interests of the smaller national groups.
Miller suggests that “the most obvious case is that of
Pakistan”.® The creation of Pakistan can be explained in terms
of the conflicting and divergent aims and aspirations of two
major national groups in undivided India. “Race, language,
religion and to a certain extent the territorial situation, al]
separate the Indian Muslims from the Hindus, Their whole
history deepens the gulf between them. Their past is a past of
mutual destruction.”¢ These were the words of an eminent
scheduled caste Hindu leader of undivided India, B. R. Am-
bedkar. The nearer the prospect of self-government, the more’
bitter were the feelings between the two national groups.
In British India the quarter-century preceding the. transfer
of power in 1947 was a time of increasing friction between
the major religio-national groups. As pointed out by Alfred
Cobban, India was composed of many communities, some of
which, always distinct in their culture, were rightly becoming
politically conscious of their s¢parate national identities” 5
Similarly, Professor Hayes noted that the “nationalist impulse
throughout the huge and heterogeneous British Empire of

THE RISE OF BENGALI sUB-NATIONALISM 3
India has issued in the emergence of separate nations not only
| distinctive in languages but rather of distinctive religion:
Hindu India, Muslim Pakistan, Buddhist Burma and prim-
arily Buddhist Ceylon”.®
There are some similarities between the Muslim nationalism
of undivided India and the Bengali sub-nationalism within
united Pakistan: “The force that underlies the political agita-
tion”, The Times of London reported, from Dacca in 1966,
“Gs the same that created Pakistan itself — the desire of an
under-group to improve its position by somehow stepping out. |
from beneath those whom it believes to be exploiting or sup-
pressing it.”? An East Pakistani political leader commented in
1963: “What was the original demand of the Muslim League
in India before independence? Fair shares — in appointments,
in jobs, in political influence. It was only the blindness and self-
ishness of the Hindus that translated that into the demand for
partition and now the West wing [West Pakistan] is taking the
same attitude to :
The analogy is not, however, complete and cannot be
carried too far. First, the Hindu-Muslim differences which
gave rise to the Muslim nationalism in undivided India had six
hundred years of history behind it, and was the product of
fundamental factors characteristic of any well-defined national
movement and aspiration. Jinnah based his demand for a separ-
ate state.for the Muslims on the principle of the right of self-
determination, and no serious observer of the Indian political :
scene before independence could challenge the grounds on
which he based his two-nation theory: that the Hindus and the
Muslims constituted two separate nations by any accepted oi
definition or. criterion of nationalism. Ultimately both the
British Government and the Indian Congress led by Gandhi
and Nehru were forced to accept his pleas, hence the partition
of 1947 was the result of an agreement among the British author-
ities, the Hindus and the Muslims.
Bengali sub-nationalism or regionalism was, on the other
hand, the product of a number of unfortunate and, in asense,
accidental factors connected with the internal political develop-
ments in Pzkistan in the 1950s and 1960s, particularly
after the eclipse of the democratic process of the country
which denied the Bengalis their due share in the political
OO

4 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
~ process. It created an artificial situation in which the majority
group felt itself dominated by ati élite from West Pakistan
composed of top civil and military officials, The Bengalis were
_ .maturally resentful of this state of affairs but there was no
fundamental cleavage between the Muslims of East and West
Pakistan, as between the Hindus and Muslims in undivided
India.
Secondly, the East-West Pakistan internal political tensions
were fully utilized by the hostile neighbour of Pakistan, which
not only divided the two parts of the country geographically
but took an active role in aggravating the internal tensions of
the country in the twin expectation of weakening its principal
enemy and belying Jinnah’s two-nation theory — neither of
which seemed to have been achieved by the partition of 1971.
»The rise of Bengali sub-nationalism cannot be adequately
‘explained without a reference to India’s involvement in it.
But the most significant difference between the Muslim
national movement in undivided India and Bengali sub-
nationalism within united Pakistan is the fact that while
Jinnah and the Muslim League had spelled out the goal of the
Indian Muslims — a sovereign state of their own choice, Paki-
stan — in unmistakable terms and the Indian Muslims while
participating in the plebiscitory elections of 1946 knew fully
the national aspirations for which they stood firmly behind
eos the Bengali were never told by Mujib or his
iden that their national goal was a separate state of
_Mujib adopted a deceptive strategy to achieve his
dismembering Pakistan. He tn the Muslim ti
oe 1970 elections on the issue of regional autonomy for the
| ngalis and made repeated pledges that he would never
break up Pakistan or oppose a constitution based on Islamic
principles or ideology. It was not until the Pakistan Ar
began its brutal assault at midnight on March 2 5-26, 1 a
‘that the Bengali Muslims were ever told by Mujib ae
of his colleagues of their ultimate goal. H ‘ed 4 ee
Bengali Musi ite goal. He presented to the
7 poe zi ae and veiled scheme of secession under
i gional autonomy. Once the i
ile and his party ae a rigid and sia,
ing 3} put forward a constitutional formula which

EN ee iw ee ee Se we ——
THE RISE OF BENGALI sUB-NATIONALISM 5
amounted to the break-up of Pakistan; created an explosive
situation which amounted to a unilateral declaration of
independence and when the federal Army reacted - which ~
it did in a most stupid and cruel manner - the Awami Leaguers
proclaimed their ultimate goal: a separate state of Bangladesh,
It is a tragic history. Of all the provinces which made up
Pakistan, it was Bengal which gave the most solid support to
Jinnah in his struggle for the establishment of a separate
Muslim state in the subcontinent. Yet, within a very short
period, the Bengalis found themselves in an unfortunate
situation which made them have second thoughts about the
creation of a state in which they had joined with the Muslims
; of other parts of the subcontinent in the north, separated by a
thousand miles of foreign territory.
Although they were the majority group in Pakistan, they
suffered from a deep-rooted fear of domination by the minority
group of West Pakistan. In a democracy, the majority should
not have to ask for safeguards, such as regional autonomy,
reservation of places in the civil service and the Army, and
guarantees that the economic development of their region
would not be neglected nor their culture threatened. But for
two decades the majority Bengali group did feel obliged to
seek these guarantees; and when they were not granted,
Bengali sub-nationalism gathered momentum until ultimately
it became a national movement for the creation of a separate
state.
What were the factors that gave rise to Bengali sub-national-
ism? First was the political factor. Pakistan began its political
career under a parliamentary system modelled on Westminster
and under a federal constitution. But neither the parliamen-
tary system nor the federation was genuine. The constitutional
forms and trappings of democracy only provided a cloak for
rule by the few who were able to concentrate power in their
own hands. During eleven years (1947-58) of so-called
mentary democracy, there was not a single general election, |
and the provincial elections were described as “a farce, a
mockery and a fraud upon the electorate”.® Well-organized
political parties did not exist. With the decline of the Muslim
League, there was no national party; the remaining parties
were more narrowly based than those in the new Asian demo-

6 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
cracies, not to speak of Western countries. The failure of par.
liamentary democracy led to the development of an all-power-
ful and irresponsible executive, aided and supported by a power
ful bureaucracy. Pakistan was dominated by bureaucrats and
soldiers.1® .
The emergence of this all-powerful ruling élite had a great
impact on the separatist movement in East Bengal. The ruling
élite was composed of senior bureaucrats, none of whom was
an East Bengali. Up to 1958 they were supported indirectly
by the Army; after 1958, Army support was direct and open.
There was a cabinet and a parliament, but the political order
in Pakistan could be called “an oligarchy under a democratic
constitution”. It was a “modernizing oligarchy” in which
Bengalis had no share. Except during the short thirteen-
month interval of H. S. Suhrawardy’s cabinet in 1956-7,
the Bengalis had hardly any role in national affairs. Every vital
decision, whether it related to political or defence or economic
or diplomatic matters, was in the final analysis made by the
ruling élite, composed of West Pakistani civil and military
officers.
In provincial matters the situation for the Bengalis was no
better. Even in their own province, all the key posts in the
administration were held by West Pakistanis who had direct
access to the central ruling clique. The country had, in theory,
a federal constitution, but in practice the provincial govern-
ment was entirely subordinate to the centre, particularly
in financial and administrative matters. The Bengalis found
a new ruling group set over them in place of the former
British officials, The civil and military officials from West
Pakistan stationed in East Bengal never bothered to develop
any real bonds with the local population, who looked upon
them as aliens. There were few social contacts; the West Paki-
stani officials considered themselves socially superior to the -
Bengali Muslims, who were regarded as converts from lower-
_ ‘caste Hindus, The result was bitterness and a widening gap.
The Bengali intelligentsia, particularly at Dacca University,
became increasingly conscious of their unsatisfactory situation.
It must be pointed out, however, that at the time of indepen-
dence the Indian civil service left behind by the British raj
contained only one Bengali officer. Similarly, the Bengalis

THE RISE OF BENGALI suB-NATIONALISM 7
were very poorly represented in the Army because the
authorities had considered them a non-martial race. There
were therefore some historical reasons for the preponderance
of West Pakistani civil and military officers in East Bengal.
But after independence nothing was done to rectify the situa-
tion and, in the absence of a genuine democracy, with the
country run by an oligarchy of civil and military officials,
the Bengalis found themselves in the position of a colonial
people.
Region rather than Religion
After Ayub Khan came to power in 1958 there was complete
authoritarian rule in the country until 1962; then came a
period of Controlled or guided democracy, under which the
President and the same old ruling élite dominated the political
scene. What had been veiled before 1958 mow became :nore
obvious. The result was a further widening of the gap between
East and West Pakistan. The political order, as set up by Ayub
in his 1962 Constitution, gave hardly any scope to the Bengalis
for effective and equal participation in national affairs. They
had no share in the decision-making process. In any vital
national issue they could only react; they could never
No self-respecting group could tolerate this state of affairs,
Nationalism or patriotism cannot be expected to grow or
flourish in a vacuum, It is only through participation and
sharing responsibility that people develop national feelings.
There was hardly any scope for the Bengalis to develop com-
mon national feelings with the West Pakistanis, apart from the
religious bond of Islam, But, as in many other parts of Asia
and Africa, they became more and more conscious of region
rather than religion, The Islamic ideology, on which Jinnah
had based Pakistan, began to fade away, and regional feelings
grew fast in East Bengal. Regicnalism was the ratson d’étre
for the emergence of Bangladesh.
Henceforth, East Bengal became a hotbed for political
agitation and unrest. Hardly a year passed without Bengalis
revolting against alleged. maltreatment by the central govern-
ment; the result was shootings and killings, which gave further
impetus to the growth of Bengali nationalism. By the 1960s,

8 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
most of the urban professional Bengali groups were beginning
to consider seriously whether they could or would live together
with the western part of the country. People no longer con-
cealed their hatred of West Pakistan. But the greatest blow to
Pakistan nationalism came as a result of the Indo-Pakistan
war in September 1965. Neither India nor Pakistan could claim
victory or be considered defeated in this seventcen-day war.
In fact, Pakistan, with a much smaller army, air and naval
force, did quite well in 1965 in comparison with December
1971. But the war of 1965 disastrously weakened the national
bond between East and West Pakistan. Until then a common
fear of external aggression had, like the religious link, been an
important factor in helping the two parts of the country to live
together. There was a deep-rooted myth that if India attacked
East Pakistan, West Pakistani soldiers would move up to Delhi.
The 1965 war shattered that myth for good. Mr. Bhutto, Ayub’s
foreign minister, proudly claimed in the National Assembly
that East Pakistan had been protected by China. If that was
so, the Bengalis began to argue, why do we not settle
our own diplomatic and external relations? Why depend on
West Pakistan, which could give no protection to East Pakistan ?
Within one hour of the war beginning, East Pakistan was cut
off, not only from West Pakistan but from the rest of the world.
So the old argument that the defence of East Pakistan lay in
West Pakistan no longer held water.
It was under these circumstances that Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman formulated his famous six-point programme, Let me
also examine some economic and cultural factors in the Bengal
separatist. movement. The Bengalis’ most serious complaint
was of what they called the “economic exploitation” of East
Pakistan by the Pakistan central government. It had been
said by many impartial economists, particularly American
and British, that the economic development of East Pakistan _
was sadly neglected and that something ought to be done about
‘it. I myself, who used to believe in one Pakistan, have pointed
out in previous writings that the most serious challenge to
Pakistani nationalism was the economic disparity between
East and West Pakistan, Many moderate East Pakistani leaders,
like Nural Amin and others who also wanted to live in a united
. Pakistan, strongly urged the government to accelerate the eco-

THE RISE OF BENGALI suB-NATIONALISM 9
tr Ban alte re
m evance of the i tists. But unfor-
tunately no one listened wean to this advice.
But since political power was exercised by a narrow oligarchy
which looked at the whole situation entirely from the
colonial angle of maintaining “law and order”, it was futile
to expect any imaginative economic programme or lans.
At the time of Independence, eters were thd to
speed up economic growth. But, tragically, the rate of economic
growth in the the development plans was much slower in East
than West Pakistan. Many figures have been published to
illustrate this disparity. Some may have been exaggerated for
political purposes but even allowing for this, they convincingly
demonstrate the extent to which the East’s interests were neg-
lected. The bulk of the country’s revenue was spent in West
Pakistan because the federal capital was there. Moreover, a
high percentage of the budget was spent on defence, which was
all concentrated in West Pakistan. A much larger share of
development expenditure as well as of foreign aid and loans
went to the West. East Pakistan earned most of the country’s
foreign exchange by the export of jute; yet most of the foreign
: exchange was spent on the industrialization of West Pakistan.
Whether it was revenue or development expenditure, foreign
assistance and loans or foreign exchange, East Pakistan did
not get its fair share, though it contained the majority of the
country’s population. :
A report made by a panel of experts to the Pakistan
Government’s planning commission in 1970 provides authori-
tative documentation of the increasing economic disparity be-
tween the two regions. The most striking fact in this report was
the widening gap between the income of the average West
Pakistani and his Eastern counterpart.’
No East Pakistani, whether a regionalist or a nationalist,
could watch this situation with equanimity. The economic
disparity - or economic exploitation, as it was called by the
regionalists - provided them with powerful weapons to win
popular support. The situation could be compared to that
which prevailed in undivided India when Jinnah convinced
the Muslim intelligentsia and the masses that their rights and
interests were not safe under Congress rule in India. He cata- |

10 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
logued the list of Muslim grievances under Congress rule;
whether these allegations were all true or not, the important
thing was that the Muslims believed in Jinnah’s version of their
plight. Similarly, Sheikh Mujib and his party were highly
successful in convincing the emotional Bengalis that their
interests and rights were‘not safe with a government con-
trolled and directed from West Pakistan. This led the younger
and more militant s°ctions of the Awami League to start a
movement for secession. Sheikh Mujib himself has confessed
in a recent interview with a British journalist that he had been
_ working for the establishment of Bangladesh for some
the flag of the new nation was already there; the slogan “‘7ai
Bangla” (victory to Bangladesh) was heard long before the
tragic events of March 1971.
Now turing to cultural factors, it should-be noted that when
Jinnah déclared that by ey definition and standard the
Muslims of India constituted a nation separate from the
Hindus,** his two-nation theory was probably more applicable
to Northern India than to Bengal. The Bengali Muslims and
Hindus had many differences; the Muslims of undivided Bengal
had many grievances against the upper-class Bengal Hindus,
or Bhadralok of Bengal, as they were called. The Bengali
Muslims’ support of Jinnah’s demand for the establishment of
Pakistan was based on a negative attitude. The Bengalis are
noted for a negative and destructive attitude rather than for
hard work and constructive programmes; they also have a
tremendous. tendency to put the blame on others. In pre-
. Independence days, they blamed the British and then the
Hindus, with whom they could not compete in any sphere of
life. Jinnah’s demand for a separate state appealed to the
Bengali Muslims, not so much because of the two-nation
theory, but because they looked upon it as a protective wall
against the wealthy apd privileged Hindus,
Language an Emotive Issue |
But when, with the establishment of Pakistan, they. found
that the privileged position of the British and the upper-class
Hindus had gone to the West Pakistanis, they started stressing
their cultural and linguistic. affinities with the Bengalis

THE RISE OF BENGALI suB-NATIONALISM II
of West Bengal. The Pakistan authorities regarded this as a
serious menace to the existence of Pakistan and tried to impose
a cultural uniformity based on Islam, The Bengalis reacted
sharply. They felt (just as the Muslims of undivided India had
felt) that their cherished culture and way of life were tareat-
ened. The first tussle was over the language question.
In 1948 the Bengalis reacted violently to Jinnah’s proposal
that Urdu should be the only national language, On February
21, 1952, three students of Dacca University were killed in a
riot over this issue — since which time February 21 has been
ne as ‘ day of mourning for the cherished language of the
The Pakistan Government failed to appreciate the fact
that nations are made up of human beings whose deep feelings
about such questions as their language cannot safely be ig-
nored. A federal union can be strengthened by giving cultural
freedom and autonomy, but Pakistan’s attempt to impose
uniformity where diversity was desirable had unfortunate
consequences. Every attempt made by the Pakistan Govern-
ment to foster a cultural uniformity based on Islamic culture
in East Pakistan produced a sharp reaction; the Bengalis began
to look more and more to West Bengal for cultural affinity and
bonds. The Indians, who also had not been happy about
Jinnah’s two-nation theory, gave encouragement and sympathy
to the growing separatist movement in East Bengal, The
Bengali Muslim intelligentsia were more at home with the .
Bengali Hindus in West Bengal than with their fellow-country-
men from West Pakistan, Culturally, and perhaps psychologi-
cally, the country was divided long before the crisis of 1971.
When the six-point programme was formulated early in
1966, Mujib might have been willing to make some adjust-
ments and amendments, but Ayub preferred to meet the chal-
lenge with the.“‘language of weapo-1s” rather than by political
negotiations. ,
After Ayab’s fall, General Yahya made a number of gestures
to try to win the confidence of the Bengalis. He allowed
free and fair elections on the basis of “one man, one vote”,
_ and Mujib won an absolute majority. Yahya’ also acknow-
ledged that the Bengalis had no share in the decision-making
processes and that this state of affairs must be ended. But

