12 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
be made
these measures came too late. Another analogy can
with the period of British rule. In the 1940s, the en
tried to make a number of concessions to Jinnah the
Muslims. But by that time the Muslims had already decided
to have a separate state. Similarly, the scheme for a ng
of power as formulated by Yahya in 196g was too late;
the Bengal intelligentsia and urban élites had already decided
to have a state of their own. Just as Jinnah used the election
of 1946 to establish his credentials as the sole spokesman and
leader of Muslim India, so Mujib used Yahya’s election on
the basis of “one man, one vote” to establish his credentials
as the spokesman of the Bengali nation.
| REFERENCES
C.J. A. Hayes, Nationalism: a Religion, New York, 1960, p. 157-
2. Ibid. p.93. |
3. The Politics of the Third World,
4. B. R. Ambedkar, Thoughis on Pakistan, London, 1941, p. 30.
5. Alfred Cobban, Vational Self-determination, London, 1945, P» 127.
6. Nationalism: a Religion, p. 157.
7. The Times, London, July 1, 1966.
8. Ibid., June 24, 1963.
9. Report of the Electoral Reforms Commission, Government of Pakistan,
Karachi, 1956. 3
10, G. A. Almond and J. S, Coleman, The Politics of the Developing Areas,
, Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, p. 572.
11, Almond and Coleman, op. cit.
12. See the author’s Constitutional Development in Pakistan, 2nd edition,
Longman, 1970, p. 247.
1g. See the Report of the Experts on the Fourth Five-Year Plan, Govern-
ment of Pakistan, Islamabad, 1970.
14- Sheikh Mujib’s television interview with David Frost, London Weekend
Television, January 16, 1972.
15. See M. A. Jinnah’s foreword in M. R. T., Pakistan and Muslim India,
Bombay, 1942. ~ :

2
THE FALL OF AYUB:
A PERSONAL ACCOUNT
No Muslim since the fall of the Moghul Empire ruled over a
wider area in the Indian subcontinent for a longer period or
more effectively than Field-Marshal Mohammed Ayub Khan
did in undivided Pakistan from October 27, 1958, to March
25, 1969. Pakistan under Ayub used to be cited as a “model”
for developing countries. His political innovation, Basic Demo-
cracy, was acclaimed by many, including the historian Arnold
'. Toynbee, as a plausible alternative between the Western
democratic and the communist systems. Toynbee wrote:
It [Basic Democracy] does suggest a possible way in which
politically and economically backward countries can arrive
at self-government on our Western lines. So I should say
that the Pakistan experiment in so-called basic democracy
deserves our sympathy and support and certainly deserves
“out |
The extensive rural development works under Ayub’s
Basic Democracy, especially in East Pakistan (Bangladesh),
was described as “an example of Jeffersonian democracy in
action” by the leaders of the Harvard Advisory Group in
Dacca (1968).* While Ayub’s economic development pro-
gramme for Pakistan was appreciated like this - “There
is hardly a developing country which would not profit from
. looking over Pakistan’s shoulder - his foreign
policy and diplomatic moves earned him the title of “Asian
{or Muslim] de Gaulle’.: Ayub was credited with putting
an end to Pakistan’s subservient foreign policy towards the
United States and enunciating an independent policy which
extracted such comments as the following: “The spirit of revo-
lution of October 1958 had engendered a new approach
3

14 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
to Pakistan problems in both economic and foreign affairs.
That Karachi was no longer a helpless and a rather hopeless
hostage of the West was shown both by the handling of Peking
and by its protests in Washington on the action of the U-2
incident.” It went on to note the “original approach on the
part of President Ayub which characterized the new Pakistan A
Commenting on Pakistan’s new trends in foreign policy under
President Ayub, a “Muslim de Gaulle”, The Economist wrote
that the President wanted essentially what his brother-soldier
sought for France: an opportunity for national self-assertion
and independence (meaning independence of the United States).
Referring to the creation of a “Regional Co-operation for
Development” Plan (R.C.D.), a new scheme for economic
co-operation between Pakistan, Iran and Turkey, The Economist
commented: “C.E.N.T.O., like N.A.T.O., is not dead but
President Ayub has served notice, much like President de
Gaulle, that from now on the decisions that matter to Pakistan
will as far as possible (which is an important proviso) be made
in Rawalpindi and not in Washington.”®
Yet Ayub Khan was removed from the Presidency in March
1969 as a result of agitation which began over a trifling incident
in Rawalpindi, a scuffle between the students and the police
over some allegedly smuggled goods. In November 1969
it appeared like an anomic movement — a sudden sporadic
outburst of political activity engendered by the insecurity and
frustrations usually characteristic of societies undergoing rapid
change.® Political movement against Ayub was not organized
by the politicians, who were caught unprepared; they took
advantage of it only afier it had begun. |
There have been many interpretations of Ayub’s fall. Z. A.
Bhutto, now Premier of truncated Pakistan, has been given
the credit for having played a “revolutionary role” in it after
serving Ayub faithfully for about eight years as one of his .
“nominated” ministers. There were socio-economic interpreta-
tions: Ayub’s economic policy had resulted in phenomenal
growth, but it sadly neglected the distributive aspect of econo-
mic growth; the wealth was concentrated in the “twenty-
two families”. Mahbub-Ul Haq, the Chief Economist of the
Planning Commission headed by Ayub himself, disclosed the
. fact that the wealth of the country was dominated by indust-

‘ THE FALL or ayus 15
ries and directors belonging to the ‘twenty-two familics”,”
i i aad amuy Was, significantly, one of the lucky twenty-
two. Industrial production had increased by 160 per cent
during the Ayub régime, particularly b
aii & y between 1960 and 1968;
ents by way of tax concessions, import facilities
and export bonus were granted to the industrialists to achieve
the accelerated rate of growth, but Ayub’s economic policy
failed miserably in ensuring an equitable and effective
' distribution of the fruits of development.
meme political agitation in the winter of 1968-9, the
int se Kd mmussion issued a document in which it acknow-
ged that the economic policy put too much stress on a high
_ Tate of growth and neglected the social and regional distri-
bution of the benefits of economic development. At that stage,
the Commission stressed the need to “make a beginning of the
evolution of a synthesis” of economic and social objectives, but
it was too late.
More important, Ayub’s economic policy and development
projects had widened the gap between East and West Pakistan.
Ayub initiated the debate on economic disparity between East
and West Pakistan; his Constitution laid down that economic
disparity must be removed, yet after ten years of his rule, the
disparity had increased. In 1959-60 the fer capita income in
West Pakistan was 32 per cent higher than in the East. Over
_ the next ten years the annual rate of growth of income in West
Pakistan was 6-2 per cent, while ‘it was only 4-2 per cent in °
East Pakistan. As a result, by 1969-70, the per capita income in
the West was 61 per cent higher than in the East. Thus in ten
years of Ayub’s rule, the income gap had doubled in percent-
* age terms; it had widened even more in absolute terms.®
' It has, however, to be added that the political movement
against Ayub began in West Pakistan, in his capital city and not
in East Pakistan. The fact that the movement began in West
and not in East Pakistan, where Ayub’s political order and
economic policy were totally unacceptable, had great signi-
ficance, and provides the clues to the inside story of the move-_ -
ment. The socio-economic factors and, more important, the
regional tensions between East and West Pakistan were, no
| doubt, sapping the Ayub régime and indeed the viability of a
united Pakistan. |

16 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
However, the immediate causes of Ayub’s removal ay else.
where: in intrigues at the army headquarters at Rawalpindi
The. process began in 1966, after the Indo-Pakistani war of
1965 and the subsequent Tashkent Agreement, gained momen.
tum during Ayub’s serious illness in early 1968 and finally
culminated in the political agitation which began in Rawalpingj:
in the winter of 1968-9. Bhutto’s so-called “revolutionary role”
had its roots in his links with the GHQ at Rawalpindj.s
Political changes in Pakistan were always the product of in.
ternal intrigues and power struggles among the factions of the
ruling élite composed of the top civil and military officers,
sometimes aided and abetted by some political leaders who had
the fortune of enjoying good relations w:th the ruling élite,
The dismissal of Khawaja Nazimuddin’s cabinet in 1953; of
the Mohammed Ali (Bogra) cabinet and the dissolution of the
Constituent Assembly in 1954; and of Suhrawardy’s cabinet
in 1957 as well as the Ayub-Mirza coup in 1958, were all .
products of “palace intrigues”.
_ Political changes in Pakistan could not take place through
the process of ballot because there was no general election in
the country except the 1970 election held on the eve of the Civil
War over Bangladesh. Ayub’s exit, like his coming to power,
was basically the product of secret plans and intrigues. It had
the appearance of a mass upheaval, and no doubt the mass
movement had facilitated the plans and schemes at GHQ,
and similarly the “mass movement”, particularly that organ-
ized by Z. A. Bhutto in West Pakistan, had the secret blessing
of GHQ. While there have been many accounts of the fall of
Ayub dealing with political socio-economic factors,*® the “in-
side story” has not yet been revealed fully.
I had ample opportunity to watch the drama and to inform
myself regarding the plot against Ayub by some of his military
colleagues. I had been seconded from the University of Dacca
to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in early 1967 to take up a
‘ special assignment in the research division of the Ministry.
This was done on Ayub’s own initiative and directive. From the
time of my arrival in Islamabad I had regular and frequent
contacts with the President. He was agreeable to me personally
and extremely helpful over my work at the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. I had direct access to him and he was never tired of

THE FALL OF AYUB | 17
seeing me, As the “S ; ” P
ix aun Ss ee boss treated me kindly, I had no
ha: Bibs. 4 § attention among the members of
e Tuling élite, including s0
veal catin: me members of Ayub’s inner or
eal cabinet. After Ayub’s fall I
summoned by the new military ré ron Oe Sn ie
= chanel ty régime to become a member of
nan planning cell, which was th tuts
be associated with the new mili ee first civiban body
the Pakistan cabinet in October m4 ste et a.
‘ter — my real role being political asin mmunications
“Folore 3 ( mmunication and to assist
ahya in formulating his scheme for transferring
power to the elected representatives of th 1
contacts with Ayub Khan and his inner cabi € people. These
spite sid echecunent inet as well as with
Vales: caldnct eushind use svat a member of the
the fall of Ayub. I also ie old catia a Ay ib
even after his retirement —-
Ayuly and appeoved by a greatly appreciated by
Ayub came to power in 1958 as the chief of the armed :
he had no difficulty in dislodging President Mine
within three weeks because he and not Mirza had the backing
of the armed forces. Then from October 27, 1958, to June 8
1962, he ruled the country under a military system, thou h
; : ’ §
with the full co-operation of the bureaucracy. In 1962 Ayub
introduced a quasi-constitutional and civil régime. A Constitu-
_ tion was “granted” ; it was not made by the people’s representa-
tives. There were institutions like “National Assembly’, -
“Cabinet”, “Governor’s Conference’, ‘‘National Economic
Council”, etc. Political parties were also revived, though with
restrictions. The press could criticize the Government; even
Ayub and his family were not immune from press criticism.
Yet Ayub’s political order was no more than a depoliticized
quasi-constitutional system in which the real decision-making
body was composed of the top bureaucrats and army generals.
Some members of the cabinet (such as Manzoor Quader in the
early years and Bhutto in 1962-5) or some other individual
members might have some share, but usually the cabinet.
would discuss such peripheral issues as a civil aviation pact
between one country and another, the prospects of jute or
cotton, or the food situation. But the vital decisions — whether
related to defence, foreign affairs or economic policy — were

18 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
ded in the Presidential House with the help of an inner
ae A most significant feature of the system was the total
exclusion of Bengalis from the decision-making process.
The main cbjective of Ayub’s political order was to create
a rural élite - “the Basic Democrats” — and by-pass the urban
élite composed of lawyers, journalists, doctors, teachers and
other professional groups. Ayub tried to build up his base of
support in the rural areas by his scheme of Basic Democracy
and the rural development works done through the Basic
Democrats. But he was not successful in acquiring a solid base
in rural areas; as a substitute for the urban élite, it was not
strong or effective. Thus like any other military leader, Ayub
rested in the final analysis on the support and loyalty of the
armed forces. He enjoyed their confidence and loyalty for a
long time. He was the first Pakistani commander-in-chief
of the armed forces — a position which came to him in 1950
on the retirement of the British commander-in-chief. From that
time Ayub was the real and unchallenged boss of the Pakistani
army. He had organizational skill and ability on the one hand
and charming personal qualities on the other which enabled
him to retain the confidence of his senior colleagues and the
loyalty of the rank and file of the armed forces. This happy state
of affairs for Ayub continued even after he became an “elected”
or “civilian” President and “leader of a political party’’, the
Muslim League (the Convention group). Ayub, however,
began to rely more and more on his top civil servants like
Qudrutulla Shahab, N, A. Faruque, Fida Hasan and, in the
later part of his era, on Altaf Gauhar more than anybody else.
This reliance on top civil officials was resented by the army
generals but yet Ayub kept the generals in good humour by
patronage, such as promotion to ambassadorships, allotment of
large landed properties, increased salaries and chairmanships
of many autonomous bodies with wide powers and resources.
_ Ayub also took an active part in the selection and promotion of
the army officers and he tried to attend regularly the ceremonial
functions of the various units of the armed forces. These good
relations between the Presidency and GHQ existed up to
1966, particularly with his closest confident General Musa,
commander-in-chief till that year.

THE FALL oF 19
‘yub at the Renith’
Ayub seemed to reach th
his electoral Victory over Mace a Sune Rnd efter
tial election of 1965. Miss Tin atema Jinnah in the presiden-
Moh . Miss Jinnah, the sister of Quaid-i-Azam ,
ammed Ali Jinnah, the F
edb ; » “he Founder of Pakistan, was suppor-
victory was mainly q parties (COP), Though Ayub’s
~ iy Gue to the indirect method of election, his
success in a lively and much- ublicized electi
over a candidate who was a “nc, tae ke Reon
by all the opposition > @ popular heroine and supported
particularly abroad parties gave a great boost to his prestige,
‘indined we ss ee ae nae
ballots ase rt to violence after seeing the futility of
pontine ne ye seemed to have developed
to’ . .
he tiiplied fa Pi iy ape domestic affairs, while
mself eign affairs — to play his
role as the Asian de Gaulle. He planned a grand triangular
vant to Peking, Moscow and Washington soon after the
electior in the spring of 1965. He visited Peking and Moscow
with good results and wide publicity at home. His trip to
Washington was cancelled rather discourteously by President
Johnson at the eleventh hour. But it only increased Ayub’s
prestige as he was regarded as following an “independent foreign
policy”, which wrath of Washington. So Ayub’s
adventures in external relations so soon after his electoral .
victory had enhanced his prestige and image.
. Ayub’s dialogue with Chairman Mao, Premier Chou-En
Lai and other top leaders in Peking and his similar dialogue
with the Kremlin leaders in Moscow’ satisfied the Pakistanis’
sense of national pride, as the country was considered to have
achieved at last the goal of diplomatic parity with India -.a
cherished desire of the Pakistanis. Then Pakistan under
Ayub took a leading part in organizing the Second Afro-Asian
Conference; although it proved abortive, Ayub’s role was
appreciated. It must be made clear, however, that the majority
of the Bengalis had no such thrill over Ayub’s successes in
external relations. As already pointed out, the Bengalis had
begun to think seriously in terms of emerging Bengali national-
ism rather than of sharing the “incoherent” Pakistani national-
B

20 THE LA8T DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
ism (so described by the Bengali intelligentsia). But for Ayub
the diplomatic successes were significant for his image in West
Pakistan, the base of his military strength.
But adventures in international politics cam sometimes
cost a dictator dear when he lacks popular support and a
firm base. Ayub’s over-confidence in his success in foreign
affairs entangled him into the biggest mistake of his career —
the war between India and Pakistan in 1965.
- The Indo-Pakistan War of 1965 and its Effect on Ayub’s Fall
Calculations and temptations for intervening in the widespread:
- political unrest and agitation in the Indian part of Kashmir,
which began over the theft of the holy relic in 1964*, were great
for Ayub.and his advisers. India under “Little Shastri” was
considered to be weak following the death of Nehru. The mini
Indo-Pakistani battle over the marshy lands in the Rann of
’ Kutch in the spring of 1965 gave the Pakistani armed forces
. a false sense of superiority, and memories of India’s military
defeats by the Chinese in 1962 were still fresh. Under these
“favourable circumstances”, a group of the ruling élite —
Bhutto being the most enthusiastic among them — felt that a’
policy of confrontation with India over Kashmir might
- be fruitful.
The usual procedure for such a crucial decision was as foi+
lows. The Pakistani army chiefs used to make a careful analysis
of the pros and cons of the proposed course of action, one
group presenting the case, while another group acted as
opponents of the proposed action. The opposing group might
not actually disagree, but for the purposes of clarification and
examination, this type of debate used to be arranged.
In 1965, when the Pakistani ruling élite decided the course
of action on Kashmir, this well-established practice was not .
_allowed.1° When I questioned him on his crucial decision,
Ayub on more than one occasion during ‘1967-9 answered
me: “Please do not rub in my weakest and fatal point.” He
admitted that he was greatly misted by his Foreign Minister
* Bhutto and Foreign Secretary Aziz Ahmed. The Foreign
* For details see G. W. Choudhury, Pakistan's Relations with India, Lon-
don, 1968, pp. 283-7. ‘ |

rin THE FALL oF ayys
inistry was severely criticized for ; , .
and both Bhutt ‘ or its grand miscalculations,
utto and Aziz Ahmed were removed'soon after the
India reacted violently by attacking Pakistan on the inter-
national frontier on the morni
“ie rning of September 6, 1965. Thus
gan the full-scale war between India and Pakistan. The
war ended in a draw: neither «i fie
: ; er side could claim victory, nor
could it be considered defeated. Pakistan, with a much
smaller army, put up a brave sh ee .
a Ow particularly when com-
pared with the military débacles of :
; C €8 Of 1971. Yet the Indo-Paki-
— War of 1965 had a disastrous effect both on Ayub’s author-
ity and image with the armed forces and on relations between
East and West Pakistan, as I have already discussed i
; glider y in analys-
ing the growth of Bengali nationalism (see Chapter 1, above),
As to its impact on Ayub’s authority, many army officers, in-
cluding some generals, felt that Ayub should have continued -
the war with Chinese help; Indonesia under Sukarno was also
willing to help Pakistan. The younger groups of army officers
felt that Ayub accepted the cease-fire and the subsequent
Tashkent agreement under external pressures and to the detri-
ment of his internal political order. It was argued that he could
not afford a people’s war with Chinese help with his narrow
political base and the vested interests of his ruling élite, in-
cluding his own interests. I have described elsewhere Ayub’s
secret trip to Peking during the 1965 war and the Chinese offer
of help." Suffice it to say here that the Chinese offers were not .
“empty” nor were they “paper tigers”. But Ayub had also
genuine and serious limitations in prolonging the war. So the
cease-fire and the Tashkent Agreement ended the war after
seventeen days. Ayub’s image was tarnished by his alleged
surrender of the “national interests” at the Tashkent Con-
ference —- a theme on which Bhutto based his major attack
against Ayub duting the political upheaval of 1969.
Ayub lost the confidence of his real constituency of power |
(the armed forces) and with General Musa’s retirement in
1966 as the Commander-in-chief of the armed forces, his
position was further weakened. After careful thought and
‘considering many factors other than military efficiency or
qualities, Ayub selected General Yahya Khan as commander-
in-chief, and in so doing by-passed a few generals senior to

