|
112 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
orders has, I know, been misconstrued in certain
as weakness. These people did not understand that free
attitude was deliberate and was, in fact, inherent in the
situation obtaining in the country. The task of my govern.
ment has been a difficult and delicate one. On the one hand,
we had to keep the forces of disorder in check, and on the
other we had to ensure that the development of political
activity was not discouraged in any way.’
Those who cast reflections and doubts on the sincerity of
Yahya’s desire to have free elections and a smooth transfer
of power: should read his repeated pleas to political leaders
for tolerance, Democracy, he pointed out, presupposes toler.
ance; “let us show we are fit for democracy”. In his private
talks with political leaders, particularly those who had broad
political support like Mujib and Bhutto, he urged and
begged them for mutual tolerance and understanding and to
observe the fundamental “rules of the game” in a democratic
process. Unfortunately, those counsels of restraint and modera-
tion fell on deaf ears. I have already described the political
scene, both in East and West Pakistan, when election
campaigning started in 1970,® Let me now discuss the political
programme, policies and issues as presented to the electorate
by the various parties. It was, incidentally, an election in which
there was no ruling party contesting the election. True to its
nature as a “caretaker government”, no member of the Yahya
cabinet was permitted to seek election - it was specifically
provided in the L.F.O, that “a person shall be disqualified from
being elected as, and from being a member if he has been a
member of the President’s Council of Ministers at any time
following 1 August 1969, unless a period of two years or such
lesser period as the President may allow in any particular case
has elapsed since he ceased to be a minister” (Article gd).®
This was done to ensure that no misuse of political power
could be made by any member of the cabinet and. also to
demonstrate the impartiality of the Yahya régime towards
the election process. Elections in underdeveloped countries
can be, and often have been, rigged. Pakistan’s past record,
as pointed out earlier, was most discouraging, To what
extent did political leaders respond to Yahya’s elaborate and
well-meaning steps towards democracy?

| TES FIRST AND 113
Parties and their Programmes
Twenty-four parties Participated in the 1 i
; 970 elections, The
ape Commission Gave symbols to each of these parties,
Most of the electorate in an Asian country like Pakistan or
India cannot even read the name of a political party to which
a candidate belongs and for whom he may wish to vote. So
symbols such as a boat for candidates belonging to the Awami
League or a sword for Bhutto’s party, the Pakistan People’s
Party, were given. Many of these twenty-four parties were of
very small significance, A total of 800 candidates, belonging to
various parties and including independents, contested 198
seats in the National Assembly from the four provincesin
Pakistan, while 781 candidates contested 162 seats: from
East Pakistan. The break-down of candidates for the National
Assembly from East and West Pakistan according to party
_ affiliation is given in Tables 5.1a and 5.1b.
Table 5.1a
CANDIDATES FOR THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ACCORDING
TO PARTY AFFILIATION: EAST PAKISTAN .
Name of Party No. of candidates
1. All Pakistan Awami League 162
2, All Pakistan Central Jamiat-Ulama-e-Islam and ;
49 ;
g. Islami Ganatantri Dal 5
4. Jamaat-e-Islami, Pakistan ee
5- Jamiat-Ulama-e-Islam, West Pakistan 15
6. Jatiya Gana Mukti Dal 5
7. Krishak Sramik Party a
8. National Awami Party (Bhashani Group) ‘ "yeh
9. Pakistan Daradi Sangha :
10. Pakistan Democratic Party : se
11. Pakistan Muslim League (Convention)
© RRR MS Te ro
12, istan Mus gue °
tt Pakistan National Awami Party (Wali Khan Group) 39 .
15. Pakistan National Congress
16. Pakistan National League 114
17. Independents ! prc
: TOTAL 781

II4 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
‘ Table 5.1b
CANDIDATES FOR THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ACCORDING
TO PARTY AFFILIATION: WEST PAKISTAN
Name of Party Punjab Sind N.W.F.P. Baluchistan
1. All Pakistan Awami League 3 2 2 ‘
2. All Pakistan Central Jamiat-
Ulama-e-Islam and Nizam-
e-Islam 4 =a 2 =
3- Baluchistan United Front I I =
4- Jamaat-e-Islami, Pakistan 44 19 15 2
5. Jamiat-Ulama-c-Islam, :
West . 47 21 19 4
6. Jatiya Gana Mukti Dal — I — —
9. Khaksar Tebrik 2 ma =
8. Markazi Jamiat-e-Ahle
Hadess, Pakistan — =
9. Markazi Jamiat-c-Ulama,
Pakistan 36 8 I _
10. National Awami Party
(Bhashani Group) 2 2 — r
11, Pakistan Democratic Party 21 3 2 I
1% Pakistan Masihi League | ‘ 1 1
13. Pakistan Muslim League
(Convention) 24 6 1 =
14. Pakistan Muslim League
(Council) goog 5 2
15. Pakistan Muslim League
(Qayyum Group) 33 12 17 4+
16, Pakistan National Awami
Party (Wali Khan Group) — 6 16 3
17. Pakistan People’s Party 77 25 16 . I
18, Sind-Karachi Muhajir | :
Punjabi Pathan Muttahida
Mahaz I 4 — —
19. Sind United Front _ 1 — _
20. Independents , 115 45 45 6
TOTAL 463 . 170 142 25
_As already mentioned, some of the parties were of no
significance. Some had a long history behind them, such as the
Muslim League, which was, however, divided into three fac-
tions. The two rightist parties, Jamaat-e-Islami and Jamat
Ulama-e-Islam, also dated back to pre-independence days.

THE FIRST AND LAST GENERAL ELECTION 115
Among the parties created after 1947, the Awami League wes |
the oldest and the most powerful political force in East Pakistan.
The most recent, but an emerging powerful force, was Bhutto’s
Pakistan’s People’s Party (P.P.P.). The Communist Party in
Pakistan was banned from the mid-1950s when Pakistan be-
came “the most allied cally” of the U.S.A, But pseudo-leftist
parties affiliating with communist ideology were not lacking.
The National Awami Party which was formed as a result of a
split with its parent body, the Awami League, over differences
on foreign policy in 1956-7, was divided into two groups
popularly (though not officially) known as “pro-Peking” and
“pro-Moscow”’. The section of the Indian National Congress
which was included in Pakistan in 1947 redesignated itself as
the Pakistan National Congress; however, it had had very
little strength since the beginning of the 1960s.
In Table 5.2, I have attempted to categorize the political
forces in Pakistan over a left-right spectrum:
Table 5.2
POLITICAL FORCES in PAKISTAN
Left Centre Right -
(1) National Awami (1) Awami League (t) All Pakistan
(both (2) Pakistan People’s Central Jamiat-
Bhashani and Wali Party Ulama-e-Islam
groups) (3) Pakistan Demo- and Nizam-e-Islam
(2) Jatiya Gana Mukti cratic Party (2) Jamiat-e-Islami
Dal (National (4) Pakistan Muslim (3) Jamiat-Ulama-e-
Peoples’ Liberation League (all three Islam
Party) groups) (4) Markazi Jamiat-
(3) Sind United Party - (5) Krishak Sramik e-Ahle
(confined to Sind Party (Peasants (5) Markazi-Jamiat-
Province only) and Workers) e-Ulama
(6) Pakistan National
League
(7) Pakistan National
Congress
The most disquieting feature of the political forces
working in Pakistan in 1970 was the lack of any national
leader or national party. Some parties, like the Muslim Leacue
ue ‘

116 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
(three factions), Jamiat-e-Islami and t.c Pakistan Democrati,
Party, doubtless had an all-Pakistan organization and set
up candidates in both East and West Pakistan. But it soon
became evident that none of these parties had any real popy.
lar support in East Pak‘stan, and they were also rapidly losing
their hold in West Pakistan to Bhutto’s party. The two princi.
pal political parties ultimately emerged as successfy]
in the election: were regional and not national. The Awamj
League had acquired an absolute hold in East Pakistan but
had no support in the West, while the emerging West Pakistani
leader, Bhutto, did not dare to set up even a single candidate
in East P..Listan. Regional polarization became
evident as the election campaign developed. This was most
disheartening for those like myself who had been working hard
for the unity of Pakistan.
Without going into the details of the programmes of all the
parties, most of which were routed, let me examine the political
programmes of Mujib and Bhutto, the two principal actors in
the final drama of united Pakistan.
Mujib’s political manifesto was based on his six-point plan
which will be fully analysed in the next chapter. Apart from
this, the manifesto of the Awami League included the following:
Islam is the deeply cherished faith of the overwhelming
miajority of the hse The Awami League affirms that a
ciear guarantee shall be embodied in the Constitution to
the effect that no law repugnant to the injunctions of Islam
as laid down in the Holy Koran and Sunnah shall be enacted
or enforced in Pakistan.’
Mujib thus appealed to the sentiment of the rural Muslims
of East Pakistan by pledging an Islamic Constitution;
yet after the break-up of Pakistan, he imposed a “‘secular’’
_ Constitution on the Muslims of Bangladesh!
Similarly, while his six-point plan was nothing but a veiled
scheme of secession, Mujib declared in one of his early election
speeches: “Pakistan has «ome to stay and there is no force
which can destroy In fact, though Mujib claimed on
many occasions that the election would be a referendum on his
a six-point plan, he gave repeated assurances that his policy or

THE FIRST AND LAST GENERAL ELECTION 117
programme would protect “the viability of the Federal Govern-
ment of Pakistan”14 Again after the creation of Bangladesh
Mujib said that he had been working for a separate state for
Bangladesh siace 1968: struggle for independence began
in 1948 and through movements in 1952, 1954, 1902, 1969 and
These provide some of the glaring instances of the
gap between Mujib’s professions and pledges before the election
and his real role in the break-up of Pakistan,
Mujib’s manifesto had also promised that a “socialist econo-
mic order” would also prevent the transfer of resources, or the
flight of capital, from East to West Pakistan. It pledged “2n
independent non-aligned foreign policy”.
Mujib’s election campaign and strategy were simple:
their sole purpose was to carry the gospel of Bengali national-
ism and the ideal of Bangladesh everywhere in Pakistan.
Thanks to the naiveté and incompetence of Governor Ahsan,
Mujib and his followers had a free hand and were able to
preach secession without the least hindrance. Bhashani told
me that if the Government were leaving Mujib free to preach
the idea of Bangladesh, he had no option but to speak in terms
of an “independent East Pakistan”. However, his speeches
in favour of an “independent East Pakistan” were misunder-
stood by the Government as well as by sections of the public
in West Pakistan. He did not favour the break-up of Pakistan,
as he could foresee that Bangladesh would be nothing more
_ than a client state of New Delhi, like Bhutan or Sikkim; his:
call for an “independent East Pakistan” was one of anguish
and warning to the Government. But again Ahsan prevented
any understanding with Bhashani. He was unhappy over my
meetings with the “Red Maulana” and reported them to
Yahya as being detrimental to the cause of an under-
standing or deal with Mujib. Ahsan may have been sincere in
his conviction that it was necessary to have a deal with Mujib,
but he lacked the political acumen needed to understand the
political forces inside the Awami League working against
a united Pakistan. I repeatedly suggested to Yahya that he |
should hold a straight dialogue with Mujib and find out if he
was prepared to modify the six-point plan. If Mujib refused,
I recommended that Yahya should arrange a referendum in
East Pakistan to ascertain if the Bengali Muslims wanted to

"18 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
live in a United Pakistan or to separate. I reminded Yahya of
de Gaulle’s bold steps in the Algerian crisis. But Yahya was not
of de Gaulle’s calibre, Moreover, he was misled both by Mujib
and by his own Governor, Ahsan.
Mujib’s task was simple and easy compared with that of
other pol!'ical leaders. His only theme was the exploitation of
Bengal by the West Pakistanis; his ideal was that of a “Sonar
[golden] Bengal”. This was a most successful appeal to a poverty
stricken people of 75 million. Just as the Muslims of undivided
India were convinced that a separate state of their own
would give them a land of opportunities, so the Bengalis in
rural areas, to whom Mujib had tremendous appeal, listened
to his ideal of a golden Bengal. The only requirement was to
give him and his party votes in the elections. Jinnah’s strategy
in the 1946 elections scems to have been the same and he too
had no difficulty in getting votes. Similarly Mujib had no
threat either from rightist or leftist elements.
Bhashani subsequently decided to wit!.draw from the election
because of Ahsan’s }) icy of persecuting his party and finally
as a protest at the elections being held after the cyclone in
November 1970. The pro-Moscow faction of N.A.P. had no
popular leader; its leader in East Pakistan, a self-styled
Muzaffar Ahmad, me real hold on the -
people. The leftist forces in East Pakistan were also divided
and had no well-organized or reliable power base. They were
weakened by the manoeuvring of various Bhashani’s
group was weakened by the defection of a splinter party Ied by
Mohamed Toaha, who was opposed to parliamentary tactics;
he believed in a lcng-term politicizing process among the masses
in rural areas, The other pro-Peking factions remained with
Bhasani, who had a strong peasant following; but after the re-
signation of Toha, the N.A.P. (Bhashani group) was increasingly
divided; the faction led by Abdul Matin advocated the same
_ revolutionary tactics as those used by India’s Naxalite groups,
particularly in West Bengal. |
Apart from their internal divisions, the provincial Govern-
ment headed by Governor Ahsan did everything possible
to crush the leftist forces in East Pakistan. Why Ahsan adopted
this policy is difficult to ascertain, but it might be due to his
former long association with SEATO. One big problem with

THE FIRST AND LAST GENERAL 119
the members of the military junta was their lack of under-
standing of international issues. In the heyday of SEATO
it might have been the policy of the Pakistani Government ‘9
be vigilant with pro-Chinese elements, but when China becaine
Pakistan’s real ard most valuable friend, Ahsan’s policy was °
either simply naive or inspired by some foreign influence.
Whatever the true interpretation of Ahsan’s intentions, his
policy toward t!e¢ “Red Maulana” seemed suicidal for Paki-
stan’s national interest, and it gave Mujib a wonderful oppor-
turity to preach his gospel of secession. The rightist or moderate
groups were no threat to Mujib; the only person who could
expose his scheme of veiled secession was Bhashani, and Ahsan
torpedoed all chances of an understanding with hi.
That the Pakistan Army was ruthless against a friendly force
was demonstrated by their killing of so many pro-Peking
party leaders during the civil war. When Bhutto went to Pek-
ing in November 1971 to enlist China’s support against the
imminent military intervention by India in East Pakistan,
the Peking authorities presented Bhutto with a list of sixty
pro-Peking leaders who had been killed by the Pakistan Army.
This action by the Army was a legacy of the policy of Ahsan
who is his reports characterized the pro-Chinese leaders as
“‘anti-state elements” while ignoring the real anti-state groups.
Bhutto was right when he complained:
The provincial administration [in East Pakistan] gave
complete support to the Awami League, and during the
elections the Awami League workers: were allowed a free
hand and took full advantage of it. . . . There are many
reasons but the main reason was to be found in the prejudice
against the left... . Mujibur Rahman boasted that he would
liquidate the leftists in East Pakistan. . . . Throughout this |
period the military governor of East. Pakistan [Ahsan]
sympathized with the aspirations of Mujibur Rahman.’
The pro-Moscow group faced a dilemma as to where to
place their allegiance and which party offered them the
greatest hope of increasing their influence. The Soviet propa-
ganda media supported. Wali Khan’s N.A.P., ignoring the
existence of Bhiushani’s N.A.P. A Moscow “Radio Peace and
Progress” broadcast on August 15, 1970, gave almost equal

120 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
praise to Mujib’s Awami League and Wali’s N.A.P. It should
be added that as late as 1967 the Soviet attitude toward the
Awami League was not at all favourable. Thus on March
16, 1967, the same “Radio Peace and Progress” voiced the
opinion that “reactionaries from the Awami League have
exposed themselves for the whole country to see as Amcrican
hirelings and traitors to the nation’s unity.” By August 14,
1970, the Awami League was elevated to the rank of “standing
in the vanguard of the left-wing forces”. The Soviet attitude
seemed to have been influenced by Indian support for Mujib,
which became palpable in 1970, and also by Mujib’s constant
antipathy toward China. Mujib used to describe Pakistan's
friendship with China as “provocative”. When one day I
told Mujib that as future Prime Minister he might find
China’s friendship “valuable”, his reply was “friendship of
China against whom? I have no dispute with India, why
should I need China’s help and assistance ?”
The Western press had correctly predicted Mujib’s success
in the election, on which there was no doubt. U.S. policy
towards Pakistan, which had been bogged down with mutual
suspicion and prejudices during the presidency of Johnson —
who was annoyed at Pakistan’s links with China — began to
grow friendly with the entry of President Nixon into the
White House in 1969, But the role of the U.S. Consul General
in Dacca, Mr. A. Blood, was dubious and seemed to be detri-
mental to Pakistan’s vital national interests. Blood’s secret
meetings with Mujib were known to the authorities; his -
sympathy for Mujib and his aspirations, as well as that of a
group of American economists in Dacca who were financed by
the Ford Foundation, was too obvious. These people were not
aware of Nixon’s sympathetic attitude towards Pakistan or
Yahya’s role on behalf of Nixon in his new China policy.
Blood had to be recalled from his ultra-Mujib sympathy. -
We met several times and he left me in no doubt as to where
his sympathy lay. The U.S. policy was made clear to Mujib
by Ambassador Farland, who advised him not to look to-
wards Washington for any help for his secessionist game in
early 1971; but it was too late. Mujib, who had no experience
or depth of understanding of foreign affairs, accepted Blood’s
personal views as the US governmental policy. This emboldened

.
THE FIRST AND LAST GENERAL ELECTION 12!
a Pal Oe in any compromise on the issue of
‘ Though foreign policy was not a very hot debating issue
in the 1970 election campaign, foreign influences were very
active in East Pakistan, the most serious one being from New
Delhi and subsequently from Moscow.
, The rightist Partics, as well as moderate or centre groups |
like the Pakistan Democratic Front and the Council Muslim
League, were no less enthusiastic to protect the legitimate
hopes, aspirations and rights of the people of East Pakistan.
An analysis of their manifestoes and of the speeches made
by the leaders of these groups would leave no impartial
observer in any doubt that they also wanted genuine regional
autonomy for East Pakis:an, so that the people of the two
regions of Pakistan could live together as equal partners. But
with them the unity of Pakistan was a cherished ideal, as it
was to many other Bengali Muslims, particularly in rural
areas. So they could not, or did not wish to go to the extreme
position adopted by Mujib and his younger and more militant
groups, for whom the unity of Pakistan or Pakistani national-
ism meant nothing.
These supporters of Mujib were going about with the
cry of “Foy Bangla” (Victory to Bangladesh), The rightist
and moderate groups had financial difficulties and, with
few exceptions, had no support from the Bengali press. The
Bengali urban élite, composed of the intelligentsia, Journalists, ,
_ writers, government officials and businessmen, was behind
the demand for a separate state of Bangladesh. Although
my birthplace is in East Bengal, I had never toured the rural
areas of East Bengal as extensively as I did in 1970. As Com- _
munications Minister this was part of my duties, but I was
interested as a political scientist in studying the political
dynamics prevailing in East Pakistan when the unity of the
country was in serious doubt. Many of the district and sub-
divisional officers, who used to run the administration in the
rural areas, were my direct or indirect students - directly
those who had studied political science, indirectly those who
were students in other fields - at the University of Dacca
since 1950. During my tours I talked to them og and
frankly, and they in turn used to treat me more as a former

