62 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
of the earlier economic policy which had created this explositive
situation. The Bengali economists stated:
Our analysis indicates that despite the formal commitment
of the Government of Pakistan ‘to reduce disparity, the
extent of disparity in per capita income between East and
West Pakistan has widened at an increasing rate over the
past decade and the commitment was only honoured in the
breach. Disproportionately higher levels of development
and non-development expenditure in West Pakistan,
supported by fiscal and commercial policy throughout the
past two cecades, led to the creation of a thriving private
enterprise in West Pakistan while that in the East was
deliberately left to lag
The West Pakistani economists in their report stated:
The phenomenon [regional disparity] was inherited at the
time of parition. The disparity has progressively worsened
during the last two decades and it is now as high as 38 per
cent. The removal of this disparity between East and West
Pakistan is an important national objective. . . .
But it is obvious that the disparities cannot be removed
overnight. . . . The national objective must be to bring
about a reduction in disparity not by lowering the growth
rate in West Pakistan but by raising it in East Pakistan. . . .
The key elements of our approach towards removal of
inter-wing disparity during the Fourth Plan are:
(1) a massive increase in the level of net capital inflow into
East Pakistan from Rs. 105 crores in 1969-70 to
Rs. 325 crores in 1974-5 involving a dramatic shift
in its share in the net capital inflow from 40 per cent
in 1969-70 to more than 75 per cent in 1974-5;
(2) a steep rise in investment levels in East Pakistan from
Rs. 405 crores in 1969-70 to 991 crores in 1974-5
and an increase in her share in total investment from _
$9 per cent in 1969 to 54 per cent by 1974-5; and
' (3) a much closer attention to’ the possibilities of tech-
nological change in agriculture, private investment
and growth-oriented policies,2?
The National Economic Council met on June 2, 1970, to
finalize the plan with the two divergent reports from the East
and West Pakistan economists. The debate on the plan had

YAHYA BEGINS ANEW | 63
added fuel to the political situation in the coun i
; : try, which was
wpa: ie eae with emotion, tension, hatred and bitter-
ra ple si 3 of the Planning Commission, M. M.
ciated wi ig nie of high calibre who had been closely asso-
yub's economic policy, which had widened the
gap. He now seemed to have realized the gravity of the issue
and, unlike other non-Bengali bureaucrats, had at least the
foresight to perceive the risks involved in the disparity issue
if Pakistan were to be saved from splitting up. The Planning
Commission, in its Anal assessment on the plan, pointed out to
the National Economic Council that to secure the widest
possible support in both wings of the country, any pattern of
regional allocations must, in its judgement, fulfil at least two
important criteria:
(1) The total allocation of development expenditure,
taking the public and private sections together, must be
larger in East Pakistan than the combined allocations for
the four provinces of West Pakistan.
(2) While ensuring maximum feasible acceleration in East
Pakistan, the allocation for West Pakistan must nevertheless
provide for a minimum necessary acceleration to permit a
larger social programme and to meet the needs of the less
developed areas of West Pakistan.
The final allocations under the Fourth Five-Year Plan,
as approved by the National Economic Council, were as fol-
lows (in crores of rupees): -
East Pakistan West Pakistan Total ©
Public sector 2,940 (60%) 1,960 (40%) 4,900
Private sector . 1,000 (39%) 1,600 (61%) 2,600
Totals 3.940 (525%) (475%) 7500
These allocations were expected to give “a big push to the
development of East Pakistan during the Fourth Plan and to
make a positive move towards a pune Eye ra
ional disparity in per capita income”. e cabinet
a ae of two (Dr. A. Malik and Ahsan-ul
Huq) were not happy with the final allocations made by the
National Economic Council. Non-Bengali members felt that

64 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
“a good start had been made” towards the objective of re.
moving econémic disparity. : ;
But a the same arias of the National Economic Council
on June 2, 1970, when the Annual Development Plan for 1970-1
came up for discussion, the three Bengali ministers r aised their
voices against the Annual Plan for 1970-1 because 1t was con-
sidered not to be in accordance with the objectives of the
Fourth Plan. The allocations for East Pakistan under the An-
nual Plan for 1970-1 were neither adequate nor in accordance
with the supreme objective of removing the regional disparity.
Yet Yahya allowed the Planning Commission to go ahead with
its proposals, notwithstanding the strong notes of dissent from
the three Bengali ministers. This was a big shock for my two
colleagues and myself.
Immediately after the meeting of the National Economic
Council on June 2, the three of us (Hafizuddin, Shamsul Hug
and myself) met together and wrote a joint letter to Yahya
expressing our inability to continue in his cabinet in view
of what we considered as “most unfair allocations to East
Pakistan”. We knew our limitations; we were “nominated
ministers” without any political or popular support. But
our collective resignation — the other two Bengali ministers
were bound to follow our course of action because of the
prevailing public opinion in East Pakistan —- would have com-
pelled Yahya to dissolve the cabinet, and it would have
created a big issue in the country. The press in East Pakistan
_ would certainly have taken up a position against the régime by
noting that even Yahyz’s own nominated ministers could not
agree to his economic policy toward East Pakistan. These
calculations made our decision of collective resignation effec-
tive. Yahya immediately met the three of us and assured us of a
special meeting of the National Economic Council where
Yahya’s opening remarks to the Planning Commission were:
“My Bengali colleagues in the cabinet have pointed out to
‘me that the allocations to East Pakistan for 1970-1 would not
narrow down the gap in regional disparity. If so, I cannot be
a party to it; the gap must be narrowed down.” The officials
of the Planning Commission were taken by surprise by this
| sudden changed attitude -of the President, and like typical
civil servants they yielded to the pressure of the boss without

. YAHYA BEGINS ANEW 65
much resistance. So the allocations for the Annual Develo
Th Plan for 1970-1 were cl ed. p-
First, when Mufib ae pe si about this incident.
his closest friend in the cabinet, M st sp
Of one of th net, Mahmood Haroon, a member
wealthy twenty-two familics”, who o d
East Pakistan’s increased allocations on June 2, he “advised”
us through Haroon “not to precipitate a crisis” by a collective
resignation from the cabinet. We could not, at that time
appreciate Mujib’s uncalled for “advice” to ian but it subse-
quently became evident that Mujib was mainly interested in
the promised “‘free elections” so that he could establish his
credentials as the sole leader of the emerging Bangladesh;
he was not at all interested in the ‘“‘allocations” for East Paki-
Stan in 1970-1. ;
Secondly, while in public Mujib and his economists de-
nounced the 1970-1 allocation for East Pakistan, they cited
it as a model in the crucial tripartite negotiations in March
1971 at Dacca before the civil war began on March 25, 1971.19
So the great debate on the Fourth Plan was over by June
1970. The plan was formally launched on July 1, 1970, amid
government publicity. The Vice-Chairman of the Planning
Commission announced that there would be a transfer of
resources worth Rs. 750 to 1,000 crores from West to East
Pakistan in order to make a substantial narrowing down of the
regional economic disparity between the two wings of the -
country, and to ensure that East Pakistan’s share in develop-
mental expenditure would rise from 37 per cent in the “im-
plemented Third Plan” to 52-5 per cent in the Fourth Plan,
implying an edge of Rs. 380 crores.” Yahya, in his broadcast
on July 28, claimed; “The Fourth Five-Year Plan fulfils my
promise to the nation that this government will take positive
steps to reduce regional disparities and provide a greater mea-
sure of social justice.” -
The plan allotted about go per cent of the investments for
1970-5 to health, education and housing. Yahya further stated :
“This year we will also begin a determined attack on the prob-
lem of flood control in East Pakistan.” In the Annual Devel-
opment Plan for 1970-1, Rs. 150 crores was allocated for
flood control in East Pakistan. Yahya and the Planning Com-

66 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
mission were willing to spend more on flood control, but we
were dismayed to learn that the provincial government of
East Pakistan was unable to receive more money “for lack of
our adequate number of projects”. This was a poor perform.
ance on the part of the provincial administration, particularly
its planning and development branch, wich by 1969-70
was entirely manned by Bengalis. There were some doubts
about the feasibility of the “ambitious plan” as a whole:
the total size of Rs. 7,500 crores was considered impractical,
though the Planning Commission was quite optimistic. The
expected foreign assistance for the plan was Rs. 325 crores,
Apart from the “consortium for aid to Pakistan” composed of
the Western countries (particularly the U.S.A.), the World
Bank and Japan, prospects for assistance from China and the
Soviet Union were also good.
_ But all these gigantic efforts were being made for economic
development at a time when the country was heading towards
massive political changes or, as it subsequently turned out,
towards the great confrontation. A Bengali economist working
abroad wrote: “Whether or not one accepts the ‘immutable’
Marxian law, one feels tempted to extrapolate the past empiri-
cal experience of Pakistan into the future we are concerned
with.” He then said: “Let us hope that reason will triumph and
the Pakistani people will be able to work out a reasonably
viable SS [structure-superstructure]. For a country having two
economies, such a SS will make the people of each region
master in their own house free to live in it the way they wish
without federal let or hindrance.”** Why such a “structure-
superstructure”, when offered by Yahya after the 1970 elec-
tions, was not acceptable; why reason did not triumph and
why the country had to face one of the tragedies of modern
history are questions to which I shall turn in subsequent
chapters. In the meantime, let me turn to Pakistan’s external
environment in 1969-70.
The External Environment
Pakistan under Yahya Khan was described in certain quarters
“as a country without any foreign policy”. In the mid-1g50s
Pakistan was elevated to “the most allied ally’ of the United

YAHYA BEGINS ANEW 67
States in Asia and consequently a target of Soviet vilification
and wrath, culminating in Khrushchev’s threat of rocket
a ena at the time of the U-2 incident in 1960. Then
eet Coe pe ee Policy, which was termed “Bila-
of. the People’s Republic of China sed cont the friendship
without forfetin of “hina and of the Soviet Union
_ Orteiting that of the United States, particularly its
economic aid and assistance. Ayub’s foreign policy, as indicated
at previous chapter, had dramatically redefined Pakistan’s
rove in international affairs and its most spectacular aspect was
Ayub’s flirting with Mao”.
_ When Yahya came to power in March 1969, Pakistan’s
internal political dynamics were so desperate that its foreign
policy had lost some of its past glamour, Yahya had no foreign
minister, a fact which reflected the decreased importance
attached by the new military régime to external affairs. The
all-powerful Peerzada became the “expert” in foreign affairs.
Subsequently Major-General Omar, who became the Secre-
tary of National Security Council, aspired to be the Henry
Kissinger of the régime. Both Peerzada and Omar were totally
incompetent in handling external problems, but their self-
imposed role could not be challenged either by the civil officials
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or by the Cabinet which,
during its existence from August 1969 to February 1971, had
not a single debate on foreign affairs. Yahya, however, soon
developed his own style and modus operandi. He removed the .
Foreign Secretary, S. M. Yousuf, a man of high integrity and
ability,- because Peerzada and Yousuf were almost on non-
speaking terms; Yousuf was not prepared to be browbeaten
by Peerzada. The new Foreign Secretary, Sultan Khan, was
able to develop a working equation with both Peerzada and
Omar - the “‘two great experts” on foreign affairs. Yahya,
however, knew the worth of his generals as foreign policy
makers. So he used to rely on otheg sources,
: When my own contacts with Yahya became closer, I was .
often taken into his confidence in external affairs. The first —
occasion was during Nixon’s 22-hour visit to Pakistan in August
1969. I was still working in the research division of the Foreign
Affairs Ministry and in Yahya’s planning cell. Yahya asked me
to prepare notes for his dialogue with Nixon, particularly

68 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Pakistan’s pleas for U.S. arms aid. I was able to dig up some
of the old papers relating to Nixon’s sympathetic views on
Pakistan’s application for U.S. arms when he had visited Paki.
stan as the U.S. Vice-President in December 1953. Yahya was
pleased to have this material and data, and included me in his
team for the U.S.-Pakistan talks during Nixon’s visit. However,
the dialogue was carried on at two levels, at the summit level
it was between the two Presidents: Nixon gave Yahya the
special assignment to act as “courier” between Washington
and Peking — an assignment which the latter carried out with
the utmost secrecy and conscientiousness. The second level of
discussion was between the U.S. team headed by Henry Kis-
singer and the Pakistani team headed by the Foreign Secretary.
Though Yahya was neither willing nor had the time
to play a significant role in external affairs because of internal
complications, yet Pakistan had a number of highly important
and complicated external issues in 1969-70. First was Yahya’s
grand assignment from Nixon which, as already mentioned,
he carried out well, his services being appreciated both
in Washington and Peking. Yahya’s first tour abroad was
to attend the Islamic Summit Conference in Rabat, Morocco.
He made a mess of this by at first agreeing to India’s
participation in the Islamic ‘Conference and then realizing
that his “mistake” would give India a big edge in support
of her claim as a secular country with sixty million Muslims
as a religious minority. Pakistan reacts violently to any Indian
penetration into the Muslim world; hence Yahya faced a
big dilemma. However, King Hassan of Morocco, the host
country, and the Shah of Iran came to his rescue, Finally,
the Indian delegation, led by a Muslim cabinet minister who
had already arrived at Rabat, was unceremoniously asked not
to participate. Yahya’s “mistake’’ turned out to be a great
diplomatic success for him as nothing pleased the Pakistanis
(though not, of course, the Bengalis) more than a setback for
India. Yahya returned from his first tour abroad with flying
colours.
Yahya made his major speech on Pakistan’s foreign policy
in the Iranian Majlis on October 30, 1969. I participated fully
in the preparation of this speech. Yahya’s relations with the
Shah of Iran were more cordial than those of Ayub, who had

. YARYA BEGINS ANEW
offended the Shah by praisi — . 69
biography, Friends no} Nasser in his political auto-
told Ayub: “In the time 7 The Shah was reported to have
_ Pakistani crisis) you crab your crisis the 1965 Indo-
reserved. for Nesee and me to help but your praises are
India,”*4 The Shah’s © 18 & great friend of your enemy,
Yahya and the Shah Were not without justification.
. tlonged to the same sect, the Shia com-
of Islam, and Yahya’s family had ee ee
| Tran. & special personal relationshiy mins Rai
and Pakistan under Yahya P developed between Iran
Turning to Pakistan. . ;
the USA. the USS em with = ee FS
simultaneous friendship with Washin = rie ap a
had been a great source of ee ee i
or complications in the early rg60s
now ‘not only feasible but appreciated in both capitals. How.
ever, Pakistan began to face crude Russian in ari
70. The Russians were not happy with the exit of Ayub.
Pravda, commenting on the change of government in Pakistan,
wrote that when Ayub agreed to meet the leaders of the
Opposition parties, “there was no unity of views among them”
and then added: “In the meantime, pro-Peking and pro-
American elements. had begun to apptar.” At the same time
Izpestiia wrote that the “introduction of martial law in Pakistan —
will not solve all the problems facing the country.”*5 When
the Soviet Defence Minister, Marshal A. A. Grechko, visited
Pakistan in March 1969, just before Ayub’s exit, he bluntly
told the Pakistani generals that their decision to remove Ayub ,
would be a mistake. The Soviet leaders, Kosygin and Pod-
gorny, however, sent greetings to Yahya on April 11, 1969.
Then in May Kosygin made his second and, to date, his last
visit to Pakistan to talk to Yahya. It was at this meeting that the
Russians made it plain to Pakistan that simultaneous friend-
ship with Moscow and Peking would not be tolerated. Yahya
asked Kosygin how the Soviet Union could insist on simul-
taneous friendship with India and Pakistan. The reply was:
**What is possible for a super-power is not possible fora smaller |
power.”’*? Ayub’s follies in falling into the Soviet trap in ex-
change for some Russian arms of the “nuts and bolts”
type now became evident, and the Chinese warnings to Paki-
stanis about the illusory Russian friendship with Pakistan

70 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
proved correct. Yahya was faced with the crucial choice
between Moscow and Peking, and this grave issue In external
affairs flared up at a time when his attention was diverted
exclusively to internal problems. From the time of my entry
into the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1967, I had consistently
pointed out, in my various notes to Ayub and then to Yahya,
the Soviet designs and threats to Pakistan. Ayub used to take
great pride in what he claimed to be the “‘unfreezing” of
Soviet hostility towards Pakistan. But this was not @ correct
assessment; the Soviet Union never wished Pakistan well.
Ayub’s flirting with the Russians had, on the contrary, the risk
of costing Pakistan the confidence of China.
When Yahya planned his grand visits to Moscow, Wash-
ington and Peking in 1970, Pakistan’s triangular diplomacy
needed serious study and assessment; but thanks to the
neglect of foreign affairs and to the personal feud between
Peerzada. and Omar to gain prominence to foreign affairs,
the complicated problems had not been properly dealt with.
I had some roles — Yahya asked me to comment on the papers
before his state visits to Moscow (June), Washington (October)
and Peking (November) in 1970. I did my best to point out the
threats from Moscow and urged closer and friendlier relations
with both Washington and Peking, for which Yahya’s chances
were better than Ayub’s had been. Yahya also gave me a
. Choice of going with him either to Moscow, Washington or
Peking; as he had no foreign minister he used to up” a
member of his cabinet to accompany him for his state visits.
I opted for Peking because I had already been to Moscow
with Ayub in 1965, and the United States is not only my
“academic homeland”, but I had also been there more th.an
once as a delegate to the United Nations. I had never been to
Peking and moreover, as a researcher, I was keenly interested
in the emerging Sino-American relations in which Yahya .
was playing a significant role, and I was one of the very few
‘whom he took into his confidence about his top secret mission.
Indo-Pakistani relations in 1969-70 were bad and as tense
as always. Reports from the Pakistani intelligence services,
both civil and military, about India’s involvement in the
highly explosive situation in East Pakistan since the Agar-
tala conspiracy case of 1968 continued to pour into Yahya’s

— YAHYA BEGINS ANEW “I
omice, Dut wer i :
country was fin given the attention they deserved. A friendly
giving a similar version of India’s involve+
ment. Yahya realized th :
¢ €a the truth too late. In all my public
speeches as a memb ;
same mber of the Yahya cabinet, I voiced the
a yee tn about Indian designs but my voice was
REFERENCES
I, Economist, March 29, 1969.
2. in | pe Plamenatz, German Marxism and Russian Communism,
S ap ncon, 19549 P- 144.
1965. of Wahya’s broadcast on March 26, 1969, in Deum, March
4. Tbid. a
i ot an Middle East Politics: The Military Dimension, pp.
6. See Lucian Pye, “Armies in the Process of Modernization”, in J. J
Johnson (ed.), The Role of the Military in Underdeveloped Countries,
Princeton : Princeton University Press, 1962, PP. 69-90.
7- Quoted in Fazal Muqeem Khan, Pakistan’s Crisis in Leadership, National
Book Foundation, Karachi, 1973, p. 19.
8. Rounaq Jahan, Pakistan: Failure in National Integration, New York,
Columbia University Press, 1972, p. 97.
g. Z. A. Bhutto, The Great Tragedy, Karachi, a Pakistan Peoples’ Party
Publication, 1971, p. 9- .
10. See M. Janowitz, The Military in the Political Development of New Nations,
(Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, 1964); J. J. Johnson (ed.),
The Role of the Military-in Underdeveloped Countries, op. cit.; S. E. Finer, -
The Man on Horseback, London and New York, 1962; William F.
Gutteridge, Military Institutions and Power in New States, London, 1964.
11. Robert M, Price, “A Theoretical Approach to Military Rule in New
States,” in World Politics, April 1972.
12. Dawn, April 1969. .
13. See Dr. Mahbub Ul Hag, “Pakistan’s Choices for the 1970's”, a paper
at the Conference on Economic Growth and Distributional Justice in
Pakistan, the University of Rochester, July 29 to July 31, 1970.
14. Dawn, April 11, 1969.
15. From a review paper by Dr. Ralph Smuckler, former representative
of the Ford Foundation in Pakistan, dated September 16 and 17, 1969.
16. See the Report of the Panel of Economists on the Fourth Five-Year Plan
(1970-75), Planning Commission, Government of Pakistan, May 1970,
p. II.
17. Ibid., pp. 104-6.
ase oa lo for the National Economic Council”, June 2,
1970.

