TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS
REFERENCES
1. See The Partition of India: Policies and Perspectives, 1998-1949, ed. C. H.
Philips and Mary D, Wainwright, London, 1970.
2. This was the constant theme of the Soviet writings on Pakistan from
- 1947 t 1965. See Current Digest of the Sovict Press and The Ceniral Asian
3- woe The British Impact on India, London, The |
‘Economist, May 17, 194, :
' 4. See my “Bangladesh: why it Happened”, International Affairs (London),
April 1972.
5. Ibid,
6. = Formula : our Right to Live by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Dacca,
1966. ;
7: Ibid., p. g,
8. Pi The Legal Framework Order, 1970, Government of Pakistan, Karachi,
n. .
Q- See Six-Poing Formula, Op. cit., pp. 5-9.
10. Ibid.
11. See Abdul Kalam Azad, India wins Freedom, London, 1959.
12. K. C. Wheare, Federal Government (4th ed.), London, 1963, P. 94.
13. See Six-Poin Formula, op, cit., and his various speeches during the
election of 1970, .
14. Ibid., p. 12.
15. I obtained the copy of the preliminary draft constitution of the Awami
League from a former colleague of mine at Dacca University who had
close links with the small group headed by Kamal Hossain to prepare
the draft.
16. Dawn, Karachi, March 27, 1971,
17. Z. A, Bhutto, The Great Tragedy, Karachi, September 1971, p, 13. ;
18. Bangladesh, my Bangladesh: Selected Speeches and Statements by Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, New York, 1972, p. 39.
19. Ibid., p. 55.
20. Z. A. Bhutto, The Great Tragedy, Op. cit., p. G2,
21. Bangladesh, my Bangladesh, op. cit., Pp. 20-1,
22. Ibid., p. 24. ;
23. Ibid., pp. 22~7,
24. Ibid., pp. 35-6.
25. Ibid-, p. 36.
26. Pakistan Times, Lahore, December 22, 1970. Bee ®
27. Dawn, Karachi, December 25, 1970. : é‘
28. See G. WwW. Choudhury, “The Last Days of Pakistan: A Personal
Account” in Internationa] Affairs, April 1973. 2
29. Based on unpublished papers of the Government of Pakistan,
30. Tajuddin became Prime Minister of the exile government of Bangladesh
in India from March 26, 1971.
$1. Dawn, Karachi, January 15, 1973.
32. Ibid, ;

160 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
33- Z. A. Bhutto, The Great Tragedy, op. cit., p. 20.
34- Ibid., pp. 22-5.
35- See Z. A. Bhutto's statement at press conference in Peshawar on
February 15, 1971, Dawn, Karachi, February 16, rg71.

| THE DACCA DIALOGUE
March 16-24, r971
Yahya’s trip to Dacca on March 15, 1971, and his final bids —
to save ‘the unity of Pakistan were something like giving
oxygen to a dying patient when the doctors have declared him
a lost case. Yet the crucial talks began while Mujib had de-
clared the unilateral independence of Bangladesh and invited
President Yahya to visit Dacca as the “guest of Bangladesh”’!
On the day of Yahya’s arrival in Dacca; March 15, Mujib
issued a highly provocative and uncompromising statement:
“The heroic struggle of the people marches forward... . The
people of Bangladesh, civil servants, office and factory workers,
peasants and students, have demonstrated in no uncertain
terms that they would die rather than surrender, . ., The spirit
of Freedom in Bangladesh cannot be extinguished. ... The
- Struggle shall, therefore, continue with renewed vigour until . 7
our goal of emancipation is :
Mujib also issued as many as thirty-one as to
how “Bangladesh shall be governed”: all government and semi-
government offices’ would remain closed: no communications
with West Pakistan; inter-wing telex, telephone and wireless
communications would be allowed. “The sense of a separate
state”, a foreigner reported to his head office abroad, ‘‘began to |
take quite unambiguous shape, . . . It was clear that in ail but
military ways Sheikh Mujib was running East Pakistan.”?
Foreign journalists were also turnitg in similar reports. |
For instance, The Daily Telegraph (London) reported on March
9, 1971, that “Sheikh Moujibur Rahman appears to have
declared the independence of East Pakistan”, while on the
same day the paper in its editorial wrote: “Already we hear
the putative mame of the separate state that East Pakistan
: 161 .

162 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
could become - Bangladesh, Bengali Jand. The flag has been
_ devised.” Similar pr appeared in The Economist (March
13, 1971) and Time magazine (March 15, 1971): “Pakistan
as it stands today is finished.” ;
In the mean time, India had already banned all flights of
Pakistani planes between East and West. Pakistan as of
February 1971, because of an alleged hijacking of an Indian
plane by ‘‘Pakistanis” at Lahore. Pakistan was frantically
making efforts through the help of friendly countries, includ-
ing the United States and Great Britain — the Soviet Union
was also approached — to dissuade India from taking this
extreme measure at a time when East-West Pakistani contacts
were more vital than ever. But India would not listen to any
counsels of restraint or offers of mediation by the U.N. Secre-
tary-General. A judicial inquiry conducted subsequently by
the Pakistan Government revealed that the hijackers were
Indian agents from the Indian-occupied part of Kashmir.
Mujib indirectly endorsed the Indian action by terming it as
“a conspiracy by the Pakistan Government to postpone the
transfer of power”. This was an unfortunate remark since
Yahya was at that time sincerely working for a political settle-
ment. Mujib’s remarks about India banning Pakistani planes
from flying to East Pakistan had only deepened the suspicion
of those members of the military junta who had always con-
sidered Mujib to be an “Indian agent”. performance
at the time ‘of the alleged hijacking was also ludicrous: he
described the allegedly “Pakistani” hijackers as “national
heroes”! Could there be clearer evidence of the bankruptcy
of wisdom on the part of the two elected leaders of East and
West Pakistan than such a reaction to a serious threat by the
Indian Government to the national security and viability of
Pakistan?
Bhutto’s reaction to Mujib’s proposal for handing over power
before the National Assembly could meet or frame a constitu-
‘tion was equally distressing and shocking. In a statement on
March 14, when Yahya was on his way to Dacca to make his
final bid to Mujib, Bhutto declared: “If power were to be
transferred to the people before any constitutional settlement
as demanded by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, it should be
transferred to the majority party in East Pakistan and the majority

THE DACCA prALoguE 163
parly here [West Pakistan — My italics].”8 In a subsequent state-
_ ment on March 15, Bhutto went — step further by !
that “in the Situation faced by Pakista havi ical
distance between the two Parts, the/ i it wie a
apply” [my italics) » of the majority did not .
: So Yahya landed in Dacca on March 1 5, at a time when
. Mujib had almost declared the independence of Bangladesh
, and the majority party leader in West Pakistan, Bhutto, also
seemed to favour “two or a splitting up of the
country, It was the smaller parties in West Pakistan and the |
Pakistani Government, headed by Yahya Khan, who still
talked of “protecting” the tertitorial integrity of Pakistan.
_ Bhutto was requested by Yahya to go to Dacca but declined
initially on the grounds that after Mujib’s virtual declaration -
of independence, there was no point in making the journey.”
He now seemed more interested in getting power than in the
unity of Pakistan, For him a twenty-one-gun salute was
more attractive than going to Dacca to find a solution for a
united Pakistan,
Yahya asked me to go to Dacca and to take part in the
final political dialogue, first as an official adviser and then as —
a private citizen, I declined both offers because there seemed to
me hardly any chance for a and the talks were
likely to be a futile exercise, While Yahya sincerely urged
mé to go to Dacca; two important membtrs of the junta
vised” me as my ‘‘well-wishers” not to bu my fingers in such ©
a futile exercise. Since Mujib began his mlovement in March,
I had given up all hope of a settlement. My foreigner friend
whose report I quoted earlier referred to my agony: “That
evening [March 2] the man who had been the chief political
adviser to the President, a Bengali, had dinner with my wife
and me. He and his wife were in great distress, . . .”
For me it was a terrible shock to see the plan for the transfer
of power - in which I had sincerely tried to accommodate
all the legitimate demands and aspiration of the Bengalis
while at the same time protecting the unity of Pakistan — being
torn to pieces by Mujib and Bhutto, playing their unscrupu-
lous roles the former being also under some foreign influences,
and to see, in unmistakable terms, the ending of my cherished
homeland.

164 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
I had already wound up my affairs in Islamabad after the
dissolution of the cabinet on February 17, and was planning .
to go to London for an academic assignment at the Royal Insti-
tute of International Affairs. But I did not wish to leave Paki-
- stan before the outcome of the Dacca dialogue had become
known. I stayed behind in Karachi on my way to London to
watch carefully the last phase of the drama which marked the
end of united Pakistan. I also assured Yahya that if the situa-
- tion were to improve so that there was any chance of a political
settlement, I would immediately dash to Dacca to contribute
my little part in helping his efforts to protect the unity of the
country — but such a prospect hardly seemed likely.
The two sides were also reported to be preparing their con-
tingency plans for the imminent confrontation. The Pakistani
Army was reinforced in East Pakistan by being flown over a
circuitous sea route of 3,000 miles because of India’s continued
ban on. all flights between East and West Pakistan.
India also put pressure on Ceylon not to allow Colombo airport
to be used for Pakistani forces, but without success. Mujib
was also making his plan. .He appointed Colonel Usmani as
Commander of “the Revolutionary forces”. A few other re-
tired Bengali officers of the Pakistani Army joined Usmani
im organizing an armed uprising. Three weeks of de facto
| independence of “‘Bangladesh” provided Mujib with unique
opportunities for challenging the central Government. He had
absolute control over radio, television and the press, which were
asked to publish his edicts. The East Bengal Regiment and the
East Pakistan Rifles, as well as the police force of the provincial
Government in East Pakistan, were all united in showing their
. allegiance to Mujib and not to the central Government.
When Yahya arrived in Dacca on March 15 he was virtually
4 “foreign guest” of Bangladesh. Yet, in spite of everything,
the political dialogues began. rae 3
The first meeting between Yahya and Mujib took place on
- . , March 16. Mujib arrived at the President’s House at 11 a.m.
in a car flying a black flag to mourn the death of those killed
during the preceding two weeks. His car also had a symbol of
j Bangladesh pasted onto it. During the meeting Mujib put for-
ward his four points relating to the immediate lifting of martial
law and the transfer of power. Prospects of framing a constitu-
5 : j ip
rr |

THE DACGA DIALOGUE 165
tion on the basis of Yahya’s transfer of power plan as formulated
in 1969-70 had ceased to exist, The choice before the military
régime was between Tecognizing the de facto independent status
of Bangladesh and challenging Mujib; or, expressed another
way, between presiding over the dismemberment of the country
and embarking On a military venture ‘which would not
only be terribly costly in terms of human lives but would also
be uncertain in ultimate consequences, This was the dilemma
before Yahya.
Of course, there were hawkish generals, like Hamid and a
few others, who were confident of “fixing” the whole situation
in, as they said, seventy-two hours. The calm with which the
imposition of martial law had been accepted in 1969 gave
these hawkish generals a false sense of confidence. They did not
realize that the Bengalis had accepted martial law so calmly
in 1969 because there were behind-the-scenes parleys between
political leaders and the new military régime, with the promise
of an election and transfer of power, By March 1971 the whole
situation was changed, The year-long election campaign
enabled Mujib and his party to preach the gospel of Bangla-
desh in homes all over East Pakistan; Bengali nationalism was
no longer dormant but had become highly articulate and mili-
tant.
Yahya made earnest pleas to Mujib, as I learned from him
subsequently, to avoid the path of confrontation. Yahya and —
_ others who accompanied him to Dacca for the talks were
. rather surprised to see Mujib shaky and nervous, Mujib, who
has never had the reputation of being the bravest or the most
intelligent of politicians, was in a Situation which probably
would lead him nowhere — this was his Own assessment at the
time in spite of his big talk and militant press statements,
The result was that even in this hopeless and dismal situa-
tion, Yahya and Mujib were still talking in terms of a political
. settlement, while Yahya’s militant army generals were getting
ready for a confrontation and Mujib’s militant supporters
were similarly opposed to any compromise. Yet by March 20
| = Le. four days after Yahya’s arrival in Dacca - the press was
reporting that an agreement had been reached on a compro-
| mise constitutional formula incorporating most of the
fundamentals of Mujib’s six points. A formula had reportedly
|

166 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
been presented and agreed upon by Yahya and Mujib, provid-
ing for the immediate lifting of martial law and the transfer
of power. A draft proclamation effecting an immediate transfer
of power was ready; it provided for the formation of provincial
and central cabinets from among the elected representatives,
The National Assembly would be split into two committees
to formulate special provisions and requirements of East and
West Pakistan to. be incorporated into the future constitution.
The National Assembly would then be summoned to frame a
constitution for .
The White Paper, published by the Government of Pakistan,
gave only a summary of the draft proclamation;® I saw its
full text during my private visits to Islamabad and Dacca in
May 1971. The full text, as I discovered from the minutes of
the Dacca dialogues, revealed a rather different picture in that
it allowed for much more compromise than was conveyed by
the White Paper. It accepted the relationship between the
central Government and the “State of Bangladesh” (the
nomenclature was also now accepted) on the. basis of the
formula which I had prepared for Yahya in January 1971,
and which was virtually the six points minus the dismember-
ment of Pakistan. When I inquired why the White Paper
did not publish the full account, the answer I received from
Peerzada was that ‘“‘a proclamation was made under duress” —
implying that the Army was no longer prepared to grant those
_ concessions .after it had ‘“‘crushed” the secession movement.
What a sad commentary on the junta’s wisdom!
Returning to the Dacca dialogues, Yahya and Mujib, to-
gether with their aides, were-examining the proposed pro-
clamation in a series of daily meetings. The dialogues were on
two levels: between Yahya and Mujib and between technical
experts. Yahya’s team was led by Justice Cornelius and General
Peerzada; M. M. Ahmad, Deputy Chairman of the Planning
Commission, was also associated ‘with the talks inasmuch as
: financial and economic matters figured prominently in the
yes of the relationship between the national Government
and the new state (province) of Bangladesh. A le ert,
Colonel Hasan of the Chief Martial Law Office at = earn hy
_ was the fourth member of the Yahya team. Nobody in this
team had any deep understanding of the political dynamics

. THE Dacca DIALOGUE 167
or the external forces working in East Pakistan. Most of the
promunent members of the junta (Hamid, Gul Hasan, Omar, ~
Mitha) were present at Dacca, They had regular meetings
among themselves at the military headquarters in Dacca and
with Yahya. Colonel Hasan told me how, while Yahya was
making concession after concession to make Mujib agreeable
| to a political settlement, the junta warned him of the “dire
consequences” of “weakening” the national Government.
There has always been a tendency among the Pakistani Army
generals to believe that they alone could protect the Izzat
and Gharat (honour and self-respect) of the nation. Since the
early 1950s, the Pakistani Army under Ayub seemed to regard
itself oe sole guardian of the interest” 3 it was also
. against the Oliticians of both East and West
Pakistan.
There wer ¢, however, €xceptions. Many army officers in
1969~70 were Senuinely anxious for a Satisfactory settlement
of the East-West Pakistan issue. The majority of the army as
well as of the common People in West Pakistan would have
accepted Mujib as Pakistan’s prime minister provided he was
willing to keep the Country united. Similarly, the vast majority
of the Bengali Muslims Were not prepared to see Pakistan dis-
membered and their homeland become again a target of domi-
nation by the Bhadralok- (élite from Calcutta, They were in. -
terested in having genuine regional autonomy, In fact, their
basic demand was for the improvement of their economic lot, .
Mujib captured their imagination because he promised them
a “golden Bengal” if they would only vote for his six points—
not because he favoured the splitting of their cherished home-
land into two parts and the setting up of a country whose
geopolitical realities’ would make it a client-state of New Delhi,
But who cared for the “silent majority”, either in East or West
Pakistan? The fate of this country of 120 million people was
instead in the hands of the vested interest groups — the Western
big business and senior civil servants, who had always domin-
- ated the political scene in Pakistan — and two ambitious politi-
Clans, .
Mujib’s negotiating team consisted of the hard-liner in his
Party, Tajuddin Ahmad, and other top Awami Leaguers —
Nazrul Islam, Mustaq Ahmad, Qameruzzaman, and Mansoor

168 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Ali. The real constitutional expert on Mujib’s team was Dr,
Kamal Hossain, who became Bangladesh’s first Minister of
Law and drafted the country’s constitution in 1972. A number
of Bengali economists were helping the team but they were not
participating directly in the dialogues. These economists,
aided by some foreign economists financed by the Ford Founda-
tion, were the loudest in making extreme demands, and they
were, to a large extent, responsible for the failure of the
Dacca dialogue.
Notwithstanding the highly explosive situation outside the
President’s House at Dacca and the provocative press state-
ments, militant railies, meetings, etc., the dialogues continued
from March 16 to 20 rather quietly, and it caused great sur-
‘prise im many quarters that there seemed to be some
““progress” — although it was hard to believe at that stage that
a political settlement could still be reached. The draft pro-
clamation as presented by Yahya was seriously considered.
In private discussions, Yahya and Mujib seemed to be nearing
a “settlement” — at least, that was my impressién in May 1971
reading the minutes of the Dacca dialogues up to March 20.
Meanwhile, the leaders of smaller groups from West Pakistan
arrived in Dacca to help the success of the talks.
On the evening of March 18, while I was in Karachi in
transit to London, I received an unexpected but most pleasant
signal from Yahya’s offices in Dacca that there were “good
prospects” of a political settlement and that the President
might need my services in finalizing the agreed constitutional
formula. I was, therefore, advised not to leave for London but
rather to be prepared to go to Dacca. I could hardly believe in
this signal” ‘as other developments both inside East
Pakistan and outside the country were working against such
_ All India Radio stepped up its propaganda in favour
of Bangladesh. Some of the foreign diplomats were hinting at
already established links between Mujib’s headquarters in
_ Dacca and the Indian authorities. The Pakistani intelligence
services had received many such reports.
By this tme Mujib had sized up U.S. policy towards the
political situation in Pakistan. As I have already mentioned,
the U.S. Consul General in Dacca, Mr. Archer Blood, had given
Mujib a false sense of optimism about possible “support”

