| THE DACCA DIALOGUE 179
on March 25. One might not believe the details of the so-
called “operational plan” as given in the White Paper;
there were obviously some exaggerations, But it was obvious
from the stiff resistance faced by the Pakistani Army when
it launched its military operation that some sort of resistance
plan had been organized by the Awami League with the help
of the East Bengal Regiment, the East Pakistani Rifles, and the
police forces in East Pakistan. In fact, the major part of East
Pakistan or Bangladesh was under the control of “rebel” or
“liberation” forces throughout the month of April and in some
areas in early May, so that the Pakistani Army “occupied” or
“liberated” the various areas under ‘the control of Opposition
| forces. Obviously such resistance could not have been spon-
| tancous or unorganized.
Thus it was evident, as ‘pointed - out already, that both
sides, while engaged in political dialogue, were simultaneously
preparing for the fatal confrontation.
REFERENCES
1. Bangladesh Documents, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 247-8.
2. Two years after the creation of Bangladesh, my foreign friend showed
me his report, “Notes on Events in East Pakistan, March 2-16, 1971”,
sent from Dacca on March 5, 1971.
§- Bangladesh Documents, op. cit. vol. I, p. 294.
4- The White Paper on the Crisis of East Pakistan (Islamabad), Government
of Pakistan, August 5, 1971, pp. 39-60.
5. Ibid., pp. 19-20.
6. Fazal Muqueem Khan, The Story of the Pakistan Army, Karachi, 1963, p. 63.
7. Z. A. Bhutto, The Great Tragedy, op. cit., p. 43.
8. Ibid., p. 45.
9. — on the unpublished minutes of the Dacca dialogues in March 1971.
10.
11. Ibid.
12, Ibid.
13. See the text of the Mujib plan in the White Paper, Op. cit., pp. 47-59.
14. Based on unpublished minutes of the Dacea dialogues in March 1971.
1§. See the text of Yahya’s speech on June 28, 1971, in Dawn, June 29, 1971.
16. See the text of the Mujib plan in the White Paper, op. cit.
17. See the Legal Framework Order, 1970, op, cit., p. 8.
18, Se the text of the Mujib plan in the White Paper, Op. cit,
* 19. See Mujib’s election speeches in Bangladesh Documents, op. cit., Vol. I.,
Pp. 82~7 and pp. 95~127.
20. Ibid., p. 266.

8
THE CIVIL WAR
The Dacca dialogues had failed. For this the Pakistan Govern-
ment headed by Yahya and Bhutto and his party put the entire
blame on Mujib. Yahya denounced Mujib as a traitor and
- banned the Awami League. In a broadcast he said: “The
proclamation that he [Mujib] proposed was nothing but a
trap. He knew that it would not have been worth the paper it
was written on... . . His obstinacy, obduracy and absolute
refusal to talk sense can lead to but one conclusion — the man
and his party are enemies of Pakistan and they want East
Pakistan to break away. completely from the country. He
has attacked the solidarity and integrity of this country -
this crime will not go unpurtished.’* Tajuddin Ahmad, Acting
Prime Minister of the Bangladesh government-in-exile in
India, on the other hand stated: “Tt is now clear that Yahya
| and his generals never had the slightest intention of solving
Pakistan’s political crisis but were only interested in buying
time to permit the reinforcement of their military machine
within Bangladesh. Yahya’s visit to Dacca was a mere cover
for his plan of genocide. . . . In an act of treachery unparal-
leled in contemporary history a programme of calculated geno-
cide was unleashed on the peaceful and unsuspecting popu-
lation of Dacca by midnight of 25 March.”* The third party to
the talks, Z. A. Bhutto, wrote: “Foreign pressure was partly
responsible for the position eventually taken by him [Mujib].
It seems that India wanted him to call the Army’s bluff and
strike before it was too late. Perhaps India was getting worried
about the turns of events . . . desperately wanted Mujibur
Rahman to wrench Bangladesh out of Pakistan . . . or did
India have an inkling of new initiatives in Sino-American re-
lations?”’® None of these three statements is wholly true, but
” 180

THE CIVIL war | 181
they cannot be dismissed a] :
could be totally exonerated fre then. None of the three parties
Dacca dialogues. The pt the failure of the
ago* and many interpretations have. an oe
for the failure of the Dacca dialo acy ‘been offered
spection may well continue for Rings a The process of retro-
But one thing is certain. The “we wa CORRE. A
which began on the midnight of March ae 7), actions,
ndoned or just; . 25, 1971, can never be
oO ; Justified m any way. The Army’
campaign in which many thousands of inne.
of Innocent people in-
ding a, the old: and sick, and even children
ren ca an while millions fled from their homes oo take
t i
sh se = = oe remote places or in India, constituted a mea-
sur gedy. The miscalculation on which it was based j
were beyond description, ne
The exact figures of death and d i i
estructi
never be known accurately — Mujib has talked bo a pred
lion killed”, while the Pakistan Government tried to ie arr
the figures in thousands only. But Mujib was right when he
said that few nations had had to make such colossal sacrifices
in human life and suffering as the Bengalis in “an epic libera-
tion struggle” — though he himself had no part in the suffer-
ings; he made a cowardly surrender to the Army, leaving the
people to their terrible fate.
Unlike some other tragedies in Afro-Asian countries, the
Bangladesh tragedy was given the publicity it deserved which
went a long way to arouse world-wide sympathy and support
for the suffering people of Bangladesh. The whole world
was shocked by the Pakistan Army’s brutal assault. The
foreign press, particularly in the United Kingdom and the
United States; did a service to humanity by giving prominence
to the atrocities perpetrated on the Bengalis.
What factors compelled the Pakistan generals to embark
om such a suicidal course? There was, undoubtedly, a serious
threat to the territorial integrity of the country — not least -
from outside forces. But was the course adcpted by the
Pakistan Army appropriate — not to speak of justice or moral
sues — to “protect the territorial integrity of the country’?
The Army ‘could have punished the leaders and groups of

a |
182 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
people who might have been guilty of attempting to bri
the armed secession of East Pakistan with the help of oh <a
neighbour. But i ustificati so
Dor could there be any justification or rationale for
the killing of thousands of innocent villagers who had not
the slightest idea of the issues involved in the political dia.
logues, either before or after the elections in December 1971?
These people had neither wanted secession nor been a party to
any, conspiracy. Why were children killed in the presence of
their parents and women raped in the presence of fathers or
husbands? Villages were burnt wholesale as a part of what
was termed by the military Governor, Tikka Khan “butcher
of the Bengalis” and as such destroyer of Pakistan — as part
ofa policy of collective punitive measures. The most pertinent
question is whether the Pakistan Army would have taken such
cruel measures in West Pakistan if Bhutto had taken the same
position’as Mujib on March 23, 1971. Had not Bhutto been
largely responsible for the deadlock in the political negotiations
after the election by forcing the adjournment of the national
assembly scheduled to meet on March 3, 1971? Why then did
Bhutto’s actions remain unpunished? Was it due to the fact
that he represented the recruiting areas of the Pakistan Army
and received the votes of the jawans in the 1970 election?
Did not the Pakistan Army’s action betray a deep-rooted ethnic
hatred on the part of the Punjabis against the Bengalis? In
any case the Pakistan Army, which had been maintained at a
high cost by the people of Pakistan including the Bengalis to
defend their homeland, fell stupidly into the deep conspiracy
hatched by both internal and external forces to finish off
Pakistan as a united country. Not even the most militant
metnber of the Indian Hindu Mahasabha, or any other
Indian elements which always preached the gospel of Akhand
Bharat (united India) and the undoing of the 1947 partition,
could have done the job of finishing united Pakistan as ‘quickly
, as the actions of the Pakistan Army while trying to protect the
country’s territorial integrity, Could there have been greater
folly or miscalculation?
On March 29, before I left Karachi for London’with my
family, I sought and had a meeting with Yahya. I asked
him why he had resorted to such measures after two years of
what I still believe to be sincere and honest efforts to transfer

_
THE CIVIL WAR 183
power to the clected representatives of the people. He gave
me his version of the Dacca dialogues, hich a the Sine
as was given in his speech of March 26, After listening carefully
to his account I further asked him why he had ‘not resigned
when his plan for the transfer of power had proved a failure,
just as Ayub quitted when his Constitution and Basic Demo-
cracies had also proved failures ? Yahya gave a lengthy reply
saying that the two Situations were not similar; in March
1969 when Ayub resigned there was no threat to the existence
of the country, while in March 1971 when Yahya ordered the .
Army action in East Pakistan, he, according to his interpreta-
tion, was carrying out his obligations not only as President
of. the country and also as chief of the armed forces. He
orn me of lp Oath of office to protect the country’s
ependence and territorial integrity. Legally his argument
may have been valid but te iain not. j
I further asked Yahya why he did not call for a referendum
when the political talks failed, and why he had not taken the
Bengalis into his confidence and told them the whole truth.
As already mentioned, I suggested a referendum in August —
September 1970. Yahya’s answers were incoherent and vague.
I realized that he had lost the control over the decision-making
process. From March 15 to 22 the Army, as a member of
the Dipomatic Corps: stationed in Dacca wrote in his notes,
was willing to make big concessions to Mujib and virtually
to accept his six-point plan, but when Yahya’s. own draft
constitutional formula failed to get Mujib’s approval and Mujib
presented his separation plan on March 23, Yahya lost all his
initiative and so on March 24 the generals decided to take
action. Only the exact hour of their operation was yet to be
fixed. ;
From Ballot to Bullet eeu
. General Tikka, who became Commander-in-Chief of the
“New” Pakistan under Bhutto, was appointed to carry out the
military operations in East Bengal. In an unpublished interview
. with the influential Egyptian journalist Muhammad Hasanain
Haykal, Tikka summed the military situation in East Bengal
when he arrived in Dacca in the first week of March 1971:

184. THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
When I turned to the military aspect, I found we were like
blind men in the Eastern region The officials
of the special branch, the police and the intelligence came
to tell me that the people refused to co-operate. or give
information to their men. We were in complete darkness
regarding what was happening except where we had troops,
This was intolerable. It has never occurred before and it is
impermissible, . .. This man [Mujib] incited mutiny and a
boycott of my troops.* ,
Tikka, as Haykal rightly pointed out, did not know that he
was facing an all-out popular revolution. He did not know that
this revolution arose from deep-rooted national aspirations
which were supported by good reasons. Tikka then narrated
how the political negotiations had not led to any result and
he was ordered by Yahya on March 24 to be prepared toim- .
pose security and order — “I received the order to intervene
on March 24 on the understanding that I would begin action
at dawn on March 25,”7 .
The whole population of Dacca was awakened at 1.30 a.m.
on March 26 by massive machine-gun firing. Dacca University
and the headquarters of the police in Motijeel and of the East
Pakistan Rifles in Pilkanna were the major areas from which
machine-gun fire was heard; heavy explosions were frequent
and it appeared that 105-mm. recoil-less rifles were being
used. Flares were also being fired and large fires were burning
in many parts of the city. Iqbal and Jaganath Halls — the two
largest dormitories of Dacca University — were almost com-
pletely gutted and many students were killed. The East Paki-
stan Rifles and the police put up a brave resistance though they
were overwhelmed by the Army’s massive use of guns and tanks,
The official historian of the Pakistan Army, Major-General
(retd.) Fazal Muqeem Khan, described with apparent pride
the “heroic” performances of the Pakistan Army when, at
midnight on March 25-26 “after due warning [which is not
correct], the army had to use rocket launchers to break open
some rooms of the halls [Dacca University]. From the sound
of fire during that fateful night in Dacca, it appeared as if
there was an actual war on with modern weapons” [my italics].®
This was not an “exaggerated account” by foreign correspon-
dents who, according to a so-called “liberal” West Pakistani

THE CIViIn wap 185
author, “were fA” by the Indians with the “wildest of stories
about ‘genocide’ and ‘pogrom’ » 8 All foreign correspondents
in Dacca were forced to leave and were taken by the Army to
the airport in an undignified manner, searched thoroughly
and put on a plane. Three Correspondents, however, were left
behind inadvertently — Amolg Zeitlin, Michel Laurent and
Simon Dring. They were the first to carry the stories of the
Army’s Operation in Dacca on the midnight of March 25-26,
- One of them, Simon Dring of The Daily Telegraph, published
an account é¢ntitled “How Dacca paid for a united Pakistan”,
one of the earliest Stories to be published in the Western press—
March 30, 1971. His accounts of the Army’s raid on the
campus of Dacca University was vivid and shocking:
Led by the American-sy Plied M-24 World War II tanks,
one column of troops sped to Dacca University shortly after
midnight. Troops took over the British Council library
(situated within the campus) and used it as a fire base from
which to shell nearby dormitory areas. Caught com letely
by surprise, some 200 students were killed in Inbal Hall,
headquarters of the militant anti-government students’
union, I was told. Two days later bodies were still smoulder-
ing in burnt out rooms, others were scattered outside, more
floated in a nearby lake. . . . At another hall, reportedly,
soldiers buried the dead jn a hastily dug mass grave which
was then bull-dozed over by tanks. People living near the
University were Caught in the fire too, and 200 yards
of shanty houses running alongside a railway line were
destroyed.1°
There were many such accounts either from cye-witnesses
or persons whose integrity could not be challenged. An
authentic report was given by Mr. Hendrick van der Heijden,
a member of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development mission that visited East Bengal in June 1971.
The report was obtained by The New York Times and repro-
duced in The Times of London on July 14, 1971. This report and
The Times’ editorial comments on it on the same day deserve
the attention of anyone who wishes to appreciate the magnitude
of the Army’s atrocities in East Bengal during the civil war.
After the dreadful night of March 25-26, the curfew was
lifted on March 27 for three hours from 9 a.m. until noon,
o*

‘ |
186 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Thousands of people were now streaming across the open
fields to take shelter in remote places, and even as they fled
the Army did not hesitate to kill them. At noon there was again
firing from machine-guns on the ground and from many
C-1g0s and circling aircraft and helicopters, the aim being to
create a general panic among the whole population.
The Resistance
While the Army was successful in bringing the peace of
the graveyard to Dacca city, its position in the rest of East
| Bengal was untenable. Its situation was most desperate in
the major seaport of East Bengal, Chittagong, where the second-
in-command of the East Bengal Regiment, Major Ziaur |
Rahman, after killing the West Pakistani commanding officer,
announced the formation of the provisional government
of Bangladesh from Chittagong Radio Station on March 26.
The Bangladesh Government, however, says now that Mujib,
before his arrest, had made a declaration of independence at
midnight on March 25.:It was as follows: “This may be my
last message. From today Bangladesh is independent. I call
upon the people of Bangladesh, wherever you might be and
with whatever you have, to resist the army of occupation to
the last. Your fight must go on until the last soldier of the Paki-
stan occupation army is expelled from the soil of Bangladesh
and final victory is achieved.’"*+ Yet another declaration of
independence was issued by Tajuddin Ahmad, Prime Minister
of the exile government in India, on April 17, 1971, when
after proclaiming Bangladesh as a sovereign Republic, he said:
“Pakistan is now dead and buried under a mountain of
corpses.”1? From all the available evidence it appears that
Mujib never made any proclamation of independence; it
was Major Ziaur Rahman who acted on his own initiative
and was the first to announce it from Chittagong Radio Station
at midnight on March 25-26. The “mutiny” of the East
Pakistan Rifles and the police, and particularly of the East
Bengal Regiment, “came as a great as Fazal Muqueem
says, but how could one expect the Bengali personnel of the
armed forces, the paramilitary force and the police to be pas-
sive spectators while their own people were being massacred ?

_ THE CIVIL WAR 187
The so-called “mutiny” was a natural consequence of the
Army’s operations, It is, however, correct to say that just as
the Army was for confrontation, so also the Bengali
armed personnel were preparing on the lines of their contin-
gency plan under the command of Colonel Osmani, who later
became commander-in-chief of the resistance forces ~ the
Mukti Bahini or liberation army. It was not until the end of
April that the Pakistan Army was able to regain control of the
‘various districts and areas of East Bengal, By May 1971 the
Army had apparently crushed the movement, although the
Army’s situation was never stable or secure.
Indian Involvement
After this apparent defeat, the Bengali resistance forces then |
crossed over to India, where they could obtain arms and am-.
munition as well as sanctuary — the Pakistan Army would not
dare to cross the Indian border, and thus giving sanctuary to the
Mukti Bahini was the first significant move by India in her _
involvement in the crisis. Without India’s arms and sanc-
tuary, Bangladesh might have remained a distant dream of the
Bengali nationalists for many years to come. Just as the Paki-
stan Army’s brutal atrocities can never be condoned, similarly
India’s role, which I discuss in the next chapter, was contrary
to all the basic principles of the U.N. Charter and inter.
national law.
Turning to the internal scene in the emerging Bangladesh
and West Pakistan, the temporary “victory” by the Pakistan
Army over the Bengali resistance forces gave the military junta
- in Islamabad a sense of optimism. But instead of using the time.
gained for developing a constructive and imaginative approach
to the crisis, the Army generals in West Pakistan allowed them-
selves to be fooled. The military régime imposed a stritt censor-
ship of all news about “East Pakistan”. Not only the public in
West Pakistan but even the ruling élite seemed to believe that
the uprising in East Bengal was merely the product of “Indian
agents” and a few “‘miscreants”. It was widely believed in
West Pakistan that the people of “East Pakistan” were not be-
hind the movement. Of course, the Bengali Muslims, as I have
already pointed out, did not like to see Pakistan destroyed,

188 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
particularly by the Indian forces. But the Army’s atrocities
left the Bengalis - whether Awami Leaguers or nationalists —
with no choice. The Army’s actions, particularly Tikka’s and
subsequently Niazi’s policy of “collective punitive actions”,
under which village after village was burnt and destroyed,
turned the entire population of East Bengal against the Paki-
stan Government. It was therefore no wonder that people in
_ such a desperate situation were prepared to embrace even the
devil to escape from total annihilation. Nothing could be fur-
ther from the truth than Fazal Muqueem’s statement: “The
Muslim population, particularly in the rural areas, had wel-
comed the troops and were coming forward in large numbers
to help In fact, the people were living in dread —
their young men’s lives were not secure and their women
were not safe. How could they welcome the troops who were
intent on subjugating them ? ;
May-Fuly 1971 3
“The revolt in East Pakistan had been completely crushed by
the end of May.’5 Thus asserted Fazal Muqueem, and all the
publicity organs of the Government of Pakistan began to tell
the same story. The White Paper published by the Pakistan
‘ Government in August 1971 contained false assertions to the
same effect. But those living outside the jurisdiction of the
“iron curtain” imposed by the Pakistan Government’s. press
censorship had no illusion about the real situation, The Bang-
ladesh crisis was deepening and becoming more complex,
due both to the Army’s continued atrocities and to the
lack of any positive steps by the Pakistani Government, and
indeed to India’s growing involvement in the crisis. |
I had left Pakistan within a week of the Army’s military ac-
tion and came with my family to London to begin a research
assignment at Chatham House. However, no Bengali at that
‘ time could have concentrated his full attention on research.
My family and I spent most of our time reading the British
newspapers and listening to the news on radio and television.
It was the most agonizing period of my life — Bengalis were
being killed mercilessly; Pakistan was nearing its destruction,
which meant too that the Indians were nearing the realization

