TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 149
Political Talks between December 1970 and March ro71
As soon as the results of the election were announced, Yahya
sent greetings to Mujib and Bhutto, Yakya also granted an
amnesty by releasing Persons who had been con\ ‘sted under
martial law for excesses committed during the preceding eigh-
teen months. He was anxious to begin talks with Mujib and
Bhutto. Mahmoud Haroon who, more than any other member
of Yahya’s Cabinet, enjoyed Mujib’s confidence (Mujib’s
close ties with the wealthy Haroon family had raised many
queries and much speculation) went to Dacca with Yahya’s
invitation to Mujib to com, to the czpital of Pakistan. Mujib
was already described in many Ouarters as the “future prime
minister’’, Mujib, however, declined to come to the capital
or to West Pakistan, This significant move was interpreted
in some quarters as meaning that Mujib was not interested in
becoming Prime Minister of a united Pakistan; a more charit-
able interpretation was that Mujib wanted to assert that
henceforth it would bz Dacca and not Rawalpindi where vital
decisions should be made.
Yahya, therefore, had to go to Dacca, where he arrived on
January 12. Yahya had expectations that Mujib \-ould show
him the Awami League draft constitution as he had pledged to
do ‘during their secret meetings on the eve of the elections,
For this reason Yahya asked me to accompany him to Dacca
so that he would have someone to advise him on Mujib’s draft |
constitution. The first meeting between Yahya and Mujib
took place on January 12 and lasted over three hours; no other
person was present. As soon as the meeting was over, I received
and answered a summons from the President’s House to see
Yahya. I found him bitter and frustrated. He told me: “Mujib
has let me down. Those who warned me against him were
right; I was wrong in trusting this person.” He then gave me
the substance of his discussion with Moujib in great angu'sh zs
well as anger. Mujib had refused to show him the draft con-
‘stitution as he had solemnly promised before the election. He
made it clear to Yahya that as leader of the majority party,
he and he alone, -was responsible for the new constitution;
Yahya’s job was to summon the Assembly immediately ;
he threatened Yahya with “dire consequences” if he failed to

150 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
do so. For Yahya it was the greatest shock; he had taken a great
risk by putting faith in Mujib’s assurances and promises,
His image among the army generals would be serious!y affected
as he had been proved to be naive in dealing with Mujib.
As already mentioned, he had had a constitutional fo: mula
prepared by me which had conceded almost a'l the de:nands
of the Mujib programme. There were only two differences;
Yahya agreed to have a central authority with only three
subjects plus some peripheral items such as nationality,
emigration, issuing of passports, etc. In the plan prepared by
me, the centre’s list.did not have more than five or six items
in all, but the real powers were three: foreign affairs, defence
and currency. But since he wanted to ensure that the centre
should discharge those functions properly, he demanded that
while the centre would have no power of levying taxation,
there should be some provisions guaranteed in the constitution
so that.the centre would receive a fixed percentage of
_ certain taxes, so that it could carry on its responsibilities
without being dependent on the federating units for an uncer-
tain, if not voluntary, contribution which might even vary
from time to time.
Secondly, he could not agree with the subtle distinction
between political or diplomatic and economic aspects of
-foreign affairs, as I have earlier pointed out while analysing the
six points. Yahya’s compromise formula on this issue was that
the state of Bangladesh would have the right to appoint its
trade commissioner or economic representative abroad and
also to enter into agreements with foreign countries on
economic. matters, provided that such economic dealings with
foreign countries were “not against the fundamentals of the
country’s foreign policy”. If, for instance, Pakistan’s foreign
policy demanded that there should not be any economic
ties wtih a hostile country or neighbour, Bangladesh. could
not enter into any agreement with such country or countries.
‘When it was argued by the Awami Leaguers that West Paki-
stan might not wish to have economic or trade relations with
India in preference to China, Yahya’s reply was that, thanks
to his granting of “one man, one vote’’, the Bengalis would
have a clear majority in the federal legislature, and the
country’s Prime Minister should shape its foreign policy.

| TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 15!
There was no satisfactory answer on this from Mujib or his
advisers. -
The discussion between Yahya and Mujib and his party
colleagues continued even after their frustrating first meeting
on January 12, But it was clear that Pakistan was drifting to-
wards a fatal corifrontation.
At the time of leaving Dacca, Yahya told newsmen that he
had had discussions” with Mujib. He also made a signi-
ficant comment: “When he (Mujib] comes and takes over,
I won't be there. It is going to be his government soon,’8
I knew that there was an understanding between Yahya and
Mujib that while the former would continue to be the con-
stitutional figurehead in a parliamentary system, Mujib as the |
leader of the majority party would be prime minister, As he |
was leaving Dacca Yahya said that Mujib would be the future '
prime minister of the’country.3? Yahya’s remark that he would |
not be there while Mujib took over indicated that the under-
standing built up between them over a period of nearly two :
years (1969-70), reaching its peak in November 1970 when
Yahya complied with Mujib’s request not to postpone the elec-
tions following the terrible’ cyclone, had nearly broken down.
I met Yahya on the eve of his departure from Dacca, He
expressed his total frustration and bitterness over Mujib’s *
changed attitude. He told me that he was going to see Bhutto
and other West Pakistani leaders, to urge them to come to .
Dacca and prevail upon Mujib to see reason. When I Speci-
fically asked him: “Have you reminded Mujib about his |
pledges, made on the eve of elections?”, Yahya’s reply was |
- made with deep anguish: “You and I are not politicians — |
it is difficult for me to understand their mind and ways of
thinking, Let us pray and hope for the best.” I knew what
_ these words meant. I asked for his permission to go abroad for
two weeks on some personal-cum-official business; he readily
allowed me to go but in a rather touching way asked me not
to desert him at this critical time, and I assured him of
my full and loyal support to him in his endeavours to find a
Political solution that would Prevent the break-up of the
country at that crucial moment. .
After the ill-fated meeting between Yahya and Mujib on
| January 12 and my Own meeting with Yahya the same even-

152 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
ing, I told a Bengali colleague’ of mine in the i
Mr. Hafizuddin, about these ys Ta! developments, He ‘Lad
good contacts with Mujib, and is in fact a relation of his, ]
urged Hafizuddin to see Mujib and plead with him-not to
take a position of no return, Hafizuddin was equally con-
cerned over the post-election developments. He saw Mujib
and reminded him of his Pledge to show Yahya the draft
constitution as prepared by the Awami League. Mujib’s reply
to Hafizuddin was evasive; he could not deny it, but turned to
Tajuddin who was also present at the meeting and Tajuddin’s
prompt reply, as Hafizuidin reported to me later on, was:
“We did not make such a pledge, nor is there any need to show
our draft constitution to anybody.” It may. be recalled that
when the period of 120 days was fixed for completing the task
of framing the constitution, it was solemnly agreed by all
. parties, including Mujib and his party, that the real discussion
on the future constitution would be made and finalized before
the assembly met; otherwise it was impossible for the assembly
. to produce a constitution in 120 days with so many compli-
cated issues — because of which the two constituent assemblies
in Pakistan had taken nine years (1947-56) to produce an
agreed constitution. ;
The Larkana Dialogue °
It was in this mood of Yahya went to Bhutto’s
home town, Larkana, to have a discussion with him. I was
not present at the Larkana talks, having by this time left
Pakistan for a tour abroad. Bhutto took full advantage of
Yahya’s frustration with Mujib. At Larkana Yahya and other
prominent members of the junta — including General Hamid,
whose hatred for Mujib was well known, and Peerzada,
Bhutto’s closest friend in the junta — enjoyed Bhutto’s hospita-
lity, and in the course of rather colourful social evenings
‘a new and most sinister alliance seems to have developed.
between the military junta and Bhutto - though Yahya never
believed in him. Bhutto has given his version of the discussion
held in Larkana: “We discussed with the President the
implications of the six points and expressed our serious mis-
givings about them. We nevertheless assured him that we

TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 153
-were determined to make every effort for a viable com-
In the meantime Bhutto had a round of talks
with Mujib at Dacca, He and his party arrived there on Jan-
uary 27. I was there to watch the outcome, if any; of the
political dialogue between the two leaders who had emerged
as the leaders of East and West Pakistan, There were three
days of talks but, due to their lack of mutual understanding,
there could hardly be any progress towards political
settlement, though such talks were the most obvious course
for any meaningful settlement. The election results demon-
strated that neither Mujib nor Bhutto represented. Pakistan
as a whole; so that if an agreed constitution were to be
framed, there must be some understanding between the. two )
most representative parti¢s in Pakistan — just as an under-
standing between the Congress and the Muslim League had
been needed in 1946-7 for any constitutional formula that
| would result in the British raj being liquidated voluntarily.
| Yahya could transfer power only when the represen-
tative groups in -the country could agree on some sort of
modus operandi for the transfer of power from the military régime
to the elected representatives. Even if they were to agree to’
divide Pakistan, as the Congress and the Muslim League
finally agreed to divide India in 1947, there still needed to be
an agreement. Yahya,. true to his commitment to protect
Pakistan’s territorial integrity, had no mandate to preside over
its dismemberment: : a
The Mujib-Bhutto talks, though reported in the press as
having been held “in a cordial atmosphere” at the former’s
residence, were noted for lack of any progress. Mujib made it
clear to Bhutto, as I gathered from various sources, that -he
was not prepared to modify the six-point plan, while Bhutto
made it clear that his party could not agyee to a veiled scheme
of secession under the plan. Bhutto gives his version: ““Mujib’s
strategy was to bring the national assembly to session without
loss of time in order to give legal sanction to his six points —
to thrust a six-point constitution on the pountry before full
awareness of its implications could grow in West Pakistan or,
for that matter, in the East wing itself. He sought to pressure
the people of the country into submission, to leave no time
for Teflection,’’?4 a
|

154 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
There is no public record of Mujib and his party’s reaction
to Bhutto’s mission to Dacca. After the Larkana dialogue
Bhutto was regarded by Mujib and his party as an “agent”
of the hawkish elements of the junta who, according.to him,
were still unreconciled to the idea of any genuine transfer of
power. Another complicating factor in a Mujib-Bhutto
understanding was their divergent attitude towards India.
Mujib was in favour of friendly relations with New Delhi,
while Bhutto was still regarded as anti-Indian, When an
elderly Bengali leader, who belonged to no political party,
suggested to Mujib that Bhutto should be made deputy prime
minister and foreign minister, Mujib’s reaction was one of
extreme disepproval and anger. Mujib was reported to be
ready “to make Bhutto Agricultural Minister” in his cabinet,
but Bhutto would be the last person to be given the foreign
office. The elderly Bengali political leader was dismayed by
this attitude, not out of love for Bhutto but for its grave im-
plications. “
Mahmood Haroon also played a significant role in ensuring
. an understanding between Mujib and Bhutto, which was
so vital for any political settlement, would not come about.
- Haroon did his best to portrait Bhutto to Mujib as “‘the army’s
| man”. Mujib had already been suspicious of this; he did not
like the fact that Yahya and other generals had visited Bhutto’s
home town Larkana, and Haroon most skilfully exploited the
situation. |
The Contingency Plan.
After the fateful Larkana talks, the army junta met formally
at Rawalpindi in mid-February to discuss the political situa-
tion. It was at this meeting that the junta decided to challenge
Mujib if he persisted in his uncompromising attitude, but signi-
| ficantly it ignored Bhutto’s provocative speeches. Bhutto was
‘now regarded by the hawkish generals like Hamid, Omar and
Gul Hasan, as well as by his trusted friend Peerzada, as the
defender of “the national interests” of Pakistan as interpreted
by the ruling élite. It was at this meeting that the junta decided
to dissolve the cabinet - whose members had already expressed
their desire to be relieved after the election. But at the cabinet

| . TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 155
meeting on December . .
with it as some of its ee alg gi ves fs
with Mujib, while he needed the ail if nas ae
long as constitutional dialogue pers; “biggest
hold over the junta, which had eos hee gh
clining because of his failure to mont ee Mes oe
Both Ahsan a Modify Mujib’s policy,
and me es discredited. Ahsan wanted to be
7 a hawk, He a aged
sien. n. The cabinet was
so'vec On February 17, but within forty-eigh
Yahya invited some of its members includin eee —
tinue as his advisers, Instead of a counci il pike La i i
to have.a council of advisers, But the Bengali chic ome:
proposed council — with one exception, Ahsan ah Hu a
clined to continue any longer. Of the West Pakistan ral =
of ha cabinet Cornelius decided to shack
cause of Mujib’s ated dem warnd ,
announced on F heard: 3 that ene
meet in Dacca-on March 3. Bhutto immediatel raised ‘ls
flag of rebellion. He declared that unless there al an under-
standing Mujib and himself on the future constituent
assembly, it would not be allowed -to meet. He threatened "a
revolution from the Khyber to Bhutto by this
time knew his bargaining strength; powerful members of the
Junta were with him rather than with Yahya. As pointed out
earlier, Yahya had a free hand in formulating his scheme for -
the transfer of power and holding elections, but the junta
adopted a policy of “wait and see”; if Yahya were successful
in maintaining the unity of the country, by whatever constitu-
. tional device, well. and good, but from late January, when
Yahya had had his abortive talks with Mujib, the junta was
| not prepared to remain as a passive spectator of political
and constitutional issues. From January the process of decision-
making had changed: : :
As already pointed out, Pakistan under Yahya had a mili-
tary or inner cabinet apart from a civilian one. I had the oppor-
tunity of attending the inner cabinet while the L.F.O. was
being drafted — not as a member of Yahya’s civilian cabinet
but rather I was a constitutional expert. I therefore had rome
idea of how the decision-making process operated during

156 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Yahya’s time. By and large, Yahva had a free hand in the
country’s day-to-day and routine administration and in exter-
nal affairs, but he was always careful to have any important
decision approved by his inner cabinet — even’ lis policy state-
ments used to be thoroughly discussed by them. Unlike Ayub,
Yahya operated within a collective leadership although he
retained the vital role for himself. |
It is my assessment that in February Yahya, like Ahsan,
might also have been replaced by Hamid; he would not per-
haps have been unhappy to go. But for some reason, the junta
had to carry on with Yahya. It was conscious of the adverse
international reaction that would have been created by Yahya’s
removal or resignation, particularly in Washington and Peking,
in the context of the role assigned to him by Nixcn to develop
ties between Washington and Peking.
_ So Yahya continued to play his role in an untenable
situation. Following Bhutto’s: threat, the National Assembly,
which had been scheduled to meet on March 3, was postponed
indefinitely. Yahya’s announcement on March 1 on the post-
ponement of the Assembly could not have been more provoca-
tive or tragic. When I asked him about it on March 5, he looked
vacant and helpless; I was convinced he had only been a
signatory to it. Bhutto and Peerzada were reported to have
drafted the statement. Yahya, unlike on previous occasions,
did not broadcast it; it was only read out over the radio.
Before Yahya left Rawalpindi for Karachi to pursuade
Bhutto to go to Dacca so that the National Assembly might
not be postponed, he had already sent Peerzada, Ahsan and
Yakub on the same mission to persuade Bhutto to attend the
National Assembly. He gave Bhutto a solemn promise that if
Mujib were to “thrust a six-point constitution” against the
wishes of the majority of the West Pakistan members and if
his constitutional draft would mean splitting the country, he
would at once prorogue the assembly; however nothing could
satisfy Bhutto. When it became evident that as a result of
Bhutto’s threat of boycotting the assembly, the majority of the
West Pakistani assembly members would not attend the session,
Yahya decided to postpone the summoning of the assembly,
but he wanted to issue a statement which should cause the
least provocation possible in East Pakistan. Though I was

TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 157
no longer a member of hig Cabinet, Yahya asked me to epare
a statement in a CONCiliatory vein. I baba to
draft the proposed statement, which ran as follows:
| In view of the Complete deadlock between the two principal
Te representing East and West Pakistan respectively,
. 7, 4m Constrained to Postpone the mecting of the National
‘Assembly on March 3) 1970. I would however wish to make
_ it absolutely Clear that the Postponement will not exceed
fwo to three weeks and during this short period, I shall
make all endeavours to bring between the
elected will of the two regions of our country.
| As you recall, I have often said in the past and I want
fo reaffirm that I have nO desire to impose a constitution
either on East or on West Pakistan against the wishes of the
People. A true federal Constitution, to Which the political
_ Parties and my régime are all committed, Cannot be framed
without the consensus of various federating units. I shall
be the happiest Person when a consensus on a federal union
18 arrived at, and on iY Part I assure my nation that I shall
‘pare no efforts to achieve this supreme goal.
I sincerely’ hope and appeal to my brethren in East
Pakistan to appreciate the gravity of the situation and allow
me this short period of two or three weeks to work for an
“agreed formula, Insha Allah [by the Grace of God] we shall
Overcome this difficulty, Let us remember Quaid-e-Azam’s
immortal saying “Pakistan has come to stay”; let us all
dedicate ourselves to the fulfilment of the desire of the .
| Father of the Nation. Tua,
I personally handed over the draft of the statement at Isla-
mabad airport as Yahya was leaving for Karachi, He sub-
sequently gave it to Peerzada, who, in alliance with Bhutto,
torpedoed it. I still fee] regret that I did not accompany Yahya
to Karachi. My reluctance was due to the fact that I was no
longer'a member of the cabinet; I also expressed my inability
to accept his offer of beirig an “adviser”, By accompanying
Yahya to Karachi, I would have caused unnecessary speculation
i ith Yahya. But I now realize that Yahya’s |
about my links wi ‘pe Pate
t weakness was his fickle-mindedness; he approved my
ny ban yan, when Bat sod Pec
Yahya, true to his weak Personality, accepted
another draft, as I cannot provide documentary
the provocative one. Though a :

158 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
evidence of this, I heard from the personal sta fof the President,
including his Military Secretary, that Yahya was most reluctant
to sign the statement prepared by Peerzada in collusion with
Bhutto. But the pressures were strong and Yahya yielded.
Dacca Revolts
As soon as the postponement of the Assembly was Announced
over the radio, the reaction in Dacca was violent. Mujib started
what he termed “non-violent non-co-operation”’, but it was
not the Gandhian type of non-violent mon-co-operation, nor
was the Pakistan ruling junta’s reaction marked by any moder-
ation as was that of the British authorities. Mujib started en
open revolt which virtually amounted to a unilateral declara-
_tion of independence for Bangladesh, and what was almost a
parallel government began to function under Mujib’s instruc-
tions. Between 3 and 25 March the central Government’s
writ did not run in East Pakistan.
But even at this stage Yahya end Mujib were still talking
to each other by long-distance telephone. On the eve of
public meeting on March 7, when many people thought that
he would finally announce the independence of Bangladesh,
Yahya had lengthy talks with Mujib over the phone. The tone
was still cordial; both still seemed eager to negotiate. Mujib
invited Yahya to come to Dacca and see the explosive situation
for himself, while Yahya appealed to Mujib not to take a step
from which there would be no return. I was present in Yahya’s
office when the telephone call came. I wanted to leave but
Yahya indicated that I should stay.
Mujib did not declare independence on March 7 but he
laid down four conditions to be met before he could consider
participating in the National Assembly, which Yahya decided
on March 6 to summon at Dacca on March 25 without any
conditions. But Mujib would not now attend the Assembly
the postponement of which had created a most explosive
situation from March 1 onwards. Mujib’s four conditions
were: immediate withdrawal of martial law; the Army’s
return to barracks; a judicial inquiry into the loss of life caused
by the Army’s action; and immediate transfer of power,
i.e. before the Assembly met or could frame a constitution.

