22°. THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN —
Yahya. Yahya was loyal to Ayub, whose calculations seemed
to be that Yahya was a non-political and non-serious type
who would be content with relaxed social evenings. But Ayub’s
cardinal mistake was to ignore Yahya’s long-standing friend-
ship and close association with Major-General Peerzada,
who had been Ayub’s military secretary until 1964, when he
was removed after a heart attack. Peerzada, who was inordin-
ately ambitious, could never forget his removal from the
President’s House, and when Bhutto was also sacked by Ayub
in 1966, these two developed a close friendship based on their
common animosity towards Ayub. The Bhutto-Peerzada axis
had great significance both in the fall of Ayub in 1969 and
in the dismemberment of Pakistan in 1971.
Ayub might have recovered his position in the army, but a
number of factors were working against him. Soon after the
Indo-Pakistani war of 1965, Mujibur Rahman put forward
his six-point programme for regional autonomy in East Paki-
stan. Mujib’s scheme will be analysed later in discussing poli-
tical dialogues during Yayha’s régime. Here it may simply be
said that'in the same city of Lahore where Jinnah presented
his scheme for a separate homeland for Indian Muslims in
1940, Mujib, twenty-six years later in 1966, presented a vei'ed
scheme of secession under the garb of demands for regional
autonomy. Those who cherished the ideals of a united Pakistan
were appalled by threats to Pakistan’s viability; Mujib’s scheme
also demonstrated Ayub’s failure, in spite of a much-publi-
cized campaign, to achieve national integration.
_ Then there was an attempt to kidnap and assassinate Ayub
in December 1967 while he was on tour in East Pakistan. The
plot was unsuccessful and unpublicized — only the foreign press
published the news, and All-India Radio also broadcast it
with the usual exaggeration. It affected Ayub’s image with
his armed forces: he was no longer regarded as “supreme
boss”, and became vulnerable. A. .
The Agartala Conspiracy Case
Soon after the attempt on Ayub’s life, the Pakistan political
scene was rocked by the startling news of a case of conspiracy
with alleged Indian help to bring about secession of East

Pakistan THE
: thre F
— en areas ms OF AYUB
ig ‘Bich Sees of gen 1gs.* Even b 23
was » and so 0 full conspi efore the Go
still 3 n. In of acy Vv
peau Dacca f fact, en January 7 Stir
duel and Wes cal sci ecember ok place w hil ests,
pi Pakistan — of oust 967. A saa Ayub
eeting was stay at D arranged us universities i of the
li . h a es
m nationali ow to 7aCCa. Tl at the Presi in both
a : Ga ent fi atent iscussion
edhe also ask ea and or Pakistan. ve spirit of th at the
ident’s ed to 1 Q. Shah . Ayub’s e Mus-
The House partici ab. w two top civi
was i a i te and as ass present ewe
e€ was ruptl an “atm nas I ent
apap cede
Sea with him and pr tapi lage hardly talk
abrupt can m and g of s part in y talk,
in cella wh the meeti such di
conclusi tion of th en I exp eeting I iscus-
The ve. I coul e meeti ressed , lhada
Eas same even d realize ae his repl wid reaction to
oe fe , the usu ae as incoherent ha
appeared onour of banquet aie had ha nd
ai fay Ste after abou the visiting ba the aa
ad a discussi part. At th t two hours esident be or of
a seni on. with € pro - — an gan late:
inkl or and ca the Chi Gor unusual phe ,
pee 1g of the abi Be eae of Civil ans i
casion I could mpending cri officer. He ce (Centr al
The mo r get little i risis. Or gave me th )s
cas st seri e informati plot alth e firs
fea Mujib’ i development of = data ough on ce
rnment & imp icati : G e 1
since the rept ett cae it-a poy conspira
the Ag ement for si Mujib days 1 a
w artala ca r six points oa who had ater, the
es most The rea tiers in 1966, iil ee in jail
e government urable in East P 7 Mujib’s arr involved in
* On announ akistan. rest in th
discov January 2 cements of th I was in D € case
In ei of a it 1968, the Go e conspir acca when
in help. It ba ring me ae of Pakis acy case and of
nos osed that t the secession of tan announced 0.
Mr P. N. Ojha, the First S eran ter a East Pakist the
‘tee and they were all tary of th had been arr with
other materi rted to hav ave been tee in Tate.
terial aid acro e contacted engaged in
Ss the border 2 the Indian offi _anti-state

24 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
the subsequent arrest of Mujib were made. The reaction
among the Bengali intelligentsia, particularly those at Dacca
University, was one of utter disbelief - and to the masses in
East Pakistan Mujib became a martyr overnight. Ayub could
do then no greater disservice or harm than to make Mujib a
hero.
What were the factors which led the Government to arrest
Mujib and to give undue prominence and publicity to the
Agartala case? Subversive activities of this kind had not been
uncommon in the subcontinent since 1947; both India and
Pakistan accused each other of internal subversion and with
some justification. Pakistan’s hands were not clean in Kashmir
nor in the Mizo unrest in Assam; similarly Indian involvement
in the agitation and. upheaval in East Pakistan was nothing
new or unusual.
Some explanations can be given relating to Mujib’s arrest.
Ayub’s Provincial Governor in East Pakistan, Monem Khan,
and one of Ayub’s Bengali cabinet ministers thought that
the best and most effective way to meet Mujib’s' challenges
was to implicate him in an Indian-inspired conspiracy which,
it was expected, would ruin his political career. Such calcula-
tions may have been made and Ayub may have received such
advice, but I cannot vouch for such an interpretation of Mujib’s
arrest. After joining the Pakistan cabinet in 1969, when the
Argartala case had already been withdrawn, I read the intelli-
gence reports, both civil and military, relating to it carefully.
According to these reports, which were also vouched for by
a senior Bengali intelligence officer whose intgrity I did not
doubt and who now holds a top position in Mujib’s govern-
ment in Bangladesh, Mujib’s indictment was based on the
following data:
Ojha of the Indian Mission- at Dacca used to have regular
rendezvous with one of Mujib’s closest followers, who is now in
a key position in the ruling Awami League party in Bangladesh ;
in fact, he was like a member of his family and was often in
his residence at Dacca. Ojha’s meetings with Mujib’s man were
carefully observed by the intelligence service, and there were
photographs of his movements, Mujib’s man, after lengthy
discussions with Ojha, would go to Mujib’s residence at Dhan-
mondhi, Dacca, following a roundabout way from the place of

THE FALL OF AYUB 25
a ig Ojha at an obscure spot in the old quarter
ieee, ts oe Mujib’s wife, though an uneducated woman,
“an active part in politics after her husband’s
arrest in 1966; both his wife and Mujib’s follower had regular
‘meetings with him Dacca Central Jail where Mujib
was detained and, thanks to the sympathetic attitude of the
Bengali officers and staff of the jail, Mujib had no difficulty in
. discussing sey political plan or plot, even from his confine-
rir This, according to the intelligence people, was the basis
of Mujib’s involvement in the case. But the public, who were
never told the inside story, were naturally furious over Mujib’s
arrest. They asked, quite legitimately, how he could be a
‘party to the conspiracy since he was already in prison.!*
After the creation of Bangladesh, Mujib himself confessed
that he had been the secession of East Bengal
for some But the reaction to Mujib’s arrest over the
Agartala case in East Pakistan could not have been worse.
Not only Mujib’s arrest but the stupid way the case, which‘was
otherwise based on facts, was handled by the Ayub régime +
portended ill for Pakistan’s viability as a united country;
it had an effect in bringing. nearer the final dismember-
ment of Pakistan in the same way as the
and frequent observance of “‘Anti-Pakistan Days” by the In-
dian parties, like Hindu Mahasabha, had made “Pakistan”
known and popular among the masses of Indian Muslims in the
19408. .
oA special tribunal was set up headed by a former Chief
Justice of Pakistan, S. A. Rahman. The trial was public, in
contrast to the Rawalpindi conspiracy case of 1951.* There
was long debate among the ruling élite about whether the
trial should be held in camera or be open. Ayub’s publicity
chief, Altaf Gauhar,, was in favour of an open trial not because
® The first Prime Minister of Pakistan, Liaqat Ali Khan, announced in
March 1951 that the chief of staff of the Pakistan Army, General Akbar
Khan, and other senior officers, had plotted to overthrow the government,
who were alleged to have planned “to resort to force with the support of
Communist and revolutionary elements” to establish a military dictator-
ship, The Pakistan Constituent Assembly passed the Rawalpindi Conspiracy
(Special Tribunal) Act, 1951, which established a special court to try the
Case in camera.

26 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
it would be fair but with the object of exposing the “conspira-
tors”. But this was a grand miscalculation: the publicity had
"just the opposite effect. Mujib and others involved in the case
became Bengali national heroes. The reaction to the Agartala
case among the Bengalis demonstrated clearly that Bengali
sub-nationalism was now a fully-fledged national movement
for a separate state of the Bengalis, During the course of the
proceedings of the case, all details of the future state of Bang-
ladesh were fully described, such as the colours and design
of the national flag, the national anthem, etc. A British lawyer,
T. Williams, Q.C., was allowed to come to defend Mujib;.
he was assisted by the former Chief Justice of East Pakistan,
S. M. Murshed, who had been arbitrarily removed by the Gov-
ernment. Justice Murshed is a man of calibre and integrity,
and his indirect support in extending co-operation to Mujib’s
British lawyer had a further impact on the Bengali public,
particularly the intelligentsia and journalists over whom Mur-
shed had tremendous influence. His removal as the Chief
Justice of East Pakistan had already antagonized public opinion
in East Pakistan. The Government’s side was taken up by
Ayub’s former Foreign Minister, Manzoor Quader. At one
stag¢, another former Foreign Minister of Ayub, Z. A. Bhutto,
appeared in the court in Mujib’s defence, and Mujib was
reported to have joked: ““The Government has engaged a
former Foreign Minister, so I also have one former Foreign
The drama unfolded in the fullest glare of publicity, and the
Dacca newspapers were giving banner headlines to the pro-
ceedings of the case. Talk of secession was no longer covert or
underground; it was now freely discussed and debated, thanks
to the wonderful publicity given by. the Ayub régime itself,
To draw another comparison with pre-independence days
in undivided India, the Agartala case had given the same .
impetus to the cause of Bengali nationalism as Jinnah’s vigorous
‘publicity campaign against Congress rule in the Muslim
minority provinces in 1937~9 gave to the creation of Pakistan.
Jinnah was successful in making the Indian Muslims realize
that there was a conspiracy by the majority Hindu community
to destroy the Muslim culture, ways of life, economic and
political interests; he observéd a “Day of Deliverance” when

THE FALL OF AYUB 27
Congress rule came to an end in 1999. The publicity in the
Agartala case did not expose Mujib or ee the Indian
involvement; Mujib’s chief defence lawyer, Abdus Salam, ar
Awami Leaguer, himself told me that he had no doubt about
India’s involvement in the case, It only exposed the Ayub
Government’s apathy and neglect of the Bengalis’ legitim te
rights and interests and thereby added arguments in favour of
a separate state for the Bengalis.
Ayub’s Serious Illness
Soon. after the announcement of the Agartala conspiracy case,
Ayub was caught with a near-fatal illness — he suffered from
a pulmonary embolisin, News of the illness was first published
on January 29, 1968, saying that he had “‘an attack of in-
fluenza”. Subsequently, it was announced on February 6 that
he had developed viral pneumonia in the right lung. It was
further stated that his physician had advised him to rest “for a
few weeks”. This piece of advice soon gave rise to all sorts of
speculation and rumours. I tried to ascertain the real situation
myself by izquiring from the Foreign Secretary, S. M. Yousuf,
who till recently had been Ayub’s principal secretary. To my
utter surprise, Yousef confessed his ignorance of the true
condition of Ayub’s health; he added that nobody was allowed
to see the sick President. Subsequently, I talked to Fida Hasan,
Ayub’s principal secretary and then promoted to his “‘Adviser”’,
but again I could not get the full news though Fida Hasan
gave me sufficient indication of the seriousness of the illness.
Ayub’s personal physician, Colonel Mohiuddin, was a friend
of mine. It was to contact Mohiuddin during
those days, but in due course I got the full story from Mohiud-
din. In the meantime, my best source of information was my
next-door neighbour in Islamabad, Group-Captain T. S. Jan,
who was second in command of the highest military intelli-
gence service, the Inter-Services Intelligence Division(1.S.I.D.).
The chief of the I.S.1.D., General Akbar, was closely known to
me. According to their version, Ayub was a “lost person”;
Jan described him as “an umbrella without the cloth-cover -
just the steel framework”. Ayub was completely debilitated
for more than six weeks. Nobody except his family, Altaf
*

28 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Gauhar, General Yahya and very few others such as Fida
Hasan or General Musa was allowed to see him.
According to Ayub’s Constitution (Article 16), when the
President was incapacitated due to illness or for any other
reason, the Speaker would assume the presidential functions,
But that was the constitutional provision only; when Ayub
used to go abroad, the “Bengali” Speaker of the National
Assembly would become the Acting President. But the situation
in February 1968 was quite different. As I learned subse-
quently from Mohiuddin, for about forty-eight hours there
seemed scarcely any hope of Ayub’s survival. So there the
question was not that of an acting arrangement but of succes-
sion.
The battle for succession within the military junta began:
the generals, air-marshals and admirals were “jockeying and
jostling” with each other to take the President’s place; the
constitutional arrangement was put aside. The three main
contenders, according to to my sources of information from
I.8.I.D., were General Yahya Khan, the Commander-in-
Chief; Air-Marshal Nur Khan, the ambitious chief of the Air
Force, and Ayub’s Defence Minister, Admiral A. R. Khan.
Soon it became evident that Yahya was the strongest contender
because in the Pakistan armed forces, the Air Force and Navy
were not equal in prestige to the land forces, and as Yahya was
the Commander-in-Chief and was living next door to the
President, he had a better chance than any of the other
contenders. Rumours that some younger officers were trying
_to capture power against the generals also circulated, but there
was no such real threat.
Yahya was reported to have said to a lady sitting next to
him at a dinner in February: “Do you know by whose
side are you sitting?” Then he gave the answer himself:
“The next President of Pakistan.” Yahya’s long-standing
colleague and friend, Major-General Peerzada, was the
happiest person; he could never forget his removal from the
Presidential House. He now saw the prospect of re-entering
the Palace with much greater power and position than before,
and was gleefully awaiting the day.
Ayub, however, survived the pulmonary embolism. His
publicity chief began to display Ayub’s recovery on television.

Kas aia THE FALL OF AYUB 29
yu to give “Fj ws
speeches to the co ie radio-television
’m March 1, 1968, Ayub followed this
P , though on television he
ELI AS appeared a sick man. Altaf
ts © announced that Ayub would take the sal th
military parade on Pakistan’s National D de ig
that had to be cancelled. Defence Minis caer send
peared to do the job on March 23 “ae ek nae =
confident mood, was the real man of the sh "The fo sign
‘diplomats who were present on the occasio aa old § at ha
changed mood in the army hierarchy. rer wie
Ayub gradually began to resume his work at the President's
House, though on a restricted basis. The number of visito
allowed to see the President was reduced. There was an
group of three in the ruling élite: Altaf; Ayub’s military na
tary, Major-General Rafi Khan; and ‘his physician, Colonel
Mohiuddin, This tri aren ers
trio more or less controlled Ayub’s activities
and he was gradually cut off from the other powerful members .
of the ruling élite; this had a prejudical effect on Ayub’s con-
tinuation in power. Finally, Ayub went to London for a medical
check-up in the summer of 1968. He was given, according to
Government publicity, “a clean bill of good health”.
I met Ayub in London and found him in much better shape
than when I had last seen him in later April on the eve
of Kosygin’s first visit to Pakistan. In spite of his poor health,
Ayub made two important decisions almost from his sick-bed.
First, he give notice to the U.S. Government to close its mili-
tary communications centre at Badaber, near Peshawar.
Then he had a serious conversation with Kosygin over the
provision of Russian arms to Pakistan; thus a move which he
had been frantically planning since 1965 had at last been
successful, though the Russian arms consisted of nothing more
than “nuts and bolts”.
After Ayub’s return from London with the news of his “full
recovery”, the celebration of “The Great Decade” was re-
vived with full vigour and enthusiasm. These year-long cele-
brations, like the publicity of the Agartala conspiracy case,
constituted another great miscalculation by the régime and had
a most unfavourable effect on Ayub’s image in the country.
The programme for a full one-year celebration of the “De-
cade of Reforms” was mainly the brain-child of Altaf, and it

30 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
was surprising that a man of Altaf’s, calibre and intelligence
should make such a stupid programme. In a country with so
many- unsolved socio-economic problems, the Government
began to publicize its achievements — phenomenal economic
growth; a large number of new universities, colleges and other
educational institutions; “grand achievements” in foreign
policy, etc. It is true that Pakistan under Ayub achieved
remarkable economic growth, but as pointed out earlier, the
fruits of this development were not equitably distributed. The
economic conditions of the poor and the urban lower middle
classes were rather getting worse, particularly after 1965,
when development projects had to be cut off as a result of the
Indo-Pakistani war and the consequent rise in defence expendi-
ture. At the same time the main source of economic aid, i.e.
Washington, was becoming chary of giving aid to Pakistan.
In 1967-8, the country’s economic situation was not ripe for the
Government’s to harp in its publicity on “the miracle” of
economic growth and prosperity. Instead of enhancing the
of Ayub, it only reminded the people of their unsatis-
factory conditions. In East Pakistan, where there was great
resentment over Ayub’s economic policy, the publicity over
the “Decade of Reforms” was a great source of annoyance and
provocation. As a counter-move, the Bengalis displayed the
skeleton of a starved villager in front of Shahid-Minar (memorial
to those killed over the language issue) to tell the people tha:
notwithstanding the so-called “‘miracle” of progress and pros-
perity, their conditions had not improved, Even in West Paki-
stan, in cities like Karachi and Lahore, the publicity did harm
rather than good to the Ayub régime, It was another ill-
planned scheme.
Political Unrest in West Pakistan
Ayub, after his medical check-up in London, began to make
preparations for the coming Presidential election in 1969-70.
The “Great Decade” performance culminated on October
27, 1968 — the tenth anniversary of Ayub’s accession to power.
The majority of opposition parties had decided to !:o;cott the
election as they were convinced that unless the indirect metiiol
of election through the Basic Democrats were not changed, it

THE FALL OF AYUB 31
was no use their contesting the election. The results of the
1964-5 clection had demonstrated that the wishes of the
electorate were not truly reflected in the results of the election
because of the indirect election. Only Mr. Bhutto, whose links
with some particularly his old friend Peerzada, were
growing, w-: hoping to enter the Presidential Palace at any
cost. So he refused to join in the opposition parties’ boycott.
The real and most crucial developments were taking place
at GHQ at Rawalpindi. Ayub’s recovery, though never full,
and his plan to contest the presidential election had upset the
plans and calculations of those generals who had been getting
ready to enter the Presidential House during his illness in
February 1968. It was at this stage that a deal was struck
between Bhutto and Peerzada to initiate a movement
against Ayub. Peerzada himself told me the story gleefully
after his dream of re-entering the Presidential House had been
fulfilled in March 1969.
Lhe climate for anti-Ayub agitation was ripe. As described
in the preceding pages, Ayub’s image and popularity had been
declining both am: .g the and, more important, among
his true constituency — the armed forces — since the war of
1965. The dissatisfaction over the Tashkent agreement, the
growing East-West Pakistan tensions threatening the viability
of a united Pakistan, and economic discontent after the 1965
war were all working against Ayub. Furthermore, in a system
of one-man rul- like Ayub’s political order, constant and vigor- —
ous leadership and guidance from the chief boss is vitally im-
portant. Ayub was no longer able, after his illness in early
- 1968, to exercise an active role; he could no longer, for example,
attend and preside over the annual ceremonial functions of the:
various units of the armed forces. He lost the vital contact
with his real constituency. This gave his arch-enemies like
Bhutto and Peerzada their grand opportunity to topple the
régime. Peerzada assured “Zulfi” (as he used to call Zulfiqar
Ali Bhutto) that army support for Ayub would be lacking in a
mass confrontation, and Bhutto was ready to start the
movement on the popular theme of Ayub’s alleged sacrifice
of “national honour”, preserved at the cost of the blood of the
brave JFawans (soliders) in the battlefield, at the conference
table at Tashkent. Bhutto began to make repeated promises to

