END OF AN ERA 229
_ of Pakistan, who had achieved their independence through
democratic process, were not willing to accept either Ayub’s
hilosophy or the political gg =
oh podtical order based on it. At first they chose
whe cock authoritarian system through the ballot box.
ene various opposition parties of the country were united
in 1964; the East and West Pakistanis were gathered together
in their opposition to an authoritarian. system — thus giving
, demonstration of the political unity of the people of .
East and West Pakistan. A non-Bengali presidential candidate
was selected by the Combined Opposition Parties (COP)
and the opposition candidate had the overwhelming support
of the people of East Pakistan. If there had truly been a demo-
cratic process, Ayub would not have been elected in the
1964 election, and a non-Bengali candidate would have been
\ elected enjoying popular mandate from both East and West
Pakistan. But thanks to Ayub’s political order, the unity of the
people was not allowed free expression.
Following from the presidential election of 1964, Pakistan
entered an cra of agitational politics giving up the constitu-
tional path; bullet was substituted for ballot. In the mean time
the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war took place. As I have already i
pointed out this war had a most unfortunate effect on national
unity in Pakistan. During the war the people of the country,
both in the East and West of Pakistan, had shown a strong
sense of patriotism and unity against the external aggression.
But an urban élite group in East Pakistan headed by
and his close party men showed utter disregard for national
security and defence. When Mujib and other opposition party
leaders were requested by the Pakistan Government to stand’
united against foreign aggression, his remarks at the Dacca
Government House meeting held in the midst of the war
amounted to nothing less than high treason. Similarly, some
__ of his‘ Awami Leaguers were secretly indulging in anti-state
activity during the war. ~ a
- India failed to achieve a military victory over Pakistan in
the 1965 war, but saw new possibilities in East Pakistan through
Mujib and his men. Less than six months after ‘the war, Mujib _
produced.a veiled scheme of secession under his six-point plan.
The 1965 war lad created for Mujib a favourable climate for
such a move. Almost all the fighting in 1965 had taken place

230 ‘THE LAST. DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
along the border between West Pakistan and India, but the
East Pakistanis felt that because they had only one army
division in their province, which was surrounded on three
sides by. India, they were at the mercy of the Indians
throughout the war: “While West Pakistan was using its
American tanks and American planes to fight India for the
precious five million Kashmiris, 65 million Bengalis were
left to fight with their bare hands if the Indians had attacked
us”, an East Pakistani said.? During the war East Pakistan
was for all practical purposes isolated from the world, and the
war. suddenly illuminated all the disadvantages from which
East Pakistan suffered because of political domination by an
irresponsible ruling élite. composed of West Pakistani top civil
and military officers. .. © , ‘ : :
Mujib and his close followers began to work for secession of
East Pakistan and seemed to have been assured of help and
assistance from India. The internal conflict in the country
was complicated and aggravated by foreign intervention.
The East Pakistan crisis became “‘foreign-linked”. ‘The Agar-
tala conspiracy case and Mujib’s followers’ direct, and his
indirect involvement, as I -have shown, were based on facts.
‘It is a pity that the conspiracy case had to be withdrawn be-
cause of the internal political confusion created during the four-
month-long agitation against Ayub and his political order.’ |
The result was that Mujib, instead of being exposed, became
a hero among the Bengalis. Its forced withdrawal of the case
made the Pakistan Government appear to. be persecuting a .
“leader who only demanded the Bengalis’ legitimate rights
for regional I have heard a tape-recorded version
. of Mujib’s talks with his top political aides in 1970 in which he
attributed to Ayub his own unique popularity among the
-Yahya’s “fantasy and blundets”* have been much talked
about but I can vouch Yahya the Pakistan Govern-
made the first and the last attempt to remove the
legitimate grievances of the Bengalis; I have.shown that he
conceded all.the demands put forward by the Bengalis. If
Mujib had been sincere and interested only in regional auton-
omy, there would have been no room for, any conflict. The
plan for the. transfer of power as made by Yahya would have |

END OF AN ERA ; 231°
preserved the country’s unity. Yahya had many limitations
but he was politically honest in his dealings with Mujib; he
went to the farthest extent possible to meét the demands of the
Seen valet bulk of the Pakistan armed forces and the
Jority of the people did not wish to see their homeland
dismembered and their cherished green and white flag’ pulled
down in Dacca by the Indian Army. The people and the bulk
of the armed forces were prepared to make real concessions
, to maintain the unity of the country. '
The dismal failure of Yahya’s plan for a genuine federal
union wherein all the demands of the Bengalis were accepted
was not due to the insincerit? of the Pakistan Government;
it was mainly due to the dubious and dishonest political
roles of Mujib and Bhutto. Mujib was not sincere or straight-
forward in his political negotiations in 1969~70; he pledged
to modify his six points and to maintain’ the unity of Pakistan.
Yahya honestly believed’ in his words and allowed him a long
rope to achieve his ulterior political objectives. Bhutto’s “un.
pardonable crime and cardinal mistake was to deny the Pakis-
tan Government a chance to show its bona fides in its dealings
with the Bengalis. His boycott of the National Assembly in
March 1971 created an explosive fituation. and a point of no
retum. Yahya and his emissarics including myself, urged.
Bhutto to go to Dacca anil to attend the national assembly,
If the national assembly had met, Mujib’s veiled scheme of
secession could have been exposed. Yahya gave Bhutto
gorical assurances that he would not allow the continuation of .
‘the assembly if Mujib tried to ‘pass his constitutional draft,
which would have amounted to. splitting of the country. But
Bhutto seemed too impatient to acquire power at any price,
no matter whether-it was in a united or a truncated Pakistan,
Just as the forced withdrawal: of ‘the ‘Agartala case in 1969.
prevented Mujib from being exposed, similarly the forced
adjustment of the national assembly on March 1, 1971, pre-
vented the world from knowing the real reasons, for the failure
plan for a genuine federal union, in which the
people of East and West Pakistan could live together as
hou the adjournment of the national assembly in March 1,
1971, there was a chain of tragic developments which cul-

232 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
minated in the dismemberment of Pakistan on December 16,
1971. The Pakistan Army’s atrocities have rightly been
condemned so in the world’s press, but @ thorough analysis
of the political developments of 19707? would reveal that
responsibility for the tragic events of 197%; which meant not
only the disintegration of Pakistan, the cherished homeland
of the Indian Muslims, but also the destruction of the
economic infrastructure end social fabric of Bangladesh, did
not belong only to Pakistan or its armed forces or, least of all,
to its people. It belonged to a great extent to Mujib for his
dishonest game not only with the central Government but
with his own people; to Bhutto’s inordinate ambition to
acquire power at any Cost; to India’s calculated plan to treat
the Bangladesh crisis as an “opportunity of tthe century”
to destroy Pakistan; to the Soviet wrath against Pakistan for
her refusaf to-‘unite against Mao’ in the context of the Krem-
lin leaders’ grand designs against the People’s Republic of
China. Even after the outbreak of the civil war, there could
have been a political. settlement of the crisis under the initia-
tives taken in Washington with support from China and Iran, .
and with the approval of the Pakistan Government, but it
was frustrated by Indo-Soviet collaboration to humiliate
Pakistan and China, and to inflict a diplomatic setback to the
United States. shes
The dismemberment of Pakistan and the emergence of
Bangladesh have not solved the regional tensions and conflicts
of the subcontinent. Jinnah’s two-nation theory has not been
proved incorrect because there is more anti-Hindu and anti-
Indian feelings in the so-called “secular” state of Bangladesh
today than there ever was in East Pakistan when it was part of
the “Islamic State’ of Pakistan. Peace and stability in the re-
gion have not been brought nearer by the tragic events of 1971;
on the contrary, the Soviet expansionist designs have new scope
in an unstable Bangladesh and an insecure “New” Pakistan.
‘India is having the “bitter taste” (to quote Chou En-lai)
of its own actions. The economic maladies of India have been
aggravated by the heavy cost of the Bangladesh operation,
while the Muslims of Bangladesh are again exposed to threats
of domination by the Bhadralok (élite) from Calcutta. Mainly
un the context of Sino-Soviet competition in South and

END OF AN ERA 233
South-east Asia, interrelated regional and global conflicts in /
the area have become more prominent.
. REFERENCES |
1. See my Pakistan’s Relations with India, London, 1968, p. 40..
2. Percival Spear, “First Steps of a Nation” in The Times, London,
, Supplement on Pakistan, August 14, 1963, |
‘See New York Times, April 21, 1966.
See W. H. Morris-Jones, “Pakistan Post-mortem and the Roots -of
Bangladesh”, Political Quarterly, Vol. 43, No. 2, April-June, 1972,
: |

