44 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
United States for a heart operation and stopped in New York
overnight on his way back to Pakistan. I, with two other
friends, went to see him mainly as a courtesy; we had no inten.
of discussing politics with him in his poor physical condi-
tion after a major operation. But the country was in the
midst of a civil war and political issues could not be avoided,
particularly when he insisted that we join him for dinner at
the luxurious apartment of a friend of his (a non-Bengali
. industrialist from East Pakistan) in Manhattan. So we discussed
political issues facing the country. In the course of discussion,
Ayub narrated how moderate Bengali leaders like Nural Amin
and others who opposed Mujib’s six points urged him to grant
real autonomy to East Pakistan. Turning to me, he asked:
“Tell me, what were they asking for? Did not my provincial
Governor Momen enjoy all the powers needed for running the
provincial government in East Pakistan? What more could
I grant?” After so many years of experience, Ayub equated
the delegated powers of his nominated and highly unpopular
Governor with the legitimate demands of the seventy-five
million people of his country! It was a great shock for me;
I wish I had not met Ayub on that occasion as it destroyed my
good opinion of his political acumen, although I still have a
. high regard for his personal qualities and graciousness.
ae REFERENCES
1. Arnold J. Toynbee, “Communism and the West in Asian Countries”,
Ths Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences, July 1961.
2. Quoted in an unpublished paper by Joseph Lelyveld for the Ford
eee New York, September 1969.
3. Ibi +N
4 nar of International Affairs, London, 1960; The Economist, August 15,
I °
5. G. A. Almond and T. S. Coleman, The Politics of the Developing Areas,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1960, pp. 59-5.
7. See Mahbul-Ul Hugq’s speech at the 1968 meetings of the Pakistan
Management Association in The Pakistan Observer, Dacca, May 3, 1968.
i; neh Ss. Manson, Robert Dorfman and Stephen A. Manglin,
_ Kanflict jin East Pakistan: Background and Prospects, London: Bangladesh
Action Committee, 1971, Part III, p. 4.
8, 'See Shahid Javed Bunki, “Ayub’s Fall: A Socio-economic Explanation”,
} Asian Surogy, March 1972; W. M. Dobell, “Ayub Khar. as President