90 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
direction, but its success depended on many conditions, Many
of which were lacking. For the’ twenty-two years since its.
founding, Pakistan had not had a direct general election
for its governing bodies. There had been no democratic process
of representation; the majority of the country’s population
were denied their political rights and economic dues. For
much of the time, there had been either a “modernizing
oligarchy” or dictatorial rule. There were deep-rooted fears
and suspicions between the peoples of the two geographically
separated regions. If Yahya’s plan were to go through, Pakistan
would survive as a united nation but this “if” was a big one,
_ Yahya between the Generals and Mujib
One thing that was soon apparent was that some of the army
generals and the West Pakistani leaders including Bhutto
thought that Yahya had gone too far in placating the Bengalis
-at the cost of the “national interest”, as they interpreted it.
However, Governor Ahsan and even General Yakub, the Zonal
MLA in East Pakistan, were happy with the wide acceptance
of Yahya’s plan and it was a pleasant surprise to me that the
chief of military intelligence, General Akbar, and Rezvi,
the chief of civil intelligence, were giving Yahya favourable
reports supporting his plan. Many army officers, unlike senior
bureaucrats, the big industrialists and some narrow-minded
politicians, were willing to make major sacrifices to maintain
the unity of Pakistan, Among the young army officers and
enlightened generals, Pakistani nationalism was not a vague
and incoherent concept; with them, as with many patriotic
elements in both East and West Pakistan, its ideology and
its flag were too dear to be preserved at any cost; they were
determined to preserve and value the ideals and ideology which
were the driving forces behind the creation of Pakistan. I
myself shared these views wholeheartedly.
. Yet Yahya was subjected to severe pressures from some
quarters at GHQ in Rawalpindi and from Bhutto, who
was backed by some generals and top bureaucrats, to modify his
plan as outlined in his famous speech of November 28, 1969.
Between November 28, rg69, and March go, 1970, Yahya was
in real difficulty. In order “to protect the country against a