——
198 = = THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Shah of Iran was also referred to. When I asked what were the
prospects, his reply was that two’ persons were creating great
obstacles — “that deceitful woman” (Mrs. Gandhi) and “that
inordinately ambitious man” (Bhutto). He confessed that his
first major mistake was his unqualified faith in Mujib’s word
- and pledges before the election in December 1970, and that
when he had turned to Bhutto, he had been let down in that
quarter as well. I found him no less bitter towards Bhutto
than towards Mujib: he said that Bhutto, no less than Mujib,
was determined to destroy united Pakistan, and for petty
personal motives.
After my talks with Yahya, other generals, top civil servants,
Bhutto, Justice Cornelius and many others, I visited Dacca
and had discussions with many people there including suppor- _
ters of the Awami League. In London later I talked with people
closely connected with the Bangladesh mission there and fin-
ally had a lengthy discussion in London early in 1972 with the ©
American Ambassador in Islamabad, Mr. Farland. From all
these I gathered that a serious move was made by President
Nixon to avert a war in the subcontinent, but by the time it
was made (September-—October 1971) the Indian Govern-
ment had decided to “‘liberate” Bangladesh.
Yahya was extremely responsive to Nixon’s gestures and
attempts. The Chinese would also have been happy to see the
success of Nixon’s mediatory efforts rather than the military
victory. of the Indians backed by the Russians. The exile
government ‘of Bangladesh in Calcutta was favourably dis-
_ posed to a political settlement under Nixon’s initiative, except
for Mr. Tajuddin, the acting Prime Minister. The then acting
Foreign Minister, Mostaque Ahmad, and Foreign Secretary,
Mr. Alam, eagerly supported the American-sponsored
_ Both were removed from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
_ after the creation of Bangladesh, — _
Yahya made an earnest appeal to the Indian Prime Minis-
_ ter, Mrs. Gandhi, to avoid war. When the newly-appointed
. Indian ambassador, Jai Kumar Atal, presented his credentials
to him in mid-Novembet, Yahya gave him a secret five-point
'. peace plan in which — he agreed to release Mujib and to
arrange a referendum td determine whether or not the Bengalis
wanted an independent state of their own or to stay in a united