144 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
country on March 23, 1971. Though Bhutto hailed the Pakistan
Army’s military action on March 25, 1971; with the words
“Thank God, Pakistan is saved’”,!® he changed his views wh€n
it became evident in the summer of 1971 that East Pakistan’s
problem could not be solved by military action; he then began
to find fault with Yahya’s negotiations with Mujib when the
latter, as Bhutto writes, was really bent on separation and not
interested in autonomy for East Pakistan. He also wrote in
his The Great Tragedy, published only three months before the
fall of Dacca: “Sheikh Mujibur Rahman manoeuvred the
Government into believing that he would become more
amenable after the elections, more susceptible to compromise
on six-points after an election victory. . - - The Government
made every effort to accommodate Mujibur Rahman and his
party.”2? I agree with Bhutto’s analysis of Mujib’s aims and the
Yahya Government’s “soft” -policy towards him. The latter
was based on goodwill and faith in Mujib’s words. But it was
equally a pity that Bhutto, who was so close to Yahya, Peer-
zada and some other members of the junta, did not advise or
offer any alternative solution. It is easy to criticize a plan based
on good faith and honest intentions when it proves a failure.
While most of the rightist parties in West Pakistan and all
non-Awami League leaders in East Pakistan were urging Yahya
to challenge Mujib before the elections, Bhutto made no
constructive suggestion. He was too busy winning the election
and capturing power.
Both Mujib and Bhutto expressed satisfaction with the way
the Yahya régime conducted the elections, which were abso-
lutely free from governmental pressure or interference of any
kind. In one of his early post-election speeches on January 3,
1970, Mujib said: “I congratulate President Yahya Khan on
the fulfilment of his promise to hold the general In
another speech Mujib repeated his praises for Yahya: “I praise
Yahya Khan for fulfilling his promises and accepting some of
the demands of the people.”?* Bhutto writes in The Great Tragedy
that during his first meeting with Yahya in Karachi soon after
the elections, his party “extended its co-operation to the régime
without rancour in the search for a national solution”’.*°
But unfortunately neither Mujib nor Bhutto showed any
appreciation of Yahya’s fulfilling his pledge of “fair and free”