|
: . TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 137
for a separate state; but it was doubtful whether the Muslim
voters of the rural areas would 80 easily give up their cherished
ideals and ideology which had made them the most enthusiastic
Supporters of Jinnah in the Plebiscitory election df 1946.
It was only the Army’s ruthless atrocities on the innocent vil-
lagers, including their women and children, that turned the
whole of East Bengal to secession, |
Dilemmas and Problems
The pertinent question is how any meaningful dialogue with
Mujib was possible when the six-point plan struck at the
very existence of a united Pakistan; how could Yahya reconcile
his five points, as laid down in his L.F.O., with Mujib’s six-
point plan? There was no doubt that the provisions for one
Pakistan as laid down in the L.F.O. - or for that matter any
concept of a united Pakistan — yas irreconcilable with Mujib’s
six-point plan if the latter were not modified. This particular |
“if” is of greatest significance in the history of Pakistan’s dis-
memberment. The whole political dialogue between Yahya
and Mujib from 1969 up to their crucial meeting in January
1971 after the elections were over was based on Mujib’s un-
qualified and repeated pledge to modify his six-point plan.
There were tape-recorded versions of the Yahya-Mujib talks —
I do not know if the Mujib-Ahsan dialogues were also tape- .
recorded. I was also present during some of the political dia-
logues, and I used to visit Mujib regularly at the time of final-
izing the L.F.O. and had lengthy discussions with him, As
pointed out earlier, provincial assembly elections Were also
held simultaneously with those for the national. assembly at
Mujib’s own suggestion so that he did not need to face the
' electorate again in six months’ time ; if'so, he argued, how could
he modify his six points? _
Sony eee Bhutto, now accuse Yahya of sim-
plicity, if not stupidity, in placing reliance on Mujib s words,
But was it an unfair game? After all, the public in East Pakistan
was behind his demand for regional autonomy, although it must
be made clear the Muslim masses in rural Bengal who voted
for Mujib did not realize that the six-point plan, if it were not
modified, would mean the end of one Pakistan. After all, the