. THE FALL OF AYUB 39
stage, Bhashani openly preached violence, destruction, and
_ armed uprisings: hartal (strike), gherao (encirclement).
Mujib became shaky; in fact, the whole situation was so
confusing that hardly any political settlement or serious politi-
cal negotiations could take place, The small advisory group at
Fida Hasan’s office in the Presidential House met regularly.
I was summoned twice to attend those meetings but nobody
could understand what was happening and how the crisis
could be resolved. The RTC came to a deadlock when Mujib
presented his extreme demands for autonomy bordering on
break-up of the country. All the West Pakistani leaders were
opposed to Mujib’s scheme, and so the RTC met its natural
death. When the RTC failed to reach any agreement, Ayub
announced his own formula on March 13 — restoration of the
parliamentary and federal system and a direct method of elec-
tion. Ayub wanted to restore the status quo as it had existed
before his capture of power through the coup of 1958. But the
Bengalis were not satisfied with the status quo of 1958; much
water had flowed under the bridge since they accepted “parity
of representation” in 1955 and the federal structure of the 1956
constitution. |
The RTC failed; so too did the Ayub-Muijib secret parleys.
Mujib was nervous that it might jeopardize his image with the
Bengalis. But the final blow to the Ayub-Mujib deal came
from GHQ; when Ayub really had good prospects with Mujib,
the group opposed to him in the military junta tantalized Mujib
with the prospect of getting power through the front door
(i.e. through elections) rather than the door”, which
was what Ayub offered him,
After the failure of the talks on political settlement, either
through the RTC or by bilateral negotiations with Mujib, the
country’s situation deteriorated quickly. There was almost a
complete breakdown of governmental machinery, and the
condition of the country was semi-anarchic. It was obvious
that this state of affairs could not be allowed to continue.
Ayub summoned a special cabinet meeting in mid-March,
which also turned out to be his last. Yahya was specially in-
vited to attend the meeting. The description he gave me of it
was as follows.
Ayub summed up the situation after the failure of the RTC