64 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
“a good start had been made” towards the objective of re.
moving econémic disparity. : ;
But a the same arias of the National Economic Council
on June 2, 1970, when the Annual Development Plan for 1970-1
came up for discussion, the three Bengali ministers r aised their
voices against the Annual Plan for 1970-1 because 1t was con-
sidered not to be in accordance with the objectives of the
Fourth Plan. The allocations for East Pakistan under the An-
nual Plan for 1970-1 were neither adequate nor in accordance
with the supreme objective of removing the regional disparity.
Yet Yahya allowed the Planning Commission to go ahead with
its proposals, notwithstanding the strong notes of dissent from
the three Bengali ministers. This was a big shock for my two
colleagues and myself.
Immediately after the meeting of the National Economic
Council on June 2, the three of us (Hafizuddin, Shamsul Hug
and myself) met together and wrote a joint letter to Yahya
expressing our inability to continue in his cabinet in view
of what we considered as “most unfair allocations to East
Pakistan”. We knew our limitations; we were “nominated
ministers” without any political or popular support. But
our collective resignation — the other two Bengali ministers
were bound to follow our course of action because of the
prevailing public opinion in East Pakistan —- would have com-
pelled Yahya to dissolve the cabinet, and it would have
created a big issue in the country. The press in East Pakistan
_ would certainly have taken up a position against the régime by
noting that even Yahyz’s own nominated ministers could not
agree to his economic policy toward East Pakistan. These
calculations made our decision of collective resignation effec-
tive. Yahya immediately met the three of us and assured us of a
special meeting of the National Economic Council where
Yahya’s opening remarks to the Planning Commission were:
“My Bengali colleagues in the cabinet have pointed out to
‘me that the allocations to East Pakistan for 1970-1 would not
narrow down the gap in regional disparity. If so, I cannot be
a party to it; the gap must be narrowed down.” The officials
of the Planning Commission were taken by surprise by this
| sudden changed attitude -of the President, and like typical
civil servants they yielded to the pressure of the boss without