THE CIVIL WAR , 197
However, the “inside” scene was quite different and per-
fectly realistic. The whole situation had changed since my
previous visit in Yahya was like a man in a trance.
The other members of the junta - Hamid, Gul Hasan, Omar
(who was busy organizing a musical performance for his son’s
marriage at which Yahya was to be the chief guest) and even
Peerzada were in the deepest gloom. The chief of Inter-Services
Intelligence (I.S.1.D.), Major-General Gillani, an intelligent
and honest officer, and his able Predecessor General Akbar,
both told me about the imminent Indo-Pakistan war on
Bangladesh and its grave implications.
I had a casual meeting with Yahya after my arrival in Is-
lamabad, and asked him about the Cornelius constitution.
Before giving any answer he asked me for my Own comments.
My reply was that it would be the final nail in the coffin of
Pakistan, Without contradicting, Yahya asked me to see him
on September 6, which had been observed as “Defence Day”
since the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war, and as such was a public
holiday. He asked me to see him alone on that day in the
morning: it was my last serious meeting with him, and lasted
three hours. I paid him a courtesy farewell call on September 22.
The following was the substance of my interview with Yahya
on September 6. There could be no military solution to the
crisis. Mujib must be released, and talks must begin with him
and his exile government in Calcutta. The Americans, with
his knowledge and approval, had already started talks with the’
exile government, and the Americans were also being given
facilities to negotiate with Mujib through his lawyer, A. K.
Brohi. When I asked what would be the basis of the political
settlement, he told me that he was not sure yet of its final shape
or outcome. All that interested him was to keep the green
and white. crescent flag intact if possible, but if seventy-five
million Bengalis would not have it, “let there be two Muslim
states in the subcontinent” — he made this comment with great
_ anguish. To my query about the procedure of political dialogue,
answer was that Mujib would be released a8 soon as
the Assembly met and passed a resolution asking him to do so.
This was a face-saving device after he had denounced -Mujib
as a “traitor”. Yahya then told me that.he was relying heavily
on Nixon for the success of this final attempt; the help of the