52 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
tract, he first hinted at a threat that defiance of an order from
the CMLA’s office might lead to termination of my job at
“Dacca University, but he soon changed the technique and
pleaded with me to work as a team member for “important
affairs”. Finally, 1 was successful in making a compromise ~
I continued to be Director-General (Research) in the
Foreign Ministry but would also work as a part-time
member of the planning cell. I soon found myself a full-time
member of the planning cell and only part-time in the
Foreign Ministry. I must confess that the work at the plan-
ning cell was both interesting and challenging. I was given the
task of helping the President on political and constitutional
matters. However, it was Nur Khan’s educational reforms
which gave me the first contacts with President Yahya Khan.
I began to attend the meetings of the Council of Administra-
tion and witnessed the interesting sight of top bureaucrats
being heckled by Nur Khan’s “whizz kids”. The bureaucrats,
however, knew well how to bide their time and adjust to the
new situation. Nur Khan soon became the target of “palace
intrigues”; Yahya wanted to “kick him upstairs’.
By June 1970 Yahya had begun to think in terms ofa civilian
cabinet and had already started his political dialogue with the
leaders of the various political parties, which I shall describe
in the next chapter. In order to get rid of Nur Khan and some
of his ill-planned reforms, which alarmed the powerful pres-
sure groups (big business, the bureaucracy and most important,
some of the generals including Hamid and Peerzada) Yahya
made new moves. Unlike Ayub’s system, Yahya operated
under a “‘collective leadership”, where army generals con-
stituted an “inner cabinet’. Nur Khan antagonized many of
the inner cabinet.
When martial law was introduced on March 25, 1969,
the legislatures, both central and provincial, the cabinet and
, the provincial governors were all gone as the Constitution
itself was abrogated. In the two provinces, the zonal
Martial Law assumed the role of pro-
vincial governors. At the provincial level, the zonal MLAs
had to rely exclusively on the top civil officers —- “the CSP”.
So the order of “Junior or concealed partnership”, as J. C.
Hurewitz described the Ayub continued in the provin-