. TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 145
elections, which were unique in the political history of Pakistan
over the previous two decades, Though Mujib and Bhutto
expressed apparent appreciation of Yahya’s role in holding the
country’s first election on a truly democratic basis, each adop-
_ ted an uncompromising attitude towards the political settle-
ment for which the elections were held. |
Mujib’s posture became more and more militant. In his
post-election speeches from January to March 1971, there
_ Was no trace of any compromise or any modification of the
extreme aspects of his six points. Contrary to his repeated pledge
throughout 1969 and 1970, Particularly that made’ during the
three secret parleys in Dacca with Yahya just on the eve of the
elections, that he would modify the extreme aspects of his
six points, Mujib now declared that the six-point plan was “‘the
property of the people of Bangladesh” and that there could
be no compromise on it. In his post-election speeches Mujib
made a-complete volte Sace; let me quote from, some of his
post-election speeches. In the first of these Mujib declared:
“Our people have recorded a historic verdict. ... A constitu-
tion on the basis of the six-point formula has to be framed and
implemented in all its aspects [my italics]. He added: “The
resounding victory of the Awami League is, in fact, the
victory of . . . Bangladesh’? [my italics]; three days later, on
December 13, he again declared: “I want to Tepeat my
assurance to the people that the constitution of the country - .
would be prepared on the basis of the six points.”23
Then again on December 20 he repeated: “There can be no —
constitution except the one which is based on the six-point pro-
gramme.”* At a public meeting on January 4, Mujib made the .
elected members of his party swear not to modify the six points;
the map of Bangladesh was displayed at this meeting. After
‘ administering the oath, Mujib stated: “The future constitution .
- +. would be framed on the basis of six-point and eleven-point
programmes (the eleven points were demands of the Awami
Student League and were even more militant and uncompro-
-mising). These are no longer my party’s programmes.
_ The Awami League cannot amend it now. No one would be
- able to stop us framing a constitution on the six-point, pro-
gramme,’?25 oa |
| a pee uncompromising statements were made when Yahya