216 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
1968 Soviet invasion and occupation of
The Soviet Union, however, did not have to resort to direct
military intervention. Her vetoes in the ‘Security Council
on any ceasefire till the Indian forces occupied Dacca ~ a
ceasefire resolution was also adopted by the U.N. General
Assembly by an overwhelming majority of 104 to 11 — were
enough to give the Indians time to carry the Bangladesh
operation though to a conclusion. The Chinese Government
said: “The Soviet Government has played a shameful role
in this war.of aggression launched by India against Pakistan,
The whole world has seen clearly that it was the backstage
manager of the Indian expansionists.”*5 The United States
President also stated: “Soviet policy, I regret to say, seemed to
show the same tendency as we witnessed before in the 1967
Middle East war and the 1970 Jordanian crisis — to allow
events to boil up towards crisis in the hope of political
China and the Bangladesh Crisis
Just as China condemned the Soviet role in the 1971 crisis
of the subcontinent, the Soviet Government and its press
also made polemical attacks on Chima’s policy and role.
Pravda wrote on December g that China provoked the war
between India and Pakistan “to further its chauvinist great-
power line in Asia”, while Red Star wrote on December 14
that China’s foreign policy was based on ideas “dug from the
garbage pit of history among obsolete geopolitical doctrines
which in their days fed Nazism”. Though such mutual re-
crimination was nothing. new in Sino-Soviet relations, the
debate on the Bangladesh war in the Security Council and the
General Assembly. carried the polemical exchanges of words
into the forum of the United Nations. Other novel phenomena
in the United Nations were the Sino-American identity of
_ ‘views and the voting on the crisis The Bangladesh crisis pro-
vided the first example of co-operation at the U.N. between
the United States and China. It was also the first demonstration
. of relaxed Sino-American relatiéns.
Was the Chinese policy opposed to the legitimate hopes and
aspirations of the Bengalis and did the Chinese actions and