232 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
minated in the dismemberment of Pakistan on December 16,
1971. The Pakistan Army’s atrocities have rightly been
condemned so in the world’s press, but @ thorough analysis
of the political developments of 19707? would reveal that
responsibility for the tragic events of 197%; which meant not
only the disintegration of Pakistan, the cherished homeland
of the Indian Muslims, but also the destruction of the
economic infrastructure end social fabric of Bangladesh, did
not belong only to Pakistan or its armed forces or, least of all,
to its people. It belonged to a great extent to Mujib for his
dishonest game not only with the central Government but
with his own people; to Bhutto’s inordinate ambition to
acquire power at any Cost; to India’s calculated plan to treat
the Bangladesh crisis as an “opportunity of tthe century”
to destroy Pakistan; to the Soviet wrath against Pakistan for
her refusaf to-‘unite against Mao’ in the context of the Krem-
lin leaders’ grand designs against the People’s Republic of
China. Even after the outbreak of the civil war, there could
have been a political. settlement of the crisis under the initia-
tives taken in Washington with support from China and Iran, .
and with the approval of the Pakistan Government, but it
was frustrated by Indo-Soviet collaboration to humiliate
Pakistan and China, and to inflict a diplomatic setback to the
United States. shes
The dismemberment of Pakistan and the emergence of
Bangladesh have not solved the regional tensions and conflicts
of the subcontinent. Jinnah’s two-nation theory has not been
proved incorrect because there is more anti-Hindu and anti-
Indian feelings in the so-called “secular” state of Bangladesh
today than there ever was in East Pakistan when it was part of
the “Islamic State’ of Pakistan. Peace and stability in the re-
gion have not been brought nearer by the tragic events of 1971;
on the contrary, the Soviet expansionist designs have new scope
in an unstable Bangladesh and an insecure “New” Pakistan.
‘India is having the “bitter taste” (to quote Chou En-lai)
of its own actions. The economic maladies of India have been
aggravated by the heavy cost of the Bangladesh operation,
while the Muslims of Bangladesh are again exposed to threats
of domination by the Bhadralok (élite) from Calcutta. Mainly
un the context of Sino-Soviet competition in South and