16 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
However, the immediate causes of Ayub’s removal ay else.
where: in intrigues at the army headquarters at Rawalpindi
The. process began in 1966, after the Indo-Pakistani war of
1965 and the subsequent Tashkent Agreement, gained momen.
tum during Ayub’s serious illness in early 1968 and finally
culminated in the political agitation which began in Rawalpingj:
in the winter of 1968-9. Bhutto’s so-called “revolutionary role”
had its roots in his links with the GHQ at Rawalpindj.s
Political changes in Pakistan were always the product of in.
ternal intrigues and power struggles among the factions of the
ruling élite composed of the top civil and military officers,
sometimes aided and abetted by some political leaders who had
the fortune of enjoying good relations w:th the ruling élite,
The dismissal of Khawaja Nazimuddin’s cabinet in 1953; of
the Mohammed Ali (Bogra) cabinet and the dissolution of the
Constituent Assembly in 1954; and of Suhrawardy’s cabinet
in 1957 as well as the Ayub-Mirza coup in 1958, were all .
products of “palace intrigues”.
_ Political changes in Pakistan could not take place through
the process of ballot because there was no general election in
the country except the 1970 election held on the eve of the Civil
War over Bangladesh. Ayub’s exit, like his coming to power,
was basically the product of secret plans and intrigues. It had
the appearance of a mass upheaval, and no doubt the mass
movement had facilitated the plans and schemes at GHQ,
and similarly the “mass movement”, particularly that organ-
ized by Z. A. Bhutto in West Pakistan, had the secret blessing
of GHQ. While there have been many accounts of the fall of
Ayub dealing with political socio-economic factors,*® the “in-
side story” has not yet been revealed fully.
I had ample opportunity to watch the drama and to inform
myself regarding the plot against Ayub by some of his military
colleagues. I had been seconded from the University of Dacca
to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in early 1967 to take up a
‘ special assignment in the research division of the Ministry.
This was done on Ayub’s own initiative and directive. From the
time of my arrival in Islamabad I had regular and frequent
contacts with the President. He was agreeable to me personally
and extremely helpful over my work at the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. I had direct access to him and he was never tired of