"TT a an in Ss ao aoe
; INTRODUCTION xiii
ep situation already created by the misrule of the country
cane i Ae & twenty-two years. Similarly, the two politi-
cv nad "eee he had finally to deal to maintain the coun-
ikon eae political honesty and integrity nor any
comptes statesmanship, External factors were also
The an already explosive situation.
Tesult was the. dismal failure of a plan to transfer
te to the elected representatives of the people from a
tary régime, culminating in a civil war which constituted
@ great tragedy of modern history. Here was a conflict which
could not be resolved, due to a combination of limiting internal
factors and a hostile international environment. Why did
Yahya’s plan for the transfer of power to a popularly elected
civil government fail? Was it inadequate to meet ‘the
Bengalis demands for regional autonomy, or had the Bengalis
under Mujib already decided on an independent state?
Were Yahya and the military régime sincere in handing over
Power to a Bengali-dominated civilian government? What
were the implications of Mujib’s six-point plan? Was it a veiled
scheme for secession or a demand only for regional autonomy?
| Was Mujib sincere and straightforward in his dealings with his
own people and with Yahya and the military régime? Did not
his policy precipitate the confrontation? What were the roles
and aims of Bhutto? Was it correct to say that he was more
interested in getting power than in the unity of Pakistan?
Could not the war have been avoided by states-
manship and moderation on the part of the three parties
involved in the final dialogue in January-March 1971 ?
What'were the international implications of t! e crisis over
Bangladesh? Was it not connected with the Indo-Pakistan .
conflict and the tensions in the subcontinent ? What was India’s
role in the crisis? Was guided by humanitarian con-
siderations, as India pretended, or was it seeking an oppor-
tunity to destroy its “enemy number one”? How far was the
Bangladesh crisis affected by the Sino-Soviet conflict in South
and South-east Asia and by the global competition between .
the two super-powers? ,
These and similar questions are examined and analysed in
this volume. The break-up of Pakistan and the emergence of
Bangladesh have great significance. It will demonstrate how a