126 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
constitutional or political issues, his main stress be-=g on the
improvement of the lot of the poorest section of socicty.2®
The television speeches by political leaders on the whole pro.
vided an additional impetus to election campaigning, though |
a number of them were dull and boring. In an atmosphere
full of tension and poli:'cal activity, the speeches provided
the Pakistaz.is, part'cularly the ws van population, with a good
picture of the intensifying election which had
now been going on in the country for about a year.
Finally, on December g, only four days before the elections,
Yahya made a passionate appeal to the political leaders
“for a spirit of give and take and trust in each other ..... at
this particular juncture of our history”. He recalled that
“many doubts are expressed regarding the sincerity and in-
tentions of this régime, but despite this we remain steadfast
in our aim of bringing back democracy to our land’’.®°
In a press conference at Dacca on November 27, 1979,
Yahya reaffirmed his pledge for “maximum autonomy for
East Pakistan”. He said that he would not stand in the way
of maximum autonomy for the people of East Pakistan, but
would rather encourage it so that they could have “full
charge of their destiny, planning and utilization of its re-
sources within the concept of Pakistan”. He added that because
of its geographical distance, ‘‘East Pakistan must have maxi-
mum autonomy to run her own affairs within the overall
framework of one Pakistan”."! Could there: be a more un-
qualified pledge for autonomy for East Pakistan? If Mujib
had only been interested in autonomy, as he told the Bengali
Muslims while he was campaigning for their votes, there
should have been no conflict; Yahya could not have been
more explicit on the granting of autonomy. But the vital
question was whether the issue was one of auto-
nomy” or a conflict over the dismemberment of the country. .
Election Results .
Elections were held on December 7, 1970, and were by any
standard free and fair — ironically the first and last genuine
election in united Pakistan. Contrary to views expressed in
many places, the results of the electicus, in so far as they