166 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
been presented and agreed upon by Yahya and Mujib, provid-
ing for the immediate lifting of martial law and the transfer
of power. A draft proclamation effecting an immediate transfer
of power was ready; it provided for the formation of provincial
and central cabinets from among the elected representatives,
The National Assembly would be split into two committees
to formulate special provisions and requirements of East and
West Pakistan to. be incorporated into the future constitution.
The National Assembly would then be summoned to frame a
constitution for .
The White Paper, published by the Government of Pakistan,
gave only a summary of the draft proclamation;® I saw its
full text during my private visits to Islamabad and Dacca in
May 1971. The full text, as I discovered from the minutes of
the Dacca dialogues, revealed a rather different picture in that
it allowed for much more compromise than was conveyed by
the White Paper. It accepted the relationship between the
central Government and the “State of Bangladesh” (the
nomenclature was also now accepted) on the. basis of the
formula which I had prepared for Yahya in January 1971,
and which was virtually the six points minus the dismember-
ment of Pakistan. When I inquired why the White Paper
did not publish the full account, the answer I received from
Peerzada was that ‘“‘a proclamation was made under duress” —
implying that the Army was no longer prepared to grant those
_ concessions .after it had ‘“‘crushed” the secession movement.
What a sad commentary on the junta’s wisdom!
Returning to the Dacca dialogues, Yahya and Mujib, to-
gether with their aides, were-examining the proposed pro-
clamation in a series of daily meetings. The dialogues were on
two levels: between Yahya and Mujib and between technical
experts. Yahya’s team was led by Justice Cornelius and General
Peerzada; M. M. Ahmad, Deputy Chairman of the Planning
Commission, was also associated ‘with the talks inasmuch as
: financial and economic matters figured prominently in the
yes of the relationship between the national Government
and the new state (province) of Bangladesh. A le ert,
Colonel Hasan of the Chief Martial Law Office at = earn hy
_ was the fourth member of the Yahya team. Nobody in this
team had any deep understanding of the political dynamics