28 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Gauhar, General Yahya and very few others such as Fida
Hasan or General Musa was allowed to see him.
According to Ayub’s Constitution (Article 16), when the
President was incapacitated due to illness or for any other
reason, the Speaker would assume the presidential functions,
But that was the constitutional provision only; when Ayub
used to go abroad, the “Bengali” Speaker of the National
Assembly would become the Acting President. But the situation
in February 1968 was quite different. As I learned subse-
quently from Mohiuddin, for about forty-eight hours there
seemed scarcely any hope of Ayub’s survival. So there the
question was not that of an acting arrangement but of succes-
sion.
The battle for succession within the military junta began:
the generals, air-marshals and admirals were “jockeying and
jostling” with each other to take the President’s place; the
constitutional arrangement was put aside. The three main
contenders, according to to my sources of information from
I.8.I.D., were General Yahya Khan, the Commander-in-
Chief; Air-Marshal Nur Khan, the ambitious chief of the Air
Force, and Ayub’s Defence Minister, Admiral A. R. Khan.
Soon it became evident that Yahya was the strongest contender
because in the Pakistan armed forces, the Air Force and Navy
were not equal in prestige to the land forces, and as Yahya was
the Commander-in-Chief and was living next door to the
President, he had a better chance than any of the other
contenders. Rumours that some younger officers were trying
_to capture power against the generals also circulated, but there
was no such real threat.
Yahya was reported to have said to a lady sitting next to
him at a dinner in February: “Do you know by whose
side are you sitting?” Then he gave the answer himself:
“The next President of Pakistan.” Yahya’s long-standing
colleague and friend, Major-General Peerzada, was the
happiest person; he could never forget his removal from the
Presidential House. He now saw the prospect of re-entering
the Palace with much greater power and position than before,
and was gleefully awaiting the day.
Ayub, however, survived the pulmonary embolism. His
publicity chief began to display Ayub’s recovery on television.