188 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
particularly by the Indian forces. But the Army’s atrocities
left the Bengalis - whether Awami Leaguers or nationalists —
with no choice. The Army’s actions, particularly Tikka’s and
subsequently Niazi’s policy of “collective punitive actions”,
under which village after village was burnt and destroyed,
turned the entire population of East Bengal against the Paki-
stan Government. It was therefore no wonder that people in
_ such a desperate situation were prepared to embrace even the
devil to escape from total annihilation. Nothing could be fur-
ther from the truth than Fazal Muqueem’s statement: “The
Muslim population, particularly in the rural areas, had wel-
comed the troops and were coming forward in large numbers
to help In fact, the people were living in dread —
their young men’s lives were not secure and their women
were not safe. How could they welcome the troops who were
intent on subjugating them ? ;
May-Fuly 1971 3
“The revolt in East Pakistan had been completely crushed by
the end of May.’5 Thus asserted Fazal Muqueem, and all the
publicity organs of the Government of Pakistan began to tell
the same story. The White Paper published by the Pakistan
‘ Government in August 1971 contained false assertions to the
same effect. But those living outside the jurisdiction of the
“iron curtain” imposed by the Pakistan Government’s. press
censorship had no illusion about the real situation, The Bang-
ladesh crisis was deepening and becoming more complex,
due both to the Army’s continued atrocities and to the
lack of any positive steps by the Pakistani Government, and
indeed to India’s growing involvement in the crisis. |
I had left Pakistan within a week of the Army’s military ac-
tion and came with my family to London to begin a research
assignment at Chatham House. However, no Bengali at that
‘ time could have concentrated his full attention on research.
My family and I spent most of our time reading the British
newspapers and listening to the news on radio and television.
It was the most agonizing period of my life — Bengalis were
being killed mercilessly; Pakistan was nearing its destruction,
which meant too that the Indians were nearing the realization