220 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
on Bangladesh, which destroyed not only the economic in.
frastructure of Bangladesh but also its social fabric. After
more than two years of independence, Bangladesh was stil]
in a shambles.
As regards American economic aid to Pakistan in 1971,
the bulk of it went to East Bengal, and without it the people
there would have faced a major famine in which millions of
people could have died. The U.S. economic assistance did not
help the military operations by the Pakistani Army, but was
utilized for humanitarian relief operations for the Bengalis,
both inside East Bengal and outside, i.e. those who fled to the
refugee camps in West Bengal. The: U.S. Government, as
disclosed by President Nixon in his Report to Congress in
February 1972, stopped military supplies to Pakistan as soon
as the civil war began. He told Congress: “Immediately, in
early April, we ceased new commitments for economic deve-
lopment, This shut off $35 million worth of arms. Less than
$5 million worth of spare parts, already in the pipeline under
earlier licences, was shipped before the pipeline dried up com-
pletely by the beginning of .
The Indo-Pakistani war finally broke out on December 3,
1971, at a time when Nixon was “in sight of a political settle-
ment” between Yahya Khan’s régime and the Bangladesh
government-in-exile in India. The U.S. efforts for a political
settlement were discussed fully with Mrs. Gandhi when she
visited Washington just ten days before the war began. It
was reported that Nixon pleaded with her to give him a little
time for a negotiated settlement and that she complied with the
President’s pleas. So when, less than ten days later, Mrs.
Gandhi nevertheless sent her troops across the boundary into
East Pakistan, the United States Government’s reaction was
quite naturally unfavourable to India. When the matter came
up before the Security Council, the permanent U.S. representa-
tive, George Bush, said on December 5 that India was clearly
' “the major aggressor”. The U.S. Government had proposed
to both India and Pakistan that there should be a cease-fire
and a mutual withdrawal of troops. The Government of Paki-
stan accepted the U.S. proposal without any reservation.
The Government of India, however, rejected it publicly and
following that rejection there was an escalation in the fight-