TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 157
no longer a member of hig Cabinet, Yahya asked me to epare
a statement in a CONCiliatory vein. I baba to
draft the proposed statement, which ran as follows:
| In view of the Complete deadlock between the two principal
Te representing East and West Pakistan respectively,
. 7, 4m Constrained to Postpone the mecting of the National
‘Assembly on March 3) 1970. I would however wish to make
_ it absolutely Clear that the Postponement will not exceed
fwo to three weeks and during this short period, I shall
make all endeavours to bring between the
elected will of the two regions of our country.
| As you recall, I have often said in the past and I want
fo reaffirm that I have nO desire to impose a constitution
either on East or on West Pakistan against the wishes of the
People. A true federal Constitution, to Which the political
_ Parties and my régime are all committed, Cannot be framed
without the consensus of various federating units. I shall
be the happiest Person when a consensus on a federal union
18 arrived at, and on iY Part I assure my nation that I shall
‘pare no efforts to achieve this supreme goal.
I sincerely’ hope and appeal to my brethren in East
Pakistan to appreciate the gravity of the situation and allow
me this short period of two or three weeks to work for an
“agreed formula, Insha Allah [by the Grace of God] we shall
Overcome this difficulty, Let us remember Quaid-e-Azam’s
immortal saying “Pakistan has come to stay”; let us all
dedicate ourselves to the fulfilment of the desire of the .
| Father of the Nation. Tua,
I personally handed over the draft of the statement at Isla-
mabad airport as Yahya was leaving for Karachi, He sub-
sequently gave it to Peerzada, who, in alliance with Bhutto,
torpedoed it. I still fee] regret that I did not accompany Yahya
to Karachi. My reluctance was due to the fact that I was no
longer'a member of the cabinet; I also expressed my inability
to accept his offer of beirig an “adviser”, By accompanying
Yahya to Karachi, I would have caused unnecessary speculation
i ith Yahya. But I now realize that Yahya’s |
about my links wi ‘pe Pate
t weakness was his fickle-mindedness; he approved my
ny ban yan, when Bat sod Pec
Yahya, true to his weak Personality, accepted
another draft, as I cannot provide documentary
the provocative one. Though a :