THE CIVIL war | 181
they cannot be dismissed a] :
could be totally exonerated fre then. None of the three parties
Dacca dialogues. The pt the failure of the
ago* and many interpretations have. an oe
for the failure of the Dacca dialo acy ‘been offered
spection may well continue for Rings a The process of retro-
But one thing is certain. The “we wa CORRE. A
which began on the midnight of March ae 7), actions,
ndoned or just; . 25, 1971, can never be
oO ; Justified m any way. The Army’
campaign in which many thousands of inne.
of Innocent people in-
ding a, the old: and sick, and even children
ren ca an while millions fled from their homes oo take
t i
sh se = = oe remote places or in India, constituted a mea-
sur gedy. The miscalculation on which it was based j
were beyond description, ne
The exact figures of death and d i i
estructi
never be known accurately — Mujib has talked bo a pred
lion killed”, while the Pakistan Government tried to ie arr
the figures in thousands only. But Mujib was right when he
said that few nations had had to make such colossal sacrifices
in human life and suffering as the Bengalis in “an epic libera-
tion struggle” — though he himself had no part in the suffer-
ings; he made a cowardly surrender to the Army, leaving the
people to their terrible fate.
Unlike some other tragedies in Afro-Asian countries, the
Bangladesh tragedy was given the publicity it deserved which
went a long way to arouse world-wide sympathy and support
for the suffering people of Bangladesh. The whole world
was shocked by the Pakistan Army’s brutal assault. The
foreign press, particularly in the United Kingdom and the
United States; did a service to humanity by giving prominence
to the atrocities perpetrated on the Bengalis.
What factors compelled the Pakistan generals to embark
om such a suicidal course? There was, undoubtedly, a serious
threat to the territorial integrity of the country — not least -
from outside forces. But was the course adcpted by the
Pakistan Army appropriate — not to speak of justice or moral
sues — to “protect the territorial integrity of the country’?
The Army ‘could have punished the leaders and groups of