42 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
affairs, made mostly by foreigners. Inside the country too, |
Ayub began his political career with wide support even in East
Pakistan, People were so — ikea? mae aoe inl the
working of the country’s parliamentary dem -
of the poliicians that they welcomed Ayub in the
expectation that their basic problems and interests would be
better served by an honest, efficient and stable régime, Ayub
was, in a sense, the last hope for a united Pakistan.
But in giving Pakistan its much needed national identity
‘Ayub was a total failure. The crucial question is why he failed
so miserably in the task of national integration. In an under-
developed country, an effective political leader might be suc-
cessful in developing a broader sense of cohesion in a society
characterized by ethnic, linguistic and cultural pluralism.
As Howard Wriggins puts it: “In. a society made of diverse
primordial groupings with parochial loyalties, a personality
can be the main focus of common loyalty.” First, let it be
stressed that Ayub was not a leader with the mass support or
calibre of Nehru, Gandhi or Jinnah. To achieve political inte-
gration in a Pakistan with two wings geographically separated
by a thousand miles was too big a task for Ayub. He could, at
best, have contributed to the achievement of that goal; but
his political order and his economic policy, instead of contribut-
ing to the goal of integration of the country, greatly widened
the gap, both political and economic, between the peoples of
the two wings. ,
There was no lack of sincerity. Ayub was a great patriot,
and loved Pakistan passionately; he did not éven hesitate to
risk his own personal security in defending what he genuinely
believed to be the “national interest” of Pakistan, When he
wrote in his autobiography Friends not Masters that “Pakistan
is my passion”, he meant it.
As for the East-West Pakistan relationship on which the
Viability of a united Pakistan depended, Ayub’s understanding
was extremely limited. I had the opportunity to read the re-
ports which Iskander Mirza as the Governor of East Bengali
in 1954 used to send to the Governor-General, Ghulam Moham-
med, in which Mirza used to offer his solutions to problems
facing the “troublesome province of East Bengal”, The
approach was that of a district officer under a colonial régime.