214 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
That India invaded East Pakistan is conceded even by
scholars who made the most charitable interpretation of the
Indian role. Thus in his assessment of the Bangladesh crisis
Norman Brown candidly states: “The victory of the forces for
independence was achieved through aid India rendered the
East Pakistanis. This turned out to be of two kinds: one was
arming of the guerrilla force known as Mukti-Bahini, ‘the
liberation Army’; the other was the invasion [my italics]
of East Pakistan by the Indian army.’
The U.S.A., the Soviet Union, China and the Bangladesh Crisis
The Soviet’ hardening towards Pakistan in the preceding two
years (1969-70) has already been noted, and as the Bangladesh
crisis turned out to be another important issue in the Indo-
Pakistan relationship, Sovict support for India on the Bang-
ladesh crisis was almost certain. |
Tht Soviet Union’s overriding strategic interest. on the
subcontinent has been to maintain close relations with India
with the twin objectives of protecting its southern flank and |
maintaining enough pressure on China. The prompt Soviet
reaction to the crisis was expressed in Podgorny’s letter to
Yahya on April 2, 1971, within less than ten days of the out-
break of the civil war. The tone and content of the letter
revealed that the Soviet posture of neutrality in Indo-Pakistani
disputes, which she had adopted from April 1965 and which
enabled her to play the role of peacemaker in the subcontinent
at the Tashkent Conference in 1966, had been sacrificed “‘in
the hope that in the long run it will pay political dividends”.
The Russians were also most conscious, above all, of the inroads
made by China in Pakistan and this had a great impact on their
policy alternatives in the area because of the geopolitical
proximity of Pakistan to the Soviet Union.*! Moscow seemed to
have made the choice between a stable and friendly India
under Mrs. Gandhi, whose electoral victory in the 1971 Indian
elections was hailed in the Soviet Union, and a tottering Paki-
stan increasingly under the sway of Peking.
Then came the dramatic announcement of Nixon’s trip
to Peking and Pakistan’s role in improving the Sino-American
relations. The latter greatly offended the Kremlin leaders,