ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 777
2 eee that the past governments in Pakistan had
ie i the welfare of the “have-nots”. Bhashani usually
in ho ¢ talking ard would allow nobody else to talk;
ours of one-sided discussion Yahya said to Bhashani
Maulana Sahib, wh ee ene
alent » Why not join my administration and try
es ¢ problems as mentioned by you?” Bhashani’s reply
nar = Job is to find faults with the government and not
. any government.” The first meeting e i iali
and friendliness, but with no ct a dc age aig
constitutional issues. When I “Red Maulana”
I had to listen to his “‘sermors” for five hours without much
opportunity to find out any 1eaction he might have to any
proposal for the constitutional problem; I was, however,
thoroughly impressed by his devotion to the cause of the
poor and his lack of any perscnal political ambition. He is
indeed a great man.
The non-Awami League Bengali leaders like Nurul Amin,
Ghulam Azam and other moderates were most anxious for a
genuine political settlement between East and West Pakistan
but they had serious apprehensions about Mujib’s six points
which they considered a scheme for secession.
Bhutto, the dapper and aristocratic leader in West Pakistan,
was busy building his political base in West Pakistan as well
as cultivating links with various members of the military junta.
Like Bhashani, he had hardly any constructive suggestion or
plan for solving the constitutional dilemma. Moreover, his
task was more complicated than that of Mujib, who had only
one theme — “Bengali liberation from domination of West
Pakistanis”. Bhutto had to speak in one language in Punjab,
where he was preaching the gospel of “a thousand years’
war with India” and to restore “national honour”, which
Ayub was alleged to’ have sacrificed at the Tashkent con-
ference, while-in the smaller provinces of West Pakistan like
Baluchistan, the North-West Frontier and his own native
province of Sind, he had to speak differently on removing
poverty and ensuring social justice on the basis of “Islamic -
Socialism”. Bhutto’s real and secret dialogues were with Pecr-
zada, while with Yahya he would drink whisky and have gen-
-eral discussions. In my talks with Bhutto, he never spelled out
his attitude to Mujib’s six points, which was the most involved