38 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Bhutto family. While Bhutto was serving Ayub as his Foreign
Minister, the Haroon brothers had a difficult time. Yousuf
Haroon was not allowed to enter Pakistan because of his
alleged links with a foreign agency. But when Bhutto began
his campaign against Ayub in 1968, Ayub made a deal with the
Haroon brothers: Mahmood was made Ayub’s High Com-
missioner in London while Yousuf was made Governor of
West Pakistan. ay
Though belonging to one of “the twenty-two families”,
the Haroon brothers had a long-standing friendship with Mujib,
to whom they gave a salary of 3,000 rup¢es and many other
facilities during his long period of political persecution. Now, |
with the help of Altaf, Ayub utilized the services of the Haroon
brothers in reaching a deal with Mujib, which was Ayub’s
last hope. Secret meetings took place at the Presidential House
between Ayub, Mujib and the Haroon brothers in a “cordial
atmosphere”. The proposed deal was that Mujib would be
made Prime Minister of Pakistan under a parliamentary sys-
tem and with regional autonomy for East Pakistan; Yousuf
Haroon was already sworn in as the Governor of West Pakistan
and a nominee of Mujib, Dr. M. N. Huda, was appointed as
Governor of East Pakistan; and Ayub would continue as
President under a system of parliamentary democracy. Again
events overtook the working-out of this deal. The generals
- at GHQ were not happy with any such secret deal between
Ayub and Mujib. Bhutto got the news of th: secret talks as he
_ had no difficulty in knowing what was happening either at the
GHQ or the Presidential House, thanks to his friend Peerzada.
Bhutto at once issued press statements denouncing the secret
parleys, and this embarrassed Mujib. Bhashani was also
terribly upset over Mujib and the Haroon brothers getting
power. The latter were regarded as having strong links with
the Americans. Ayub’s shifts in favour of the Haroon brothers
had cost him Bhasani’s covert support, which he had enjoyed
‘since the Presidential election of 1965. This was mainly
due to his moving away from Washington and closer to Pek-
ing. Bhashani and his followers were happy with Ayub’s
_ foreign policy, but Ayub’s courting the Russians since 1966
and his latest deal with the Haroon brothers annoyed Bhashani
and the pro-Peking group of National Awami party. At this