168 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Ali. The real constitutional expert on Mujib’s team was Dr,
Kamal Hossain, who became Bangladesh’s first Minister of
Law and drafted the country’s constitution in 1972. A number
of Bengali economists were helping the team but they were not
participating directly in the dialogues. These economists,
aided by some foreign economists financed by the Ford Founda-
tion, were the loudest in making extreme demands, and they
were, to a large extent, responsible for the failure of the
Dacca dialogue.
Notwithstanding the highly explosive situation outside the
President’s House at Dacca and the provocative press state-
ments, militant railies, meetings, etc., the dialogues continued
from March 16 to 20 rather quietly, and it caused great sur-
‘prise im many quarters that there seemed to be some
““progress” — although it was hard to believe at that stage that
a political settlement could still be reached. The draft pro-
clamation as presented by Yahya was seriously considered.
In private discussions, Yahya and Mujib seemed to be nearing
a “settlement” — at least, that was my impressién in May 1971
reading the minutes of the Dacca dialogues up to March 20.
Meanwhile, the leaders of smaller groups from West Pakistan
arrived in Dacca to help the success of the talks.
On the evening of March 18, while I was in Karachi in
transit to London, I received an unexpected but most pleasant
signal from Yahya’s offices in Dacca that there were “good
prospects” of a political settlement and that the President
might need my services in finalizing the agreed constitutional
formula. I was, therefore, advised not to leave for London but
rather to be prepared to go to Dacca. I could hardly believe in
this signal” ‘as other developments both inside East
Pakistan and outside the country were working against such
_ All India Radio stepped up its propaganda in favour
of Bangladesh. Some of the foreign diplomats were hinting at
already established links between Mujib’s headquarters in
_ Dacca and the Indian authorities. The Pakistani intelligence
services had received many such reports.
By this tme Mujib had sized up U.S. policy towards the
political situation in Pakistan. As I have already mentioned,
the U.S. Consul General in Dacca, Mr. Archer Blood, had given
Mujib a false sense of optimism about possible “support”