ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 75
ide of Yahya’s talks with the politicians and he
mate cacti a to them to find out their reaction as well
; proposals and suggestions back to Yahya
sing! a modus operands for the transfer of power. I had
engthy discussions with most of the political leaders including
Mujib, Bhutto, Bhashani, Asghar Khan, Justice Murshed,
_ Qayyum Khan, Nurul Amin, Ghulam Azam (Jamaat-i-
Islami), Muzaffar Ahmad (pro-Moscow Group) and others. It
' was @ most interesting experience for me; I had similar ex-
periences in 1960-1 while acting as honorary adviser to the
Constitution Commission, headed by a former Chief Justice,
Shahabuddin, but this time it was a unique opportunity for a
political scientist, as well as a rewarding experience. I was
impressed by Yahya’s straightforwardness in his talks with
the politicians.
_ I shall particularly narrate my own assessment about Yahya’s
talks with Mujib, Bhutto and Bhashani. Mujib, as already
noted, was suspicious of the military régime and its intentions.
He had good reasons for it; Yahya was, no doubt, sincere and
Mujib gradually became convinced of the sincerity of his
pledge, but Yahya was never master in his own house as
Ayub had been. He never had more than a limited hold over
the army generals, who in fact constituted the ruling junta 4
between March 1969 and December 1971, nor did he seem
either anxious or able to acquire a position of complete domi~
nance. Consequently what he did or intended to do was often »
torpedoed by other members of the junta. Yet between March
1969 and December 1970 Yahya was given a free hand.in his
constitutional quest; however, he would consult his “inner
cabinet” of generals before taking any important move;
even his policy statements, made on the 28th day of the month
— Yahya had been commissioned in the army on the 28th —
at four-monthly intervals which continued till the time of elec-
tions in 1970, were discussed paragraph by paragraph by the
“inner cabinet”, but from my attendance of these meetings I
could observe that while some generals had reservations and
doubts about the unqualified transfer of power and grave
misgivings about Mujib’s six-point plan, on the whole Yahya,
with the help of his advisers like Peerzada and myself, had a
free hand in dealing with the politicians to work out an