g2 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
founder of Bangladesh, was paradoxically the last hope
for a united Pakistan — provided he could be persuaded to
modify his six points. I carefully examined the substance of
the Yahya—Mujib and Mujib—Ahsan talks in 1969-70 and can
vouch that Mujib repeatedly assured that he would modify
his six points once the elections were over.
Another significant and encouraging development took place
in February 1970 when Mujib told me that the L.F.O. should
provide for elections not only for the national assembly
but also for provincial legislatures. I pointed out that the L.F.O,
was not supposed to be a constitution but was to be a just
modus operandi for electing a national assembly — the first task
of which would be to frame a constitution; the provincial
legislature could come into existence only after the constitution
was framed. Mujib, with a significant smile, replied: “You
are a political scientist; I am a politician; how could Yahya
expect me to modify my extreme demands?” I could appreciate
his reasoning and believed that Mujib honestly wanted an
agreed constitution on the modified version of his six points,
I considered it a very encouraging hint. From Dacca I went to
Karachi to meet Bhutto and tried to find out his reaction to the
simultaneous holding of elections for both the national and
provincial legislatures. Bhutto, with his usual style of talking,
asked me if it were Mujib’s suggestion; I avoided giving an
answer by telling him that my assignment was to talk to all
political leaders including Mujib and himself. Bhutto agreed
to the proposal, though he termed it “putting the cart before
the horse”, but he added that it would enable the political
leaders a flexible attitude. On my return to Islamabad,
I reported this to Yahya, who immediately accepted it and
asked me to draft the L.F.O. accordingly. Turning to the
two specific proposals relating to the special procedure for
voting on constitutional proposals and the definition of pro- .
_ vincial autonomy, the matters were thrashed out at a series of
meetings of the inner cabinet. Yahya was firm against any
special procedure of voting by saying that he could not com-
promise on the principle of “one man, one vote”; he argued,
with the support of Ahsan and myself, it would destroy con-
fidence in the intentions of the military régime among the
Bengalis, and once that confidence was lost, Yahya concluded,