ie |
76 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
acceptable formula for the transfer of power on the basis of a
united Pakistan.
Any threat to the break-up of the country was to be met
effectively; on that there was no difference of opinion. Within
the framework of “one Pakistan” Yahya could freely negotiate
with political leaders including Mujib, whose alleged involve-
ment in the Agartala conspiracy was never forgotten by ‘the
generals, So Mujib’s doubts and reservations had some basis.
The East Pakistan provincial Governor, Admiral Ahsan, was
to some extent successful in removing Mujib’s doubts; or,
alternatively, Ahsan let himself be fooled by Mujib and his
few advisers like Dr. Kamal Hossain, who was Mujib’s consti-
tutional adviser (he became Bangladesh’s first Law Minister to
frame its constitution in 1972), and Rahman Solhan, a pseudo-
economist who had failed to obtain a Ph.D. from London
University, but he was close to Mujib as his economic adviser.
The two met almost daily with Ahsan at the residence of a
common friend whose services were recognized when he was
given an ambassadorial assignment in 1970. Ahsan was sincere
but lacked the capacity to understand the political dynamics
of East Pakistan and the external forces at work there. He was
all for a. deal with Mujib while the zonal MLA, General
Yakub, and the intelligence services, both military and civil,
were apprehensive of Mujib’s ultimate aims — whether these
were to become the first Bengali Prime Minister of Pakistan or
the creator of a new state, Bangladesh. Yahya was bewildered by
the conflicting views of Ahsan, Yakub and his intelligence
chiefs. So the Yahya-Mujib dialogue was a most important and
complex one. The crucial issues were whether Mujib would
modify his six points; and whether the military junta would
really hand over power to Mujib.
Dialogues with Bhashani were interesting but not of great
significance. The octogencrarian Maulana Bhashani is a
legendary figure; he never accepted any office, and is
thoroughly dedicated to the causes of the poor and the “‘have-
nots”. “Maulana” is sometimes dubbed as “red” or as a pro-
Peking communist but he is also a sincere and devoted Muslim;
he is a leader of the Gandhian type with a missionary zeal to
serve the poorest. At his first meeting with Yahya, Bhashent
gave a list of the demands of peasants, workers and students,