YAHYA BEGINS ANEW st
The secretary of a ministry was summoned before the Council
whenever any matter relating to that particular ministry was
to be discussed.
Nur Khun, however, recruited a number of talented go aia
men from outside the civil service, popularly known as i whizz-
kids”. He began to introduce reforms with far-reaching im-
plications such as the right to strike and other important con-
cessions which had been denied to the workers under the
Ayub régime and then proceeded to introduce a new
educational policy which, although it had some commendable
features, included also such fantastic giving
the right to participate in the selection and promotion of
teachers including university professors. Nur Khan’s labour
policy had already created panic, Yahya was not prepared to
go in the same direction to placate the students to such an
absurd extent; he was willing to replace the “black” univer-
sity ordinances of Ayub and to give the students their legiti-
mate rights, but Nur Khan was too ambitious - he wanted to
create an image for hims-lf, as against Yahya, by introducing
“radical” reforms. So the first tussle began in the ruling junta
between Yahya and Nur Khan. By this time Yahya also set
up a three-man “planning cell” following the model of Nur
Khan’s “whizz kids”. As already mentioned, I became a
member of the planning cell. My first contact with Peerzada
was both surprising and amusing,
Peerzada was unceremoniously removing all the so-called
“Ayub men” — the top civil officers who had been close to
Ayub, such as Altaf Gauhar, N. A. Faruque and Fida Hasan.
Although I had no such important links with Ayub as these
officers, I had, as mentioned in the preceding chapter, a close
and friendly relationship with him. Peerzada’s summons to
me therefore came as a surprise. He recognized me at once
since I had met him on many occasions while he was Ayub’s
military secretary. There were a few moments of initial
‘ surprise and hesitancy. Then, like a big boss, he communi-
cated to me the order of the CMLA’s office “transferring” my
services from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the CMLA’s
office. When I explained to him that I was not a regular
government official and that my services were lent to the |
Ministry of Foreign Affairs for a specific assignment on a con-
Cc