ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 9!
ey ominated assembly”, some members of the “inner
th ct _ Put forward two particular demands. The first of
see Ne O Legal Framework Order (popularly known
had to be nicer pied tae rere Aged:
minticohtain a a a d before elections could legally be held,
‘it is melt tion of the limits of provincial autonomy,
aorta was that in the new assembly, constitutional
, Matters must be decided not by a simple majority but by a two-
thirds vote or at least 60 per cent of the total membership —
the rider clause which was dropped at the eleventh hour from ,
Yahya’s plan of November 28. It was argued that there was no
reason why Yahya should not take a definite decision on the
extent of provincial autonomy, just as he had decided on the
basis of representation and on the break up of “one unit”. The
non-Awami League leaders from East Pakistan also joined
with the West Pakistani leaders in making this demand; their.
fear was that unless provincial autonomy were defined, Mujib
would have a strong edge on them by preaching the gospel of
Bengali nationalism and his six points which had become popu-
lar in East Pakistan. They feared — and subsequent events
proved their fears justified - that if the explosive issue of
regional autonomy were not defined in the L.F.O., the flood of
emerging Bengali nationalism could not be checked. They also
argued that Yahya had pledged genuine and maximum auto-
nomy, in economic-financial. matters among others; so why ©
did he not put an end to this potentially dangerous issue by
giving real autonomy and then firmly declaring “This far and
no further”?
There was good reasoning behind these arguments, How-
ever, Mujib made it clear through Governor Ahsan that if the
extent of provincial autonomy were defined or if the principle
of “one man, one vote” were modified by any special pro-
cedure of voting on the constitutional issue, it would mean an
end to negotiations and the beginning of an armed confronta-
tion. Some of the generals seemed to prefer to have a confronta-
tion before elections, i.e. before Mujib could consolidate in
East Pakistan and emerge as the sole leader of the Bengalis, —
But Governor Ahsan warned Yahya that a united Pakistan
would -not survive a confrontation with Mujib. Yahya too
at that stage seemed convinced of it. Mujib, the subsequent
D*