ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 79
it unless the federal legislature were composed of two
houses — the lower house on the basis of population, or ‘one
man, one vote’, and the upper house on some other basis. In
West Pakistan, there was controversy over “one unit” — amal-
gamation of the four provinces of West Pakistan into one
PEOVINES OF done in 1955. The smaller provinces were
against “one unit”, and Mujib too did not favour it because,
although it did not directly affect East Pakistan, its dissolution
_ would — or so it was expected — give Mujib a better bargaining
position by coming to a deal with the smaller provinces against
“domination of Punjab” — towards which the Bengalis and the
people of smaller provinces had a. shared antagonism. The
most complicated issue, however, was the relationship between
the centre and the provinces - whether a viable national
government was at all feasible if Mujib’s six points were not
modified. After reviewing all three controversial issues, Yahya
stated:
So, you see there is quite a variety of opinions and views on
these major issues. As for myself, I have already indicated
on a number of occasions that my mind is absolutely open
on these subjects and that the decision must lie with the
people. The only requirement that I would insist upon is
that any constitution or any form of government that the
people of Pakistan adopt for themselves must cater to the
ideology and integrity of Pakistan. . . . We must think,
first and foremost, in terms of Pakistan. This is not to say -
that reasonable and just demands of various regions of
Pakistan should be ignored. As long as these demands are
in keeping. with the integrity of Pakistan, ways and means
should be found to accommodate them.?
Then, referring to the Bengalis’ demands and grievances,
Yahya said: “They were not being allowed to play their full
part in the decision-making process at the national level and in certain
important spheres of national activity [my italics]. In my view they
were fully justified in being dissatisfied with this state of affairs”,
and Yahya pledged “to correct this stituation”.* This was the |
first occasion when a Pakistani President looked at the prob-
lems of East Pakistan in its true perspective and not with the
colonial approach of “law and order”. The fact that the Ben-
galis had no effective share in decision-making process was the