_ THE CIVIL WAR 187
The so-called “mutiny” was a natural consequence of the
Army’s operations, It is, however, correct to say that just as
the Army was for confrontation, so also the Bengali
armed personnel were preparing on the lines of their contin-
gency plan under the command of Colonel Osmani, who later
became commander-in-chief of the resistance forces ~ the
Mukti Bahini or liberation army. It was not until the end of
April that the Pakistan Army was able to regain control of the
‘various districts and areas of East Bengal, By May 1971 the
Army had apparently crushed the movement, although the
Army’s situation was never stable or secure.
Indian Involvement
After this apparent defeat, the Bengali resistance forces then |
crossed over to India, where they could obtain arms and am-.
munition as well as sanctuary — the Pakistan Army would not
dare to cross the Indian border, and thus giving sanctuary to the
Mukti Bahini was the first significant move by India in her _
involvement in the crisis. Without India’s arms and sanc-
tuary, Bangladesh might have remained a distant dream of the
Bengali nationalists for many years to come. Just as the Paki-
stan Army’s brutal atrocities can never be condoned, similarly
India’s role, which I discuss in the next chapter, was contrary
to all the basic principles of the U.N. Charter and inter.
national law.
Turning to the internal scene in the emerging Bangladesh
and West Pakistan, the temporary “victory” by the Pakistan
Army over the Bengali resistance forces gave the military junta
- in Islamabad a sense of optimism. But instead of using the time.
gained for developing a constructive and imaginative approach
to the crisis, the Army generals in West Pakistan allowed them-
selves to be fooled. The military régime imposed a stritt censor-
ship of all news about “East Pakistan”. Not only the public in
West Pakistan but even the ruling élite seemed to believe that
the uprising in East Bengal was merely the product of “Indian
agents” and a few “‘miscreants”. It was widely believed in
West Pakistan that the people of “East Pakistan” were not be-
hind the movement. Of course, the Bengali Muslims, as I have
already pointed out, did not like to see Pakistan destroyed,