Kas aia THE FALL OF AYUB 29
yu to give “Fj ws
speeches to the co ie radio-television
’m March 1, 1968, Ayub followed this
P , though on television he
ELI AS appeared a sick man. Altaf
ts © announced that Ayub would take the sal th
military parade on Pakistan’s National D de ig
that had to be cancelled. Defence Minis caer send
peared to do the job on March 23 “ae ek nae =
confident mood, was the real man of the sh "The fo sign
‘diplomats who were present on the occasio aa old § at ha
changed mood in the army hierarchy. rer wie
Ayub gradually began to resume his work at the President's
House, though on a restricted basis. The number of visito
allowed to see the President was reduced. There was an
group of three in the ruling élite: Altaf; Ayub’s military na
tary, Major-General Rafi Khan; and ‘his physician, Colonel
Mohiuddin, This tri aren ers
trio more or less controlled Ayub’s activities
and he was gradually cut off from the other powerful members .
of the ruling élite; this had a prejudical effect on Ayub’s con-
tinuation in power. Finally, Ayub went to London for a medical
check-up in the summer of 1968. He was given, according to
Government publicity, “a clean bill of good health”.
I met Ayub in London and found him in much better shape
than when I had last seen him in later April on the eve
of Kosygin’s first visit to Pakistan. In spite of his poor health,
Ayub made two important decisions almost from his sick-bed.
First, he give notice to the U.S. Government to close its mili-
tary communications centre at Badaber, near Peshawar.
Then he had a serious conversation with Kosygin over the
provision of Russian arms to Pakistan; thus a move which he
had been frantically planning since 1965 had at last been
successful, though the Russian arms consisted of nothing more
than “nuts and bolts”.
After Ayub’s return from London with the news of his “full
recovery”, the celebration of “The Great Decade” was re-
vived with full vigour and enthusiasm. These year-long cele-
brations, like the publicity of the Agartala conspiracy case,
constituted another great miscalculation by the régime and had
a most unfavourable effect on Ayub’s image in the country.
The programme for a full one-year celebration of the “De-
cade of Reforms” was mainly the brain-child of Altaf, and it