88 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
have to put an end to = ne a Of Pakistan
ap to be maximum autonomy fot fey andl ‘soli
ie as this does not impair national integrity soli-
ton yo Seats of the whole ant between
the Centre and the provinces in Pakistan today lies in the
financial and economic spheres. Federation not
only a division of legislative powers but also that of financial
powers. This matter will have to be dealt with in such a
manner as would satisfy the legitimate requirements and
demands of the provinces as well as the vital requirements of
the nation as a whole. People of the two regions of Pakistan
should have control over their economic resources and
development as long as it does not adversely affect the
working of a government at the Centre.
Gould there have been better gestures and incentives for a
confederal solution of the regional conflicts between East and
West Pakistan than that given by Yahya in his speech on
November 28, 1969? There was wide appreciation of Yahya’s
speed, both inside and outside the country. Pakistan seemed
about to show that it could carry out a peaceful transfer of
power from a military to a democratic régime. The world’s
press welcomed Yahya’s “bold” and sincere proposals for
restoring the democratic process in Pakistan and for solving
the complicated regional conflicts of the country. The New York
‘Times wrote under the headline “Pakistan sets an example”:
“Pakistan President Agha Mohammed Yahya Khan has set
a prudent example for other military rulers with his move to
restore democratic civilian rule in his country. . . . The prin-
ciple of ‘one man, one vote’ will give the restive Bengalis of
East Pakistan majority representation in the Assembly con-
sistent with their numerical strength’; while the Christian
Science Momior commented: “To his credit General. Yahya:
Khan has now announced a crisp time-table for elections
' throughout the country on a one man, one vote basis and
drafting of a constitution which should give the Bengalis
of East Pakistan virtual autonomy and a voice in national
affairs, at last commensurate with their numbers.”?2 In the
USS. Congress, Mr. Sikes said: Agha Mohammed
Yahya Khan is providing an encouraging example which other