DISMENBERMENT OF PAKISTAN, 1971 213
on November 16, evading the Secretary-General’s offer of good
offices; on the contrary, she accused the U.N. of “the present
attempt to save the military régime”, and of an attempt to
“side-track this main problem and convert it into an Ihdo-
Pakistani dispute”, She further told U Thant: “If you are
prepared to view the problem in perspective, you will have
our support in your initiatives,’*2?
 U Thant, in’ his reply of November 22, expressed
surprise over Mrs. Gandhi’s remarks: “I am puzzled by the
reference in Paragraph 5 of your Excellency’s letter to “the
present attempt to save the military régime of Pakistan’
and ... to ‘side-track this main problem and to convert it into
an Indo-Pakistani dispute.’ >: . I am also puzzled by the state-
ment in paragraph 8 that if I am “prepared to view the
problem in Perspective’ I shall have the support of the Indian
Government.”28
No observer of India’s record at the U.N. whenever any mat-
ter involving her interests was taken up would be “puzzled”’,
While India made a hue and cry about her “terrible burden”
as a result of the influx of millions of refugees, she repeatedly
refused to allow U.N. observers to facilitate the return of re-
fugees to their homes. India insisted that only after a political
settlement, which must be the dismemberment of Pakistan and
the creation of a new country, could the refugees return.
It was an extraordinary demand.
On November 23, 1971, Yahya made an urgent appeal to
the UN. Secretary-General: “I am addressing this message -
to you with a deep sense of urgency in view of the grave
situation which has arisen in my country as a result of
unprovoked and large-scale attacks by Indian armed forces on
various parts of Pakistan,’?2 On November 22 Indian troops
began to cross the international boundary of Pakistan in its
castern region on the pleas of and “self-defence”
~ dangerous doctrines if applied in international relations.
If it is accepted, the territorial] integrity of any smaller country
will not be safe and it will be a negation of all the principles
and premises of the U.N. Charter. It is a great pity that the
same liberal point of view in Western countries which was
snost opposed to the U.S. involvement in the Vietnamese
War did not condemn the Indian invasion of East Pakistan,
| a 2