196 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
In fact, even before Mujib surrendered to the Pakistan Army in
March, there was a secret deal, again through the good offices
of the American officials, ensuring that Mujib’s life would be
protected. Whereas the Pakistan Army was out to eliminate
other top Awami Leaguers, including Tajuddin, and their
families, Mujib and his family were treated in a strangely plea-
sant way by the Army. The fabricated story of digging a “‘grave-
yard” for Mujib on the floor of his cell in the prison has been
exposed by the journalist, Oriana Fallaci, in her Mujib in
Power: a Portrait.** It is, however, true that some hawkish
generals, in collaboration with Bhutto, would have preferred
to execute Mujib if it had been feasible but Nixon’s strong
pressure made such a venture impossible. Yahya had no such.
plan. He was rather relieved to receive Nixon’s letters on
this matter which strengthened his hand in restraining the
_hawks.**
In August when I became convinced that Yahya was
searching frantically for a political solution of the crisis, and I
knew that some political dialogue had again started, 1 made
my second trip from London to West Pakistan and Dacca.
The scene in Islamabad, where I landed on August 23, 1971,
was bewildering. Cornelius was still busy finalizing his consti-
tution. A group of “experts” from Bhutto’s party had regular
sessions with Cornelius and his aides — a group of civil officials
headed by the all-powerful Peerzada. Peerzada and Cornelius
seemed “‘satisfied” with the “quantum of provincial autonomy”
to be given to the people of “East Pakistan” - which was no
longer a reality. A significant feature of the proposed constitu-
tion was the provision for a ‘“‘Bengali Vice-President” who
would exercise provincial autonomy sitting in Dacca. Peer-
zada explained to me that this was a “‘big concession” to the
Bengalis! It was difficult to control one’s laughter at the stupid
exercise. It seemed that the process of constitution-making in
Pakistan was endless — it had begun when the country obtained
independence on August 14, 1947, and it was still continuing
when Dacca fell on December 16, 1971. How could either
Bhutto or Peerzada still believe that a constitution framed by a
few West Pakistani civil and military officials sitting in Rawal-
pindi would be acceptable to the Bengalis, who had proclaimed
their national goal of an independent state? ,