_—
THE DACCA DIALOGUE 177
failed to see that when he made these remarks on June 28,
1971, Pakistan as it had been. established in 1947 was already
dead.
Turning to the process of drawing up the constitution for |
the so-called “Confederation of Pakistan”, the Mujib plan
would have split the National Assembly. as elected in Decem- |
ber 1970 for the country as a whole into two separate “consti-
tuent just as the original Constituent Assembly
of India had been divided into two assemblies under the {
Mountbatten plan of June 3, 1947, when the British Govern-
ment, the Congress, and the Muslim League jointly agreed to
the partition of India. The two constituent conventions — one
for Bangladesh and the other for West Pakistan — would
be free to frame any form of constitution, acting as two |
sovereign bodies. The five principles which were spelled out
in the Legal Framework Order of 1970, in consultation with
. and with the approval of. Mujib, as the basic and minimum
requirements of a united Pakistan would no longer be binding
on the two constituent conventions, Under the Mujib plan, |
the President would be required to authenticate the proposed |
constitution as framed by the two constituent conventions,
no matter whether the proposed constitution divided the
country or not. Under Article 17, sub-clause 7, of the Mujib
plan, it was laid down that even if the President would not sign
or authenticate the proposed constitution, “in any event upon .
the expiration of seven days” from the date of such presentation |
of the constitution, it “shall be deemed to have been authenti-
The members of the National Assembly who were
elected under the Legal Framework Order of 1970 were re- |
quired to take an oath of allegiance to Pakistan: “I... do
hereby swear (or affirm) that I will keep true faith and |
allegiance to Even this was not acceptable to
Mujib. His plan demanded that members of the two consti-
tuent conventions take an oath in the following form: “J
A. B., do solemnly swear/affirm that I will be faithful and keep
true allegiance to the constitution of Pakistan as by law estab- |
lished.”® This was also significant in understanding the modus
operand: of Mujib and his advisers; they were not even pre-
pared to pay allegiance to Pakistan. This demonstrated clearly —
that the Awami League did not believe in the unity of Pakistan,
G