i |
94 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
this; on the other hand, the Awami League’s election
festo pledged: ““The Awami League affirms that a clear guaran-
tee should be embodied in the constitution to the effect that no
law repugnant to the injunction of Islam as laid down in the
Holy Quran and Sunnah shall be enacted or enforced,18
It was only after the creation of Bangladesh that Mujib pro-
vided in his country’s constitution the principle of secularism
by the “elimination of granting by the State of political status
in favour of any religion and the abuse of religion for political
purposes”. Mujib won the election of 1970 by pledging a con-
stitution on the Islamic ideology because he knew that Islam
and its ideology were as dear to the Muslims of East as of
West Pakistan. Here was one glaring instance of the gap be-
tween Mujib’s professions and his practice.
Turning to other principles of the L.F.O.: (2) the country
was to have a democratic constitution providing for free and
fair elections — no one could object to that. (3) Pakistan’s
territorial integrity must be upheld in the constitution — Mujib
could not object to this because, whatever his ultimate goal,
he could not openly challenge the “oneness” of the country.
(4) The disparity between the wings, particularly in economic
development, must be eliminated by statutory provisions to be
guaranteed in the constitution — again neither Mujib nor any
other political leader, either of East or West Pakistan, could
have any objection to this. (5) The distribution of power be-
tween the centre and the provinces must be made in such a
way that the provinces enjoyed the maximum degree of auto-
nomy consistent with giving the central Government adequate
power to discharge its federal responsibilities, including the
maintenance of the country’s territorial integrity. No doubt
the intention was to set up a genuine federal system.
But since the wording of this stipulation was deliberately
_ Vague, it was capable of more than one interpretation; it
allowed Mujib to base his election campaign on his six points
while those who wanted a united, federal Pakistan could still
_ hope they had got it. This particular point or principle in the
L.F.Q. was the most complicated one, and it was agreed upon
after much discussion and debate in the inner cabinet; the
civilian cabinet was presented the final draft for mere formality
and there was not much discussion in the cabincz; there were