98 - THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
triumphant entry of Indian troops into Dacca on December
16, 1971?
Things, however, were not moving in the way that Mujib
was saying in public. When his party was debating Yahya’s
scheme of power under the Legal Framework Order of 1970,
Mujib was reported to have said to his inner cabinet that his
sole aim was to establish Bangladesh. Yahya was presented
with a tape-recorded account of these talks of Mujib with his,
close associates. Mujib was clearly heard to say: “My aim is to
establish Bangladesh; I will tear the L.F.O. [the Legal Frame-
work Order] into pieces as soon as the elections are over.
Who could challenge me once the elections are over?” He also
hinted to his colleagues about help from “outside sources’’,*
presumably from India. When Yahya listened to this “politi-
cal music” played by his intelligence services, he was bewil-
dered. He could easily recognize Mujib’s voice and the sub-
stance of his recorded talk. The next morning when I saw him
he was still in a bewildered state; but he was never a serious
administrator, so he soon recovered from his shock and told
me: “I shall fix Mujib if he betrays me.” Yahya also seemed to
have more than one contingency plan, just as Mujib seemed
to have.
The Confusing Scene
In political talks and election campaigning, Mujib and his
followers were freee to preach the idea of Bangladesh to every
house in every village without hindrance; cries of Joy Bangla!
(Victory to Bangladesh) were heard everywhere. Again,
making a comparison with the past, Mujib’s election campaign
was the same as Jinnah’s in 1945-6 for the establishment of
Pakistan. As the campaign progressed, it was clear that Mujib’s
Awami League was the only representative party in East
Pakistan; the othef parties could hardly organize any mect-
‘ings, and when they did, the militant Awami Leaguers would
disrupt them.
There was ‘a martial law regulation that anybody talking
against “territorial integrity” would be severely dealt with,.
yet a campaign for Bangladesh was freely allowed. Yahya
would make some speeches now and then reaffirming his
ents