THE FIRST AND LAST GENERAL ELECTION 117
programme would protect “the viability of the Federal Govern-
ment of Pakistan”14 Again after the creation of Bangladesh
Mujib said that he had been working for a separate state for
Bangladesh siace 1968: struggle for independence began
in 1948 and through movements in 1952, 1954, 1902, 1969 and
These provide some of the glaring instances of the
gap between Mujib’s professions and pledges before the election
and his real role in the break-up of Pakistan,
Mujib’s manifesto had also promised that a “socialist econo-
mic order” would also prevent the transfer of resources, or the
flight of capital, from East to West Pakistan. It pledged “2n
independent non-aligned foreign policy”.
Mujib’s election campaign and strategy were simple:
their sole purpose was to carry the gospel of Bengali national-
ism and the ideal of Bangladesh everywhere in Pakistan.
Thanks to the naiveté and incompetence of Governor Ahsan,
Mujib and his followers had a free hand and were able to
preach secession without the least hindrance. Bhashani told
me that if the Government were leaving Mujib free to preach
the idea of Bangladesh, he had no option but to speak in terms
of an “independent East Pakistan”. However, his speeches
in favour of an “independent East Pakistan” were misunder-
stood by the Government as well as by sections of the public
in West Pakistan. He did not favour the break-up of Pakistan,
as he could foresee that Bangladesh would be nothing more
_ than a client state of New Delhi, like Bhutan or Sikkim; his:
call for an “independent East Pakistan” was one of anguish
and warning to the Government. But again Ahsan prevented
any understanding with Bhashani. He was unhappy over my
meetings with the “Red Maulana” and reported them to
Yahya as being detrimental to the cause of an under-
standing or deal with Mujib. Ahsan may have been sincere in
his conviction that it was necessary to have a deal with Mujib,
but he lacked the political acumen needed to understand the
political forces inside the Awami League working against
a united Pakistan. I repeatedly suggested to Yahya that he |
should hold a straight dialogue with Mujib and find out if he
was prepared to modify the six-point plan. If Mujib refused,
I recommended that Yahya should arrange a referendum in
East Pakistan to ascertain if the Bengali Muslims wanted to