THE FIRST AND Last GENERAL ELECTION III
. toral rolls and of the Delimitation Commission in setting up
ee was well received in the country. Neither any
an tie pool Gee a. em ne cast any reflection or doubt
© “ommissions headed by Justice
Satter. seemed to be happy with the procedural
arrangement for holding the country’s first general election.
The Longest Election Campaign : January to December, 1970
= Out earlier, Yahya did not ban political parties
when he imposed martial law on March 25, 1969. As he said
in one of his speeches in 1970: “This caused both surprise and
relief. .. . The first action of any martial law régime is to ban
political parties, for the existence of a martial law régime side
by side with political parties is a most unusual phenomenon,”’¢
. After many years of controlled or quasi-controlled democracy,
in which political parties had been denied the freedom to
propagate their views and explain their policies and. pro-
_ grammes freely, full political activity was revived in Pakistan
from January 1, 1970. The Martial Law Regulation 60, pro-
mulgated on December 21, 1969, allowed unrestricted political
activity in the country. It is true that Regulation 60 provided
certain “guidelines” for political activity, as they were called,
such as that no political party or group nor any individual
would be permitted to preach violence or regional hatred, or.
' speak at all against Pakistan’s ideology, i.e. the Islamic ideology ©
on which it was claimed that Pakistan had been established.
| But the Regulation was only honoured in its breach. There
was open and violent preaching of regional hatred, mainly by
Mujib’s party in East Pakistan. The younger and militant |
groups, mainly students and industrial workers, adopted seem-
ingly fascist techniques for disrupting the political meetings
and processions of other parties. Various parties made charges
and countercharges of hooliganism and vandalism. The
Government was accused of being too weak, particularly in
East Pakistan towards Mujib’s party. Yahya pointed out the
real dilemmas facing his régime:
1 nder which the martial law authorities had, on
The p - ignore breaches of martial law regulations and
|
|