84 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
and that this must be rectified..I became convinced that he
intended a genuine political settlement between two parts of
Pakistan by giving the Bengalis a real share in the decision.
making process within a loose federal or even a confederal
system. Yahya told me that he was opposed to any idea of a
“strong centre”, such as Ayub had often stressed. I tried to
impress on him and other members of the “inner cabinet” that
Pakistan had tried to achieve national integration from above
| by having a highly centralized government although the
4 nation was legally constituted as a federation — but the ex-
periment had proved to be a total failure. We should try the
other way: let the two wings of the country manage their own
_ affairs without any guidance or hindrance from the centre,
particularly in the economic sphere. Here the Bengalis could
say with ample justification that the all-powerful Planning
Commission, which had been entrusted with the task of the
‘country’s economic development, had grossly neglected the
economic problems and needs of East Pakistan. Pakistan, I
continued to argue, should have full decentralization in econo-
mic and financial matters. In any political process, the
Bengalis could not be made part of a Pakistani nationalism
unless they could play their full part in national affairs. They
rightly complained: hear the big decisions over, the radio
or television or read them in newspapers; sometimes we hear
Pakistan is the ‘most allied ally of the United States’; then we
hear that the same United States encourages secession in East
Pakistan. Even foreigners sometimes know the real situation in
Pakistan better than we, the Bengalis.” As regards economic
and financial matters, even a small project such as a road link-
ing district A to district B had to be finalized by a planning
commission sitting a thousand miles away and dominated by
the non-Bengali bureaucrats. No important observer of the
Pakistan political scene could dismiss the genuine. Bengali
_ complaints. There was never a single Bengali finance minister,
nor a Bengali chief of the Planning Commission. How could
Bengalis consider themselves as part of an elusive Pakistani
nationalism solely on the basis of Islamic bonds? If Islam were
the only bond, the Bengali intelligentsia might well argue that
they could create a larger Islamic state than West Pakistan.
Yahya, unlike Ayub, never pretended to be an expert on