ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR OF POWEL 99
determination to “protect” the country agai th
gainst any threat
= a trcak-up3 yet the young and student followers of Mujib
East P the gospel of Bangladesh. everywhere in
n “August 14, 1970 ~ independence _
day — the students of Dacca University had displayed a new
map showing the creation of Bangladesh, and the flag of the
emerging country was prominently displayed at a meeting to
celebrate independence day. The meeting was presided over
by the Vice-Chancellor of the University, Justice A. S. Choud-
hury, former President of Bangladesh. He was summoned by
the Martial. Law Administrator, Lieut.-General Yakub Khan,
to “explain” lis open challenge to the country’s unity and
existence. The matter ended over a cup of tea, thanks to
Governor Ahsan’s intervention. #1
All-India Radio, from its station in Calcutta, was broad-
casting a programme every evening entitled Abper Bangla,
oupper Bangla (This Side and the Other Side of Bengal), openly
supporting the cause of Bangladesh. There were reports —
not only from the Pakistan intelligence services but also from
others, including some friendly foreign countries — that Indian
money and arms were being sent to East Pakistan both for the
success of the Awami League in the election and for the even-
tual confrontation with the Pakistan army. There was evi-
dence of India’s involvement in the affairs of East Pakistan. *
The non-Awami League political leaders of East Pakistan
made similar reports to Yahya. i.e
Ahsan was the only optimistic person in East Pakistan, and ,
he used to tell Yahya: “Sheikh Sahib [Mujib] will not break
up Pakistan.” Yahya would be satisfied; he was regularly
paying visits to East Pakistan and always had “lengthy” and
“friendly” talks with Mujib; on every occasion after his talks
with Mujib he was happy and would say: “Thank God all
those reports. [i.e. those supplied by his intelligence services
and from other sources] are not correct.” My interpretation of
Yahya’s reaction is that he was not capable of understanding
the political realities or dynamics of East Pakistan. Tt was
Ahsan who was largely responsible for leading Yahya into a
false sense of optimism; but neither Yahya nor Ahsan seemed
. to have any other option. Mujib was given a long rope, and it
was now difficult for him to retreat without a confrontation,