230 ‘THE LAST. DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
along the border between West Pakistan and India, but the
East Pakistanis felt that because they had only one army
division in their province, which was surrounded on three
sides by. India, they were at the mercy of the Indians
throughout the war: “While West Pakistan was using its
American tanks and American planes to fight India for the
precious five million Kashmiris, 65 million Bengalis were
left to fight with their bare hands if the Indians had attacked
us”, an East Pakistani said.? During the war East Pakistan
was for all practical purposes isolated from the world, and the
war. suddenly illuminated all the disadvantages from which
East Pakistan suffered because of political domination by an
irresponsible ruling élite. composed of West Pakistani top civil
and military officers. .. © , ‘ : :
Mujib and his close followers began to work for secession of
East Pakistan and seemed to have been assured of help and
assistance from India. The internal conflict in the country
was complicated and aggravated by foreign intervention.
The East Pakistan crisis became “‘foreign-linked”. ‘The Agar-
tala conspiracy case and Mujib’s followers’ direct, and his
indirect involvement, as I -have shown, were based on facts.
‘It is a pity that the conspiracy case had to be withdrawn be-
cause of the internal political confusion created during the four-
month-long agitation against Ayub and his political order.’ |
The result was that Mujib, instead of being exposed, became
a hero among the Bengalis. Its forced withdrawal of the case
made the Pakistan Government appear to. be persecuting a .
“leader who only demanded the Bengalis’ legitimate rights
for regional I have heard a tape-recorded version
. of Mujib’s talks with his top political aides in 1970 in which he
attributed to Ayub his own unique popularity among the
-Yahya’s “fantasy and blundets”* have been much talked
about but I can vouch Yahya the Pakistan Govern-
made the first and the last attempt to remove the
legitimate grievances of the Bengalis; I have.shown that he
conceded all.the demands put forward by the Bengalis. If
Mujib had been sincere and interested only in regional auton-
omy, there would have been no room for, any conflict. The
plan for the. transfer of power as made by Yahya would have |