124 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
-ppeals to “Islamic ideology” and “strong central govern-
cent” were of little interest to the newly awakened masses
in West Pakistan. The political awakening based on socio-
economic factors was hastened during the four-mor.-h
tion against che Ayub régime in 1969 and during the year -long
election campaign in 1970. During both these periods Bhutto's
performance was more successful than that of the old guard 8
out-dated programmes and policies. Though Bhutto's elec-
toral success in West Pakistan was less than Mujib’s in East
Pakistan, his achievements — in view of the more formidable
forces, more complicated issues, and sub-regional and linguistic
tensions which he had to tackle — were no less remarkable.
The Government decided to give facilities to the leaders of
various parties to project their political manifestoes and policics
through television and radio. This was the first time that politi-
cians were freely and impartially given the chance to use the
government-owned radio and _ television for their political
activities. During the presidential election of 1965, the candi-
date of the combined opposition parties (C.O.P.) was denied
the use of this facility by Ayub, while he himself utilized
radio and television in his own election campaign. Similarly,
during the parliamentary era (1947-58), when provincial
elections were held in the 1950s, the politicians were never
given the use of such facilities — television was not yet there in
the 19508 but radio did exist and could have. been made
available to the opposition parties, as is the well-established
practice in Western democracies.
In their television and radio speeches, the various leaders
did not add much to what they hae been saying in their
public meetings and rallies. Political broadcasts began on
October 28 and continued until November 19, 1970, during
which time the leaders of fourteen parties made speeches. The
series began with Mujib, who was given the chance to speak
first, and ended with the leader of the Sind United Front,
G. M. Syud. By this time there was no doubt as to who among
the leaders had real political support: Mujib, Bhutto and a
few others in West Pakistan such as Wali Khan and Qayyum
Khan, leader of one of three factions of the Muslim League;
both of the latter two leaders had chances of success in the
North-West Frontier province.