rin THE FALL oF ayys
inistry was severely criticized for ; , .
and both Bhutt ‘ or its grand miscalculations,
utto and Aziz Ahmed were removed'soon after the
India reacted violently by attacking Pakistan on the inter-
national frontier on the morni
“ie rning of September 6, 1965. Thus
gan the full-scale war between India and Pakistan. The
war ended in a draw: neither «i fie
: ; er side could claim victory, nor
could it be considered defeated. Pakistan, with a much
smaller army, put up a brave sh ee .
a Ow particularly when com-
pared with the military débacles of :
; C €8 Of 1971. Yet the Indo-Paki-
— War of 1965 had a disastrous effect both on Ayub’s author-
ity and image with the armed forces and on relations between
East and West Pakistan, as I have already discussed i
; glider y in analys-
ing the growth of Bengali nationalism (see Chapter 1, above),
As to its impact on Ayub’s authority, many army officers, in-
cluding some generals, felt that Ayub should have continued -
the war with Chinese help; Indonesia under Sukarno was also
willing to help Pakistan. The younger groups of army officers
felt that Ayub accepted the cease-fire and the subsequent
Tashkent agreement under external pressures and to the detri-
ment of his internal political order. It was argued that he could
not afford a people’s war with Chinese help with his narrow
political base and the vested interests of his ruling élite, in-
cluding his own interests. I have described elsewhere Ayub’s
secret trip to Peking during the 1965 war and the Chinese offer
of help." Suffice it to say here that the Chinese offers were not .
“empty” nor were they “paper tigers”. But Ayub had also
genuine and serious limitations in prolonging the war. So the
cease-fire and the Tashkent Agreement ended the war after
seventeen days. Ayub’s image was tarnished by his alleged
surrender of the “national interests” at the Tashkent Con-
ference —- a theme on which Bhutto based his major attack
against Ayub duting the political upheaval of 1969.
Ayub lost the confidence of his real constituency of power |
(the armed forces) and with General Musa’s retirement in
1966 as the Commander-in-chief of the armed forces, his
position was further weakened. After careful thought and
‘considering many factors other than military efficiency or
qualities, Ayub selected General Yahya Khan as commander-
in-chief, and in so doing by-passed a few generals senior to