‘ |
186 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Thousands of people were now streaming across the open
fields to take shelter in remote places, and even as they fled
the Army did not hesitate to kill them. At noon there was again
firing from machine-guns on the ground and from many
C-1g0s and circling aircraft and helicopters, the aim being to
create a general panic among the whole population.
The Resistance
While the Army was successful in bringing the peace of
the graveyard to Dacca city, its position in the rest of East
| Bengal was untenable. Its situation was most desperate in
the major seaport of East Bengal, Chittagong, where the second-
in-command of the East Bengal Regiment, Major Ziaur |
Rahman, after killing the West Pakistani commanding officer,
announced the formation of the provisional government
of Bangladesh from Chittagong Radio Station on March 26.
The Bangladesh Government, however, says now that Mujib,
before his arrest, had made a declaration of independence at
midnight on March 25.:It was as follows: “This may be my
last message. From today Bangladesh is independent. I call
upon the people of Bangladesh, wherever you might be and
with whatever you have, to resist the army of occupation to
the last. Your fight must go on until the last soldier of the Paki-
stan occupation army is expelled from the soil of Bangladesh
and final victory is achieved.’"*+ Yet another declaration of
independence was issued by Tajuddin Ahmad, Prime Minister
of the exile government in India, on April 17, 1971, when
after proclaiming Bangladesh as a sovereign Republic, he said:
“Pakistan is now dead and buried under a mountain of
corpses.”1? From all the available evidence it appears that
Mujib never made any proclamation of independence; it
was Major Ziaur Rahman who acted on his own initiative
and was the first to announce it from Chittagong Radio Station
at midnight on March 25-26. The “mutiny” of the East
Pakistan Rifles and the police, and particularly of the East
Bengal Regiment, “came as a great as Fazal Muqueem
says, but how could one expect the Bengali personnel of the
armed forces, the paramilitary force and the police to be pas-
sive spectators while their own people were being massacred ?