THE WAR 189
of their long-cherisheg dream, In a letter on April 13 from
London, I wrote to Yahya urging him passionately stop
the forces of terror and destruction let loose by the Army’s
action. His reply was, in a Sense, Pathetic; he repeated what
he had told me at Our farewel] meeting in Karachi on March
29: He now seemed to have realized insincerity but
he had never been a Serious administrator, and he now seemed
to have lost all control, Among the large community of Asian
Mmigrants in London, there were all sorts of stories and rum-
ours. At one Stage, it was circulated there that the generals
had realized the futility of their military adventures in East
Pakistan. The number of Pakistani soldiers, including officers,
killed in the military Operations in East Bengal was rising;
Pakistan § €conomic Situation was desperate. All foreign loans
and aid for development had been stopped, The United States
had announced a ban on military Supplies to Pakistan, only
those items “already in the Pipeline” being allowed. Any sensible
régime would have tried Seriously to §ct. out of the impasse;
It was difficult for me to believe that the junta had not yet
realized. ‘the blind alley into which their military operations
had led them, Was there nobody in West Pakistan to see and |
tell them the truth ?
In the latter part of May I decided to go to both West
Pakistan and Dacca to see the situation for myself. In the
Preceding two years, from April 1969 to February 1971, I
had been an active participant in the Political process in Paki- -
‘ "stan; it was thus almost impossible for me to be in London
While my country was disintegrating; near relations and dear
friends were involved. So I decided to make the trip although
it caused unjustified comments in certain quarters that I was
still involved in Pakistan’s quest for a constitution, First,
no political realist could expect a “constitutional
for both East and West Pakistan in the summer of 1971,
Secondly, I had already declined Yahya’s invitation to become
an adviser, and accepted an academic in London,
My trip was solely to watch the latest developments both in
West Pakistan and in Dacca. I had no illusions about the situa-
tion; the Pakistan press censorship had not been able to reach
me in London,
I landed at Karachi on May 16. Yahya was there on a tour,