34 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Pakistan: They were newcomers to the political scene and as
such Ayub’s oft-repeated adverse comments against “old
politicians” of the parliamentary era (1947-58) were not
applicable to them. They gave fresh momentum to the move-
ment.
Ayub and the Generals
After ten years of unchallenged rule, it was a big shock for
Ayub to face the realities of his situation. The army intelligence
chief, Major-General Akbar of I.S.I.D., had no hesitation in
sending the most candid reports to Ayub; even his top civil
service advisers could no longer conceal the unpleasant truth.
There was a scene of confusion and panic at the Presidential
House. There were regular meetings of a small group consisting
of Altaf, Fida Hasan and one or two others to review the situa-
tion and plan the strategy for meeting the most serious
challenges to the régime.
At first, Ayub’s expectations were that the norma] machin-
ery of law and order, consisting of the police and paramilitary
forces, would be adequate to meet the situation. Ayub was still
thinking in terms of law and order, but he soon realized that
the situation had gone far beyond the capacity of the normal
machinery of law and order. There were two alternatives
before Ayub: a political settlement with the opposition ~
a very complicated task, apart from Ayub’s reluctance to “talk
to the politicians”, because of the lack of a national party
ora national leader. The country seemed to have been already
politically split: Mujib was a popular hero in East Pakistan
but anathema to West Pakistan; Bhutto was popular in West
Pakistan but in East Pakistan he was not only uninfluential but
thoroughly disliked for his long eight-year association with
the Ayub régime. Ashgar Khan and Murshed were newcomers
and were listened to respectfully by the urban ¢lites but had no
hold over the masses who were getting beyond the control
of the centre politicians, Bhasani was never interested in any
political or constitutional settlement; along with other leftist
forces, he was working for a real revolutionary movement,
not one which had the secret blessing of GHQ.
The second option before Ayub was to regain the Army’s