=.
THE DACCA DIALOGUE 173
tions of Pakistan “defence” had been adequately defined so
as to cover ancillary powers connected with the defence of the
country, such as Connected industries, the manufacture of arms,
jurisdiction of cantonment areas, etc. But under Mujib’s plan,
no such powers connected with defence were allowed. The
meaning and connotation of defence as given in the Mujib
plan were vague and narrow, .
More important, while the centre was given the responsi-
: bility of “defence”, however narrowly and restrictively defined,
it was not given any independent financial resources to carry
out its responsibilities and obligations. The financial relation-
ship between the centre and Bangladesh. as proposed in the
Mujib plan was as follows;
All duties and taxes which were prior to the commencing
day (ie. the day on which the proclamation comes into
force) levied and collected within the State of Bangladesh
by or under the authority of the Central Legislature shall
be collected by the Government ‘of Bangladesh and after
adjustment against all Central Government financial
allocations to and direct expedition in the State of Bangladesh
48 provided in the Central. budget of 1970-1, the residue
remaining shall be made over by the Government of
Bangladesh to the Central Government; if upon such
adjustment, an amount is found to be due-to the State of
Bangladesh from the Central Government, the Central
Government shall make over such amount to the Government .
of Bangladesh. Ne
The implications of the proposed financial arrangement
were that the central Government would have no power of
taxation or any source of revenue. The contribution of
desh to the central Government’s expenditures were made
uncertain and vague. In fact, while the central Government ~
was denied any financial Powers or resources as far as Bangla-
desh was concerned, it might be liable to pay “dues” to Bang-
ladesh on the basis of the Yahya Government’s budget of 1970-1
under which generous allocations had been made for East
Pakistan, if the Bangladesh Government should decide that
these were due to it from the centre. The Mujib plan seemed to .
seek both advantages: absolute control over financial resources
and at the same time the centre’s grant to Bangladesh, Yahya