20 THE LA8T DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
ism (so described by the Bengali intelligentsia). But for Ayub
the diplomatic successes were significant for his image in West
Pakistan, the base of his military strength.
But adventures in international politics cam sometimes
cost a dictator dear when he lacks popular support and a
firm base. Ayub’s over-confidence in his success in foreign
affairs entangled him into the biggest mistake of his career —
the war between India and Pakistan in 1965.
- The Indo-Pakistan War of 1965 and its Effect on Ayub’s Fall
Calculations and temptations for intervening in the widespread:
- political unrest and agitation in the Indian part of Kashmir,
which began over the theft of the holy relic in 1964*, were great
for Ayub.and his advisers. India under “Little Shastri” was
considered to be weak following the death of Nehru. The mini
Indo-Pakistani battle over the marshy lands in the Rann of
’ Kutch in the spring of 1965 gave the Pakistani armed forces
. a false sense of superiority, and memories of India’s military
defeats by the Chinese in 1962 were still fresh. Under these
“favourable circumstances”, a group of the ruling élite —
Bhutto being the most enthusiastic among them — felt that a’
policy of confrontation with India over Kashmir might
- be fruitful.
The usual procedure for such a crucial decision was as foi+
lows. The Pakistani army chiefs used to make a careful analysis
of the pros and cons of the proposed course of action, one
group presenting the case, while another group acted as
opponents of the proposed action. The opposing group might
not actually disagree, but for the purposes of clarification and
examination, this type of debate used to be arranged.
In 1965, when the Pakistani ruling élite decided the course
of action on Kashmir, this well-established practice was not .
_allowed.1° When I questioned him on his crucial decision,
Ayub on more than one occasion during ‘1967-9 answered
me: “Please do not rub in my weakest and fatal point.” He
admitted that he was greatly misted by his Foreign Minister
* Bhutto and Foreign Secretary Aziz Ahmed. The Foreign
* For details see G. W. Choudhury, Pakistan's Relations with India, Lon-
don, 1968, pp. 283-7. ‘ |