THE FALL oF 19
‘yub at the Renith’
Ayub seemed to reach th
his electoral Victory over Mace a Sune Rnd efter
tial election of 1965. Miss Tin atema Jinnah in the presiden-
Moh . Miss Jinnah, the sister of Quaid-i-Azam ,
ammed Ali Jinnah, the F
edb ; » “he Founder of Pakistan, was suppor-
victory was mainly q parties (COP), Though Ayub’s
~ iy Gue to the indirect method of election, his
success in a lively and much- ublicized electi
over a candidate who was a “nc, tae ke Reon
by all the opposition > @ popular heroine and supported
particularly abroad parties gave a great boost to his prestige,
‘indined we ss ee ae nae
ballots ase rt to violence after seeing the futility of
pontine ne ye seemed to have developed
to’ . .
he tiiplied fa Pi iy ape domestic affairs, while
mself eign affairs — to play his
role as the Asian de Gaulle. He planned a grand triangular
vant to Peking, Moscow and Washington soon after the
electior in the spring of 1965. He visited Peking and Moscow
with good results and wide publicity at home. His trip to
Washington was cancelled rather discourteously by President
Johnson at the eleventh hour. But it only increased Ayub’s
prestige as he was regarded as following an “independent foreign
policy”, which wrath of Washington. So Ayub’s
adventures in external relations so soon after his electoral .
victory had enhanced his prestige and image.
. Ayub’s dialogue with Chairman Mao, Premier Chou-En
Lai and other top leaders in Peking and his similar dialogue
with the Kremlin leaders in Moscow’ satisfied the Pakistanis’
sense of national pride, as the country was considered to have
achieved at last the goal of diplomatic parity with India -.a
cherished desire of the Pakistanis. Then Pakistan under
Ayub took a leading part in organizing the Second Afro-Asian
Conference; although it proved abortive, Ayub’s role was
appreciated. It must be made clear, however, that the majority
of the Bengalis had no such thrill over Ayub’s successes in
external relations. As already pointed out, the Bengalis had
begun to think seriously in terms of emerging Bengali national-
ism rather than of sharing the “incoherent” Pakistani national-
B