' THE CIVIL WAR Ig!
in 1947. I knew from past experience that it was no use giving
Yahya a lengthy report such as I had prepared while in Dacca.
So I begn to read extracts from my notes — all factual data.
He looked vacant and seemed unable to talk to me. He knew
my devotion to the concept of a united Pakistan and he also
knew that I had never Supported Mujib’s veiled secessionist
plan. He could not, therefore, dismiss my account as that of a
“typical secessionist under the influence of India” ~ the last
' thing I wanted to see was the destruction of Pakistan with the
help of the Indian armed forces. Our meeting ended in a con-
fused way. Yahya asked me to see him again before I returned
to London. : |
Then I began a round of visits to a number of other members
of the ruling élite. It was a shocking experience to see their
attitude: “The rebels must be crushed; then we can talk of
any political settlement.” It wags also agonizing for me to
see the calmness of life in the federal capital as if nothing
_ had happened, There was only concern over India’s involve-
ment in the crisis but none for the suffering humanity in East
Pakistan.
It is, however, true that some of the Army officers who had
been in East Bengal from March 25 or had taken part in the
military operations seemed to realize that Pakistan was fin-
| ished. They also were aware of India’s growing involvement.
| Some of the “fat” generals holding high positions in the
administration, who had been accustomed to a life of luxury ©
since the country’s first military coup in 1958, seemed to be
| completely out of contact with the military aspects of the
| situation. They professed ‘“‘confidence” in facing simultaneously
both the Indian threat and the secessionist challenge from East
Bengal. This group of seemingly degenerate generals thought
| they had crushed the national uprising in Bangladesh. They
| did not or could not fully realize the international implications
| of the crisis, particularly the direct involvement of India and
| indirect involvement of the Soviet Union. A group of the junta
| ‘headed by Hamid, Peerzada and Omar, thought that the
| problems of “East Pakistan” had been solved for ever by force.
So why make any more concessions to the Bengalis? Justice
Cornelius was asked to prepare a constitution giving “auton-
omy” to East Pakistan but “within limits”, so that in future