48 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
The circumstances in which Ayub and Yahya imposeg
martial law were, however, entirely different. When Ayub
came to power, Pakistan’s democratic institutions had been
perverted and its politicians discredited. On the other hand,
when Yahya became a “military” president, there was great
resentment against authoritarian rule and lively agitation jn
favour of democracy. More important, the Bengalis were no
longer prepared to acquiesce in an “ordering framework”
in which their demands could be ignored. Bengali
ism was no longer covert or inarticulate. The four-month-long
political agitation against Ayub provided the Bengalis with
free opportunities for proclaiming their political goals in clear
terms which could be ignored only at Pakistan’s peril. Simul-
taneously the “have nots” revolted against a privileged élite
and demanded social justice. The Government’s economic
policy must aim not only at a high growth rate but also at
distributive justice. The problems and challenges facing Yahya
Khan and his régime were formidable and complicated. The
_ Movement — or more accurately tounter-coup against Ayub —
was originally hatched by some ambitious generals at GHQ
in collaboration with frustrated leaders like Bhutto, but it
resulted in the “floodtide of Bengali nationalism” and in the
formidable and unprecedented challenges to the privileged
élite in Pakistan who monopolized both political and economic
power.
Yahya had neither the vision nor the capacity to tackle the
gigantic problems facing Pakistan in 1969. His immediate
| task was “to put the administration back on the rails”; he
added “we have had enough administrative laxity and
At the same time, he could not ignore the upsurge of popular
demand for democratic government and social justice. So
Yahya declared within twenty-four hours of coming into
power: aa
: I wish to make it absolutely clear to you that I have no
ambition other than the creation of conditions conducive
to the establishment of a constitutional government. It is
my firm belief that a sound, clean and honest administration
is a prerequisite for sane and constructive political life and
for the smooth transfer of power to the representatives of the
people elected freely and impartially on the basis of adult franchise.