164 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
I had already wound up my affairs in Islamabad after the
dissolution of the cabinet on February 17, and was planning .
to go to London for an academic assignment at the Royal Insti-
tute of International Affairs. But I did not wish to leave Paki-
- stan before the outcome of the Dacca dialogue had become
known. I stayed behind in Karachi on my way to London to
watch carefully the last phase of the drama which marked the
end of united Pakistan. I also assured Yahya that if the situa-
- tion were to improve so that there was any chance of a political
settlement, I would immediately dash to Dacca to contribute
my little part in helping his efforts to protect the unity of the
country — but such a prospect hardly seemed likely.
The two sides were also reported to be preparing their con-
tingency plans for the imminent confrontation. The Pakistani
Army was reinforced in East Pakistan by being flown over a
circuitous sea route of 3,000 miles because of India’s continued
ban on. all flights between East and West Pakistan.
India also put pressure on Ceylon not to allow Colombo airport
to be used for Pakistani forces, but without success. Mujib
was also making his plan. .He appointed Colonel Usmani as
Commander of “the Revolutionary forces”. A few other re-
tired Bengali officers of the Pakistani Army joined Usmani
im organizing an armed uprising. Three weeks of de facto
| independence of “‘Bangladesh” provided Mujib with unique
opportunities for challenging the central Government. He had
absolute control over radio, television and the press, which were
asked to publish his edicts. The East Bengal Regiment and the
East Pakistan Rifles, as well as the police force of the provincial
Government in East Pakistan, were all united in showing their
. allegiance to Mujib and not to the central Government.
When Yahya arrived in Dacca on March 15 he was virtually
4 “foreign guest” of Bangladesh. Yet, in spite of everything,
the political dialogues began. rae 3
The first meeting between Yahya and Mujib took place on
- . , March 16. Mujib arrived at the President’s House at 11 a.m.
in a car flying a black flag to mourn the death of those killed
during the preceding two weeks. His car also had a symbol of
j Bangladesh pasted onto it. During the meeting Mujib put for-
ward his four points relating to the immediate lifting of martial
law and the transfer of power. Prospects of framing a constitu-
5 : j ip
rr |