8 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
most of the urban professional Bengali groups were beginning
to consider seriously whether they could or would live together
with the western part of the country. People no longer con-
cealed their hatred of West Pakistan. But the greatest blow to
Pakistan nationalism came as a result of the Indo-Pakistan
war in September 1965. Neither India nor Pakistan could claim
victory or be considered defeated in this seventcen-day war.
In fact, Pakistan, with a much smaller army, air and naval
force, did quite well in 1965 in comparison with December
1971. But the war of 1965 disastrously weakened the national
bond between East and West Pakistan. Until then a common
fear of external aggression had, like the religious link, been an
important factor in helping the two parts of the country to live
together. There was a deep-rooted myth that if India attacked
East Pakistan, West Pakistani soldiers would move up to Delhi.
The 1965 war shattered that myth for good. Mr. Bhutto, Ayub’s
foreign minister, proudly claimed in the National Assembly
that East Pakistan had been protected by China. If that was
so, the Bengalis began to argue, why do we not settle
our own diplomatic and external relations? Why depend on
West Pakistan, which could give no protection to East Pakistan ?
Within one hour of the war beginning, East Pakistan was cut
off, not only from West Pakistan but from the rest of the world.
So the old argument that the defence of East Pakistan lay in
West Pakistan no longer held water.
It was under these circumstances that Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman formulated his famous six-point programme, Let me
also examine some economic and cultural factors in the Bengal
separatist. movement. The Bengalis’ most serious complaint
was of what they called the “economic exploitation” of East
Pakistan by the Pakistan central government. It had been
said by many impartial economists, particularly American
and British, that the economic development of East Pakistan _
was sadly neglected and that something ought to be done about
‘it. I myself, who used to believe in one Pakistan, have pointed
out in previous writings that the most serious challenge to
Pakistani nationalism was the economic disparity between
East and West Pakistan, Many moderate East Pakistani leaders,
like Nural Amin and others who also wanted to live in a united
. Pakistan, strongly urged the government to accelerate the eco-