116 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
(three factions), Jamiat-e-Islami and t.c Pakistan Democrati,
Party, doubtless had an all-Pakistan organization and set
up candidates in both East and West Pakistan. But it soon
became evident that none of these parties had any real popy.
lar support in East Pak‘stan, and they were also rapidly losing
their hold in West Pakistan to Bhutto’s party. The two princi.
pal political parties ultimately emerged as successfy]
in the election: were regional and not national. The Awamj
League had acquired an absolute hold in East Pakistan but
had no support in the West, while the emerging West Pakistani
leader, Bhutto, did not dare to set up even a single candidate
in East P..Listan. Regional polarization became
evident as the election campaign developed. This was most
disheartening for those like myself who had been working hard
for the unity of Pakistan.
Without going into the details of the programmes of all the
parties, most of which were routed, let me examine the political
programmes of Mujib and Bhutto, the two principal actors in
the final drama of united Pakistan.
Mujib’s political manifesto was based on his six-point plan
which will be fully analysed in the next chapter. Apart from
this, the manifesto of the Awami League included the following:
Islam is the deeply cherished faith of the overwhelming
miajority of the hse The Awami League affirms that a
ciear guarantee shall be embodied in the Constitution to
the effect that no law repugnant to the injunctions of Islam
as laid down in the Holy Koran and Sunnah shall be enacted
or enforced in Pakistan.’
Mujib thus appealed to the sentiment of the rural Muslims
of East Pakistan by pledging an Islamic Constitution;
yet after the break-up of Pakistan, he imposed a “‘secular’’
_ Constitution on the Muslims of Bangladesh!
Similarly, while his six-point plan was nothing but a veiled
scheme of secession, Mujib declared in one of his early election
speeches: “Pakistan has «ome to stay and there is no force
which can destroy In fact, though Mujib claimed on
many occasions that the election would be a referendum on his
a six-point plan, he gave repeated assurances that his policy or