_ INTRODUCTION
Why did Pakistan fail to achieve a national identity or produce
_@ viable political order in which the people of both East and
West Pakistan could live together as equal partners? Was
Pakistan really an “‘unbridgeable division of language, climate
and way of life”, and is it true that “the division of Pakistan
into two nations (in 1971) was no more than a belated recogni-
tion of the unreality of the original state divided by a thousand
miles into two parts” ?! The growth of nationalism in Pakistan
was, no doubt, complicated by diversity of language, race,
culture and above all, by lack of geographical contiguity.
But there are many countries in the Third World with acute
regional, racial and linguistic differences and tensions. The
federal solution has proved successful in many newly indepen-
dent Afro-Asian countries with diverse ethnic, cultural,
religious, linguistic and racial groups. Why did federation in
Pakistan fail to achieve a similar success?
Geographical separation between the two halves of the coun-
try was a great challenge to its’ emerging nationalism, but in
the modern age with satellite communications, jet aircraft,
etc., geographical distance was not an insuperable factor.
It was often said that there was nothing in common between
an East and West Pakistani except religion; if that was the
sole argument for the break-up of Pakistan, one may inquire
what common identity makes a Bengali (Indian) and a
Madrassi live together in an Indian union.
_ The disintegration of Pakistan and the emergence of Bangla-
desh in 1971 is a sad story of the Pakistan Army generals’
misconceptions about their roles as the “guardians of national
interests” and of the dubious roles of two unscrupulous and
inordinately ambitious politicians - Mujibur Rahman of
Bangladesh and Z. A. Bhutto of “New” Pakistan. The crisis
| in Pakistan in 1971 was also a case of “foreign-linked factional-
| ism” where there are “linkages between internal political
factors and the international environment”,*
xi ‘