156 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
Yahya’s time. By and large, Yahva had a free hand in the
country’s day-to-day and routine administration and in exter-
nal affairs, but he was always careful to have any important
decision approved by his inner cabinet — even’ lis policy state-
ments used to be thoroughly discussed by them. Unlike Ayub,
Yahya operated within a collective leadership although he
retained the vital role for himself. |
It is my assessment that in February Yahya, like Ahsan,
might also have been replaced by Hamid; he would not per-
haps have been unhappy to go. But for some reason, the junta
had to carry on with Yahya. It was conscious of the adverse
international reaction that would have been created by Yahya’s
removal or resignation, particularly in Washington and Peking,
in the context of the role assigned to him by Nixcn to develop
ties between Washington and Peking.
_ So Yahya continued to play his role in an untenable
situation. Following Bhutto’s: threat, the National Assembly,
which had been scheduled to meet on March 3, was postponed
indefinitely. Yahya’s announcement on March 1 on the post-
ponement of the Assembly could not have been more provoca-
tive or tragic. When I asked him about it on March 5, he looked
vacant and helpless; I was convinced he had only been a
signatory to it. Bhutto and Peerzada were reported to have
drafted the statement. Yahya, unlike on previous occasions,
did not broadcast it; it was only read out over the radio.
Before Yahya left Rawalpindi for Karachi to pursuade
Bhutto to go to Dacca so that the National Assembly might
not be postponed, he had already sent Peerzada, Ahsan and
Yakub on the same mission to persuade Bhutto to attend the
National Assembly. He gave Bhutto a solemn promise that if
Mujib were to “thrust a six-point constitution” against the
wishes of the majority of the West Pakistan members and if
his constitutional draft would mean splitting the country, he
would at once prorogue the assembly; however nothing could
satisfy Bhutto. When it became evident that as a result of
Bhutto’s threat of boycotting the assembly, the majority of the
West Pakistani assembly members would not attend the session,
Yahya decided to postpone the summoning of the assembly,
but he wanted to issue a statement which should cause the
least provocation possible in East Pakistan. Though I was