162 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
could become - Bangladesh, Bengali Jand. The flag has been
_ devised.” Similar pr appeared in The Economist (March
13, 1971) and Time magazine (March 15, 1971): “Pakistan
as it stands today is finished.” ;
In the mean time, India had already banned all flights of
Pakistani planes between East and West. Pakistan as of
February 1971, because of an alleged hijacking of an Indian
plane by ‘‘Pakistanis” at Lahore. Pakistan was frantically
making efforts through the help of friendly countries, includ-
ing the United States and Great Britain — the Soviet Union
was also approached — to dissuade India from taking this
extreme measure at a time when East-West Pakistani contacts
were more vital than ever. But India would not listen to any
counsels of restraint or offers of mediation by the U.N. Secre-
tary-General. A judicial inquiry conducted subsequently by
the Pakistan Government revealed that the hijackers were
Indian agents from the Indian-occupied part of Kashmir.
Mujib indirectly endorsed the Indian action by terming it as
“a conspiracy by the Pakistan Government to postpone the
transfer of power”. This was an unfortunate remark since
Yahya was at that time sincerely working for a political settle-
ment. Mujib’s remarks about India banning Pakistani planes
from flying to East Pakistan had only deepened the suspicion
of those members of the military junta who had always con-
sidered Mujib to be an “Indian agent”. performance
at the time ‘of the alleged hijacking was also ludicrous: he
described the allegedly “Pakistani” hijackers as “national
heroes”! Could there be clearer evidence of the bankruptcy
of wisdom on the part of the two elected leaders of East and
West Pakistan than such a reaction to a serious threat by the
Indian Government to the national security and viability of
Pakistan?
Bhutto’s reaction to Mujib’s proposal for handing over power
before the National Assembly could meet or frame a constitu-
‘tion was equally distressing and shocking. In a statement on
March 14, when Yahya was on his way to Dacca to make his
final bid to Mujib, Bhutto declared: “If power were to be
transferred to the people before any constitutional settlement
as demanded by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, it should be
transferred to the majority party in East Pakistan and the majority