ae oom TRANSFER OF POWER 89
policies wiser cee appreciate. His quiet but effective
Pakistan.” President io process forward in
Seok Ava lor in W'ahi bg eet ele
should be fillowed: in All Goer eee
outside the coun han -wasi = yond hem <
try, who wanted tq see Pakistan united and
stable welcomed Yahya’s plan for the transfer of power. It
was the first — and the last — attempt pods ie
. ae pt to put the complicated
relationship between East and West Pakistan on a sound politi-
cal gon and it looked as if Pakistan was set a the right
ech wes a
3 vere expected to contradict the old truth that
dictators never give way voluntarily,
Many questions may be asked about a plan which aroused
such strong expectations, Did the army — not Yahya alone but
Aen tithe 4 y ya
¢ ruling junta ~ really want to hand over power? Did Mujib
want a. settlement on the basis of a united Pakistan or
did he only intend to use elections to establish his credentials
as the sole leader of an emerging Bangladesh? What were the
aims of the West Pakistani leaders, particularly Bhutto? Were — |
they prepared to pay the price needed to fulfil the demands of
Bengalis as pledged by Yahya? The whole plan was based on
three fundamental premises: first, Mujib would modify his six-
point plan, and would be satisfied with genuine provincial
autonomy and not aim at secession; secondly, the West Paki-
stani leaders, both the politicians and the big industrialists, —
would be willing to make the necessary sacrifices and conces-
sions to satisfy the legitimate aspirations, political demands and
economic dues of the Bengalis as.a condition for keeping Paki-
stan united; and thirdly, the military junta must give up the
power to which it had become accustomed since 1958; it
must not think in terms of any “qualified” or “limited” transfer
of power of the “Turkish” type — the Turkish model sometimes
arose in conversation with the generals. I was often asked by
some ofthe generals if I consulted the Constitution of Turkey
while advising Yahya on the constitutional problems of Paki-
stan.
A single declaration — or a plan, however carefully and sin-
cerely worked out — could not solve the complicated problems
of a country like Pakistan. The plan itself was a step in the right