Pakistan THE
: thre F
— en areas ms OF AYUB
ig ‘Bich Sees of gen 1gs.* Even b 23
was » and so 0 full conspi efore the Go
still 3 n. In of acy Vv
peau Dacca f fact, en January 7 Stir
duel and Wes cal sci ecember ok place w hil ests,
pi Pakistan — of oust 967. A saa Ayub
eeting was stay at D arranged us universities i of the
li . h a es
m nationali ow to 7aCCa. Tl at the Presi in both
a : Ga ent fi atent iscussion
edhe also ask ea and or Pakistan. ve spirit of th at the
ident’s ed to 1 Q. Shah . Ayub’s e Mus-
The House partici ab. w two top civi
was i a i te and as ass present ewe
e€ was ruptl an “atm nas I ent
apap cede
Sea with him and pr tapi lage hardly talk
abrupt can m and g of s part in y talk,
in cella wh the meeti such di
conclusi tion of th en I exp eeting I iscus-
The ve. I coul e meeti ressed , lhada
Eas same even d realize ae his repl wid reaction to
oe fe , the usu ae as incoherent ha
appeared onour of banquet aie had ha nd
ai fay Ste after abou the visiting ba the aa
ad a discussi part. At th t two hours esident be or of
a seni on. with € pro - — an gan late:
inkl or and ca the Chi Gor unusual phe ,
pee 1g of the abi Be eae of Civil ans i
casion I could mpending cri officer. He ce (Centr al
The mo r get little i risis. Or gave me th )s
cas st seri e informati plot alth e firs
fea Mujib’ i development of = data ough on ce
rnment & imp icati : G e 1
since the rept ett cae it-a poy conspira
the Ag ement for si Mujib days 1 a
w artala ca r six points oa who had ater, the
es most The rea tiers in 1966, iil ee in jail
e government urable in East P 7 Mujib’s arr involved in
* On announ akistan. rest in th
discov January 2 cements of th I was in D € case
In ei of a it 1968, the Go e conspir acca when
in help. It ba ring me ae of Pakis acy case and of
nos osed that t the secession of tan announced 0.
Mr P. N. Ojha, the First S eran ter a East Pakist the
‘tee and they were all tary of th had been arr with
other materi rted to hav ave been tee in Tate.
terial aid acro e contacted engaged in
Ss the border 2 the Indian offi _anti-state