YAHYA BEGINS ANEW 59
In our circumstances, there ;
economic development, But are
be isulated from the demands of social es The wide
gap which separates the different sections of society must
be narrowed, and the imbalance which led to ae strife
and discontent must be removed. - « « The objective of
planned economic development should be the general raisin
hes — of ving all over the country and not hi
up of a privile :
disadvantage of other” Go Le i and
This was an admirable goal but was most difficult to achieve
without radical changes in the economic and political spheres,
Piecemeal measures, such as increased allocation in public
health, education and housing, a limited scheme of minimum
wages as reflected in Yahya’s two budgets (1969-70 and 1970-
1) were not adequate for meeting the new and growing de-
mands for distributive justice. Prospects of foreign aid and
assistance were also not bright. When the U.S. Secretary of
State, Rogers, came to Pakistan in May 1969, Yahya made
strong pleas for increased U.S. economic assistance, but without
much success. The climate for foreign aid in Washington was
unfavourable; the bargaining strength of the countries of the
Third World was on the decline. With little scope for raising
internal resources and poor prospects for external aid, Yahya’s
hands were tied in any comprehensive scheme of distributive
justice. There could be some “‘distribution of but not ©
much scope for raising the living standards of the people,
which was the objective as spelled out by Yahya. When the
budget for 1969-70, which was already being made up at the
time when Yahya came to power in March 1969, was rejected
by the new régime on the grounds that it must make more
allocation for social justice, the planners’ reply was: “No money
for increased allocation.” The planning commission finally
made some adjustments. ~ -
But the explosive and vital problem on the economic front
was that of regional distribution rather than social distribution.
The economic disparity between East and West Pakistan had
been given free and articulate expression during the political
upheaval against Ayub. The new régime did not make any
attempt to censor or restrict the great debate on the economic
c