58 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
different time wear the hat of theoretical practitioner, have
found the performance of the military as political agents of
modernization to have been rather dismal.”
Political and socio-economic realities in Pakistan in 1969-71
were not conducive to the Yahya régime performing any signi-
ficant role. Further, the régime had its own weaknesses and
deficiencies. One requisite for a military régime to achieve
success is either to get broad support from the people as Nasser
had done in Egypt and Ayub also in the initial years, or to have
the co-operation and assistance of powerful segments of society
such as the bureaucrats, the business community and other
important groups among the urban élite. The Yahya régime
had the full support of the army, though the junta was a divided
house from the beginning, with Peerzada at odds with Hamid
and Yahya with Nur Khan. Yahya was never the big boss
among the armed forces as his predecessor had been.
The great debate on the synthesis of economic growth and
social and distributive justice had already begun. The pertinent
issue was whether such a synthesis could be achieved without
fundamental changes in the political and economic order.
Yahya’s government, being a “temporary” one, was neither
capable nor willing to undertake such revolutionary changes
in the economic system. As the former chief economist of the
Planning Commission, Dr. Mahbub U1] Hag, rightly pointed out,
A mere reform of the capitalistic system is no longer a viable
solution. The capitalist structure was rejected by the mass
upsurge of 1959. The “reformed” system which is being
demanded by the public and the politicians - with minimum
wages for all workers, participation of the workers in profits,
social responsibility of the capitalists, etc. - may be in
operation in Sweden or Yugoslavia but cannot be built in
Pakistan through an evolutionary process.¥
Yet Yahya with all the limiting factors, the internal and
‘external determinants of his programme, had to take some
steps toward planned economic development. At his first press
conference on April 10, 1969, Yahya, after reviewing the
.demands of the various sections of society (labour, peasants,
students) and ‘the general economic conditions prevailing in the
country, said: