150 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
do so. For Yahya it was the greatest shock; he had taken a great
risk by putting faith in Mujib’s assurances and promises,
His image among the army generals would be serious!y affected
as he had been proved to be naive in dealing with Mujib.
As already mentioned, he had had a constitutional fo: mula
prepared by me which had conceded almost a'l the de:nands
of the Mujib programme. There were only two differences;
Yahya agreed to have a central authority with only three
subjects plus some peripheral items such as nationality,
emigration, issuing of passports, etc. In the plan prepared by
me, the centre’s list.did not have more than five or six items
in all, but the real powers were three: foreign affairs, defence
and currency. But since he wanted to ensure that the centre
should discharge those functions properly, he demanded that
while the centre would have no power of levying taxation,
there should be some provisions guaranteed in the constitution
so that.the centre would receive a fixed percentage of
_ certain taxes, so that it could carry on its responsibilities
without being dependent on the federating units for an uncer-
tain, if not voluntary, contribution which might even vary
from time to time.
Secondly, he could not agree with the subtle distinction
between political or diplomatic and economic aspects of
-foreign affairs, as I have earlier pointed out while analysing the
six points. Yahya’s compromise formula on this issue was that
the state of Bangladesh would have the right to appoint its
trade commissioner or economic representative abroad and
also to enter into agreements with foreign countries on
economic. matters, provided that such economic dealings with
foreign countries were “not against the fundamentals of the
country’s foreign policy”. If, for instance, Pakistan’s foreign
policy demanded that there should not be any economic
ties wtih a hostile country or neighbour, Bangladesh. could
not enter into any agreement with such country or countries.
‘When it was argued by the Awami Leaguers that West Paki-
stan might not wish to have economic or trade relations with
India in preference to China, Yahya’s reply was that, thanks
to his granting of “one man, one vote’’, the Bengalis would
have a clear majority in the federal legislature, and the
country’s Prime Minister should shape its foreign policy.