200 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITZ” PAKISTAN
The International Jurists in Geneva made similar com-
ments on the Indian role in the Bangladesh crisis:
In accordance with international customary law India’s
first duty was to maintain an attitude of neutrality and to
refrain from interfering in the hostilities which had broken
out in the neighbouring state. . . . The traditional rule of
neutrality in respect of belligerents engaged in a civil war
was appaicable to India up to December 6, 1971, the date
on which she recognized Bangladesh as an independent
More serious, however,\ from the point of view of inter-
national law is the military assistance given by India to the
insurgents.
¢ have already expressed the view that the pence of
' self-determination of peoples (under the U.N. Resolution
2625) can not be to this situation (Bangladesh)
and India’s assistance to the insurgents can not, therefore,
be justified under this principle. i
On the face of it, certain of India’s actions fell within the
terms of this condemnation, namely the provision of military
supplies to the insurgents and granting of facilities to recruit
and train guerilla forces on Indian soil. India’s involvement
appears to have gone further than this. There can be no doubt
that India did take military action against Pakistan before the
outbreak of open war [my italics].
We find it difficult to accept that the scale of India’s
armed action was motivated solely [my italics] by military
considerations based on the need to protect her national
frontiers and territories. .. . This is a dangerous doctrine
and would set at naught all the principles of international
law enjoining neutrality on third parties in a civil war |
REFERENCES
1, See the text of Yahya’s broadcast on March 26 in Dawn, Karachi,
March 27, 1971.
@. See press statement of Tajuddin Ahmad on April 12, 1971, published
by the Bangladesh Students’ Action Committee, London, 1971.
g. Z. A. Bhutto, The Great Tragedy, op. cit., p. 72.
4. W. H. Morris-Jones, “Pakistan Post-Mortem and the Roots of Bangla-
desh”, Political Quarterly, April-June 1972.
5. See the statement by Mujib on January 8, 1972, in London, after his
release from the West Pakistani prison,