78 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED oe
n inter-
national politics, on which he was an imp
. re: It was a pleasure to talk with
very elusive on specific issues. 10 eriously |
him, but not very rewarding while everyone oe seriously in
search of a formula for a genuine settlement of the country’s
most complicated political problem.
The rightist pa in West Pakistan, popularly known 4
“Tslam-pasand” (Islam-loving) partes, ‘were’ more interest
in ideological issues — the State versus Religion in the new con-
stitution - rather than the threatening tensions between East
and West Pakistan. They betrayed lack of understanding of
real issues but they were patriotic, sincere and honest in their
negotiations and talks.
The pro-Moscow group, led by Wali Khan in West Pakistan
and by Muzaffar Ahmad in East Pakistan, were extremists,
particularly Muzaffar Ahmad. The latter refused to see Yahya
during his first visit to Dacca in 1969 but subsequently sought
snterviews with him, whereupon Yahya in his typical style
snubbed him at a dinner in Dacca which was attended by all
the political leaders by saying to him publicly: “I am not
going to grant you an interview because you refused to see
me when I invited you.” Muzaffar was very much annoyed
and maintained his hostile attitude throughout the period of
political negotiations. I had a single meeting with him and was
thoroughly disgusted by his big talk. .
After four months of discussion, on July 28, 1969, Yahya
made a major policy statement. He referred to his talks with
political leaders and pointed out acute differences of opinion
over such issues as the revival of the 1956 Constitution — Mujib
was opposed to its revival while many others felt that the 1956
Constitution should be a legal document under which an early
election could be arranged. Then there were disputes over the
principle of representation — whether it should be on the basis
of “one man, one vote” or on the principle of “parity”, as
agreed by the leaders of both East and West Pakistan in 1955.
But Mujib had made clear his total opposition to any idea of
parity, and demanded that the basis of representation should
be the democratic principle of ‘one man, one vote’, which
would give Bengalis a clear majority in the national assembly.
However, West Pakistani leaders were unwilling to accept