ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 97
ji dave eet believed that if the Bengalis were given their
as no reason why they should want to see Pakistan
they, he used to tell me, would not only have
maximum autonomy j : ae
“one ey ti their own Province but, thanks to
ites. "Th one vote”, ; they would also dominate national
pe bei <n One evening in late February when the L.F.O.
“= dane hotly debated in his inner cabinet and I expressed
| ef ay at the attitude of some members of the junta, he
me categorically: “Look at the fate of Ayub for whom both
: myself have regard! What is his condition? He is
virtually ecading a self-imposed exiled life; do you want me to
have the same fate or should we not save the country from the
terrible challenge to its very existence ‘as a result of East-
West Pakistan tensions?” | confess that I was impressed by
his words, and I still believe that he meant business, otherwise
he would not have given a free and fair election, Tampering
with elections in an underdeveloped country is not a dificult
task. Yahya could have got at least fifty seats from East Paki-
stan by unfair means and could have had a fake “representa-
tive” government. I was also: present on an occasion when an
influential member of the ruling élite hinted at such a course
of action with the plea that Mujib might get out of control if,
as developments were indicating, he obtained nearly all the
seats from East Pakistan. Yahya’s reply was: “If seventy-
five million people like Mujib’s face, who am I to oppose him
provided he does not destroy our cherished homeland? .
My commitments are for transfer of power and certainly
not for splitting the country.” Then he would always advise
patience and faith. “Pakistan can be saved through mutual |
_ faith and trust between the people of East and West Pakistan
and not through fraud and unfair elections.” |
In the meantime political activities, which had been partly
| suspended, were restored from January 1, 1970. cep set
4 Inet» whee year HEME eet aut
overlong: it lasted a whole year. In one 0 Y bs >.
speeches, Mujib declared: ‘ Pakisia has come to stay and there
is no focrce that can destroy it. ti deg Sen ot Pons
In the light of all these statements happenings which
P akistan” could anybody foresee the tragic Ppemings
: ight of March 25, 1971, and ended with the
began on the night o