Apane SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 101
su a en oO 1 . ° . °
coming the cre nef Beto his cherished aim of be-
indicate that he had now reach _ vie aa te
creation of Bangladesh was th ed the conclusion that the
| i he Aad ‘hed he only solution for the Bengalis.
M he had ad’ any reeradon oda exe ll we
Tai onde oe ot WS
, et Mui: galis.
thn ey Mui had three secret meetings with Yahya during
ys in Dacca in late November and early Decem-
ber 1970. Yahya had already decided that electi 4 uld
not be postponed — a decision which was f bl ae Mujib.
Yahya did not even grant an interview to the “el needs
of East Pakistan, including Nurul Amin iis sh te
him to postpone the election. They were bitter Ai Yahya’s
decision just as it made Mujib happy. Bhashani made it cleat 3
to Yahya through an emissary that if Yahya would concentrate
his relief operations in cyclone-affected areas by devoting his
entire administration to relief work rather than pre cn
for holding the election, and if Mujib should dia challenge
him for postponing the elections, he and his party would su
port Yahya and not Mujib; his party’s slogan at that time “2
“food before vote”. If Ayub Khan and not Yahya had been in
power, Bhashani’s offer would most likely have been accepted.
Similarly all other parties and groups were prepared to back
Yahya if Mujib started an agitation against the postponement
of elections — he openly threatened that a million people would
be killed in the confrontation if the elections were postponed.
The West Pakistani leaders, including Bhutto, were prepared
for a postponement of elections.
Yet Yahya decided to go ahead with the “free and fair
election” he had promised to the nation. His great expectation
was that this would make Mujib happy and that a compro-
mise would be possible. Before Yahya made his decision, there
were exchanges of secret messages between him and Mujib ©
which led Yahya to place trust in Mujib’s words: “Pakistan
, shall not be broken.” .
So the three secret meetings at the President’s House in
Dacca in later November and early December were held in a
most cordial atmosphere — the outside climate at Dacca at the
beginning of the mild winter was very pleasant — and no less