THE FALL OF AYUB 35
confidence. He therefor :
help. As I gathered i turned to his real constituency for
cabinet in 1969, a tom Yahya himself after I joined his
to > @ Series of meetings between Ayub and the
P armed forces lead ] )
account ers look place in February 1969. ‘This
was also substantiated by G oot
members of the President; y General Akbar and by some
provide a better Sinton te staff, who can sometimes
the Army, Air Force and N * sa, me npr Ha Arse
separate meetings wiin Ayub [An cir aides had joint and
place in mid-FeLruary i the sh oe Ce
rnp Nur Khan and Vice-Admival par amet
tell Ayub to work for “a political sett] ” Lng
Th the military forces to suppress the noch 4
€ most interesting part of this crucial ra: who
was to break the unpleasant truth = rs oe pee
pause, hesitancy and silence. Ahsan of the Nav a es
take the injtiati Navy would not
ake the initiative as he wanted to maintain his posture of
neutrality ; for Yahya it was a delicate time — Ayub had made
him Commander-in-Chief, by-passing a few senior generals.
Ultimately the task fell to the outspoken chief of the Air Force,
Nur Khan. The army chiefs agreed to use the armed forces
only to the minimum extent needed to keep the administration
functioning and prevent the situation from being exploited
by any foreign country, presumably India.
For Ayub the advice to seek a political solution as a remedy
for the basic causes of the upheaval was ‘perhaps the biggest _
shock. He had been the unchallenged chief of the armed forces
for the last eighteen years (1950-68). As he told a visiting
foreign dignitary, “perhaps they are now tired of seeing my
face’. There were, however, genuine reasons for the army’s
“getting tired” of Ayub.
Ayub Turns to Political Leaders
Ayub invited the chairman of the DAC, Nasrullah Khan, to
meet him. Nasrullah was also authorized to invite any of his
other colleagues. The DAC responded by saying that Ayub
must withdraw the state of emergency and Defence of Pakistan
rules which had been imposed since the 1965 war with India.
Further demands included the release of all imprisoned students;