TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 133
way of the transfer of power from the military régime headed
by Yahya Khan to the elected representatives of the people
Was the Bengali and West Pakistani controversy, like the
Hindu-Muslim controversy in undivided India — whether
Pakistan should remain united or the Awami League’s de-
mand for a separate Bengali state be conceded.
Of course, unlike the Muslim League and Jinnah, the
Awami League or Mujib could not openly ask for secession or
_' the creation of Bangladesh. Jimnah was free to demand a
separate state for the Muslims from a foreign ruling authority
which had declared its policy of winding up the empire.
Mujib and his party were living in an. established state —
constitutionally a federal union which was regarded as indivis-
ible — and the Pakistan central Government was legally and
morally committed to uphold the territorial integrity of the
country. Any federal authority would feel such a commitment
as of paramount importance and value. Mujib’s modus
operandi was, therefore, entirely different from Jinnah’s and
sometimes appeared as ambivalent, if not sometimes vague
and contradictory. But the fact remained that the Bengali
intelligentsia, like the Muslim intelligentsia in undivided
India, seemed to have come to the conclusion in the 1960s
that it could no longer live with the West Pakistanis and that a
separate state was not only possible and desirable, but inevit-
able because of the growing tension between the unresponsive
ruling élite in Islamabad and the militant Bengali nationalists ©
in Dacca.‘
The final blow to the concept of a united Pakistancame asa.
result of the Indo-Pakistan war of 1965 when the last argument
in favour of living together — that federal union, however
unsatisfactory it might otherwise be, at least provided a guaran-
tee against external aggression-— was also destroyed.5 The
war of 1965 had a disastrous impact on the viability of Pakistan
as a united country. It was immediately after that war that
‘Mujib put forward his famous six-point programme which, 3
on close scrutiny, proves to be nothing but a veiled scheme of
secession. Mujib could not produce another “Lahore Resolu-
tion” of 1940 but ironically it was in the same city of Lahore
that, twenty-six years later in 1966, he produced his subtle
scheme of another separate state. As the political negotiations