i |
142 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
in the constitution of r962 was highly unpopular in the
country.
(6) With regard to economic and financial matters, which
today is the crux of the central and provincial relationship
in Pakistan, the following principles may be incorporated
in the constitution:
(i) Federal resources including foreign aid and foreign
exchange should be: distributed between the province
of East Pakistan and the four provinces of West Pakistan
either on the basis of population or at least on a fifty-fifty
basis. But foreign aid and loans will be negotiated ex-
Clusively by the centre.
(ii) All federal expenditure, both revenue and develop-
ment expenditure, should again be distributed between
the province of East Pakistan and the four provinces of
West Pakistan on the same principle, viz. either on the
basis of population or on a fifty fifty basis. |
(iii) The taxation system in Pakistan should be such
that all taxes should be levied and collected by the pro-
vinces but the contributions to the Federal Government
of some of the taxes should be guaranteed in the constitu-
: tion itself.
(iv) The organs of the Central Government — both
legislature, executive and judiciary ~ should be located in
the two capitals (Islamabad and Dacca) in such a way
that the people of the two geographically separated wings
of this country should not feel any sense of isolation.
Every department dealing with central subjects must
have an additional in the other capital. If the
head office of one department is situated in Islamabad,
an additional branch should be set up in East Pakistan
and vice versa.
(v) Recruitment to all federal services at all levels
should again be distributed between the province of
_ East Pakistan and four provinces of West Pakistan either
on population basis or on 50:50 basis.
(vi) All key posts of the Federal Government (key posts
meaning posts of Joint Secretary and above in all federal
departments and institutions financed by the Federal
. Government) should be held on rotation basis between
the people of the two wings of the country.