74 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
spoke in detail on his plan for a transfer of power, much dis-
cussion and parleying took place between Yahya and
the leaders of the various political parties. One significant
phenomenon was that though Yahya abrogated the constitu-
_ tion, dissolved legislatures and cabincts, both national and
provincial, and imposed martial law throughout the country,
political parties were not banned, nor were politicians put
into prison as under Ayub in 1958. In fact, the new military
junta had made some prior contacts with political leaders like
Mujib, Bhashani and Bhutto. Hence the imposition of martial
law was no surprise to the political leaders; as for the public,
the reaction was one of relief after months of chaos and con-
fusion in the country, although there was no welcome to
equal that with which Ayub was greeted in 1958.
Yahya did not summon any conference of political leaders
after seeing the fate of the Round Table Conference summoned
by Ayub before his departure. Yahya, on the contrary, began
quiet and bilateral talks with political leaders; he toured the
country from one end to the other and had genuine dialogues
with leaders of various parties, and politicians gradually
became impressed by his sincereity. He devoted most attention
to Mujib — rightly so, since he was the leader of the Bengalis
who constituted a majority of the country’s population. Mujib,
however, was suspicious of the military régime’s intentions.
He had never forgotten the arbitrary removal in 1957 of the
Prime Minister, H. 8. Suhrawardy, his political mentor and
the founder of the Awami League, by President
Mirza, who a year later presided over the establishment of the
first military régime in Pakistan. Mujib showed the greatest
amxiety to secure every possible safeguard against similar
treatment being meted out to him if — as was bound to
happen — he lost some of his popularity after coming to
power. Eventually Yahya began to win Mujib’s confidence -
| a good personal relationship gradually developed between
As a member of Yahya’s planning cell entrusted with con-
stitational and political affairs, I had opportunities of watching
poral that took place between April and July
cat g : ugust and November, when Yahya
y spelled out his scheme for the transfer of power. I used