26 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
it would be fair but with the object of exposing the “conspira-
tors”. But this was a grand miscalculation: the publicity had
"just the opposite effect. Mujib and others involved in the case
became Bengali national heroes. The reaction to the Agartala
case among the Bengalis demonstrated clearly that Bengali
sub-nationalism was now a fully-fledged national movement
for a separate state of the Bengalis, During the course of the
proceedings of the case, all details of the future state of Bang-
ladesh were fully described, such as the colours and design
of the national flag, the national anthem, etc. A British lawyer,
T. Williams, Q.C., was allowed to come to defend Mujib;.
he was assisted by the former Chief Justice of East Pakistan,
S. M. Murshed, who had been arbitrarily removed by the Gov-
ernment. Justice Murshed is a man of calibre and integrity,
and his indirect support in extending co-operation to Mujib’s
British lawyer had a further impact on the Bengali public,
particularly the intelligentsia and journalists over whom Mur-
shed had tremendous influence. His removal as the Chief
Justice of East Pakistan had already antagonized public opinion
in East Pakistan. The Government’s side was taken up by
Ayub’s former Foreign Minister, Manzoor Quader. At one
stag¢, another former Foreign Minister of Ayub, Z. A. Bhutto,
appeared in the court in Mujib’s defence, and Mujib was
reported to have joked: ““The Government has engaged a
former Foreign Minister, so I also have one former Foreign
The drama unfolded in the fullest glare of publicity, and the
Dacca newspapers were giving banner headlines to the pro-
ceedings of the case. Talk of secession was no longer covert or
underground; it was now freely discussed and debated, thanks
to the wonderful publicity given by. the Ayub régime itself,
To draw another comparison with pre-independence days
in undivided India, the Agartala case had given the same .
impetus to the cause of Bengali nationalism as Jinnah’s vigorous
‘publicity campaign against Congress rule in the Muslim
minority provinces in 1937~9 gave to the creation of Pakistan.
Jinnah was successful in making the Indian Muslims realize
that there was a conspiracy by the majority Hindu community
to destroy the Muslim culture, ways of life, economic and
political interests; he observéd a “Day of Deliverance” when