THE FALL OF AYUB 25
a ig Ojha at an obscure spot in the old quarter
ieee, ts oe Mujib’s wife, though an uneducated woman,
“an active part in politics after her husband’s
arrest in 1966; both his wife and Mujib’s follower had regular
‘meetings with him Dacca Central Jail where Mujib
was detained and, thanks to the sympathetic attitude of the
Bengali officers and staff of the jail, Mujib had no difficulty in
. discussing sey political plan or plot, even from his confine-
rir This, according to the intelligence people, was the basis
of Mujib’s involvement in the case. But the public, who were
never told the inside story, were naturally furious over Mujib’s
arrest. They asked, quite legitimately, how he could be a
‘party to the conspiracy since he was already in prison.!*
After the creation of Bangladesh, Mujib himself confessed
that he had been the secession of East Bengal
for some But the reaction to Mujib’s arrest over the
Agartala case in East Pakistan could not have been worse.
Not only Mujib’s arrest but the stupid way the case, which‘was
otherwise based on facts, was handled by the Ayub régime +
portended ill for Pakistan’s viability as a united country;
it had an effect in bringing. nearer the final dismember-
ment of Pakistan in the same way as the
and frequent observance of “‘Anti-Pakistan Days” by the In-
dian parties, like Hindu Mahasabha, had made “Pakistan”
known and popular among the masses of Indian Muslims in the
19408. .
oA special tribunal was set up headed by a former Chief
Justice of Pakistan, S. A. Rahman. The trial was public, in
contrast to the Rawalpindi conspiracy case of 1951.* There
was long debate among the ruling élite about whether the
trial should be held in camera or be open. Ayub’s publicity
chief, Altaf Gauhar,, was in favour of an open trial not because
® The first Prime Minister of Pakistan, Liaqat Ali Khan, announced in
March 1951 that the chief of staff of the Pakistan Army, General Akbar
Khan, and other senior officers, had plotted to overthrow the government,
who were alleged to have planned “to resort to force with the support of
Communist and revolutionary elements” to establish a military dictator-
ship, The Pakistan Constituent Assembly passed the Rawalpindi Conspiracy
(Special Tribunal) Act, 1951, which established a special court to try the
Case in camera.