ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 93
. the whole process might as well be given up. So the inner
cabinet had to yield.
The question of limiting the extent of provincial autonomy
was much more complicated. I had almost daily sessions with
Yahya in Ji anuary—F ebruary as to how this delicate issue could
be tackled. Finally,-in an attempt to find a way out of the im-
passe, I Proposed at a meeting of the inner cabinet in late
January that instead of trying to define the extent of provincial
autonomy, the L.F.O. should define the minimum require-
ments that were essential for the existence of a united Pakistan.
[ had prior consultation about my plan with Yahya, Ahsan,
Yakub and Peerzada; Ahsan was quick to assure me of his
full support, and Yakub said he would discuss it with “open
mind” — he had faith in my convictions regarding one Pakistan.
Yahya, though surprised initially about what I termed “de-
fining one Pakistan”, was prepared to give me a chance to
elaborate it in the inner cabinet. Only Hamid, Tikka and a few
others like Omar were angered by this “soft” policy towards
Mujib. Peerzada had consultations with Bhutto and when the
latter was reported to have no objection, Peerzada adopted a
neutral posture.
It was a big day for me; I began my discussion with an ana-
lysis of the political situation in East Pakistan; I conceded
that by not defining provincial autonomy Mujib could cause
damage if he were planning to do so. But our whole approach,
I continued, was based on expectations of a reasonable attitude -
from Mujib as well as others and therefore no step should be
taken to precipitate a crisis - a view strongly supported by
Ahsan. When I finally elaborated the “five principles” of
one Pakistan, to the great relief and surprise of Yahya, Ahsan
and myself, it was eventually accepted by the generals. But
though the crisis seemed to be over, events after the elections |
showed that it had only been postponed for a year, |
The Legal Framework Order :
The L.F.O., which was at last announced on March 31, 1971,
contained five points or principles which were regarded as the
minimum requirements for a united P akistan. (1) Pakistan
must be based on Islamic ideology - Mujib did not object to