210 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
1970 when Pakistan was seeking a viable political order for
removing the East-West Pakistan tensions.
This was the picture of the South Asian Triangle on the
eve of the crisis on Bangladesh. The Soviet Union was hostile
towards Pakistan for its refusal to join in “the Soviet version
of SEATO” and other anti-China moves. The Pakistan—
China and Pakistan—U.S.A. relationships were cordial, and
had improved in the context of Nixon’s new China policy in
which the Pakistani President was playing 4 significant role,18
India’s relationship with Moscow, which had a history of
fifteen years of friendly ties behind it, was getting closer
in their common objéctive of containment of China; India
was also suspicious of Nixon’s alleged ‘pro-Pakistan”’ attitude.
When the civil war over Bangladesh began on March 25,
1971, the picture as presented in the world press seemed to be
that the Soviet Union and India were on the side of justice,
democracy and humanitarian principles while the United
States and China were supporting a military junta in
Pakistan against a national liberation movement based on the
democratic aspirations of the Bengalis. But the real situation
was not so simple as presented in the press. The Realpolitik
prevailing in the area had to be considered. Diplomatic con-
siderations were given priority over any ideological factors
by the great powers in the crisis on Bangladesh, as is always
the case in any international crisis. The Bangladesh War in
1971 provides an example of how the major powers wage
their many-faceted struggle in the Third World through
proxies as well as of how the Third World might become the
“tinder box” that could consume the major powers’ hopes for
a A later example was, of course, the 1973 war in the
Middle East. . .
India and the Bangladesh Crisis |
. India’s interest and involvement in political happenings in
East Pakistan during 1969-70 were closely linked with her
constantly tense and bad relations with Pakistan. As the
U.N. Secretary-General U Thant pointed out in his Annual
Report of 1971: “The relations between the Governments
-of India and Pakistan are also a major component ‘of the
|