ABORTIVE SCHEME FOR TRANSFER OF POWER 95
only few questions seeking clarifications and the President's
interpretation was final and unchallenged.
The L.F.O. had a preamble, twenty-seven articles and two
Schedules; it looked like a provisional constitution. It was
Article 20 which laid down the five “Fundamental Principles
of the Constitution” and which was thus the vital |
The other articles related mainly to composition of the national
assembly and provincial assemblies, provisions relating to the
holding of election, qualifications and disqualifications for
membership, the election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker -
peripheral matters which were needed for setting up an assem-
bly to frame the country’s constitution.
The LF -O. provided that the national assembly must
complete its task of framing the constitution within 120 days.
This time-limit was made because of the past experiences of
constitution-making in Pakistan: it had taken two. constituent
assemblies nine years (from 1947 to 1956) to frame a constitu-
tion for Pakistan, and everyone wanted to prevent a repetition.
of this tragic delay. The time-limit also demonstrated Yahya’s
sincerity regarding the handing over of power to the elected
representatives of the people in the shortest possible time.
The political leaders agreed to the time-limit, and it was
further agreed that the majority group or groups responsible
for producing a constitution would show the draft to the
President before formally presenting it to the assembly. The .
President was given power to the constitution” -
(Article 25).
_ The L.F.O. was criticized, particularly in East Pakistan,
as a retreat from the plan put forward by Yahya on November
28, 1969. In a sense, this was true. But those who knew from
the inside how the document had been drawn up realized that
some compromise had been essential and were not dissatisfied
with the outcome. Mujib, who learned what had gone on from
Ahsan, accepted the outcome. The five principles, though not
palatable to everyone, could not be criticized openly as they |
did not violate the demands of any group or party. The
President’s power of authentication of the constitution was .
criticized as curtailing the sovereignty of the national assembly
or the constituent assembly. On April 4, 1970, soon after the
promulgation of the L.F.O., Yahya went to Dacca and de-