2 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
more on racial or religio-cultural peculiarities! While
discussing the nature of nationalistic movements Professor
C. J. A. Hayes distinction between two types of
nationalism. One is “a veritable religion, a belligerent, expan.
sive and intolerant one”: the key-note of this type of national.
ism is “intolerance”.® Any groups which do not conform are
regarded as suspect and are treated as inferior and second.
class citizens, if not as downright traitors, As compared with
this militant and intolerant nationalism we have the examples
of what has been termed “human and idealist nationalism”,
which was given expression by John Locke, Milton, Mazzini,
Renan, J. S. Mill, Woodrow Wilson and Thomas Masaryk,
This type is based on a free individual choice with a conscious-
ness of the inherited traditions and values of community life,
The beliefs in this type of nationalism and democracy are
intermixed, !
When nationalism assumes intolerant and extreme postures,
as did the nationalism of the majority community in undivided
India, nationalistic movements take new turns, and what
Professor Miller calls nationalism” emerges
to safeguard the interests of the smaller national groups.
Miller suggests that “the most obvious case is that of
Pakistan”.® The creation of Pakistan can be explained in terms
of the conflicting and divergent aims and aspirations of two
major national groups in undivided India. “Race, language,
religion and to a certain extent the territorial situation, al]
separate the Indian Muslims from the Hindus, Their whole
history deepens the gulf between them. Their past is a past of
mutual destruction.”¢ These were the words of an eminent
scheduled caste Hindu leader of undivided India, B. R. Am-
bedkar. The nearer the prospect of self-government, the more’
bitter were the feelings between the two national groups.
In British India the quarter-century preceding the. transfer
of power in 1947 was a time of increasing friction between
the major religio-national groups. As pointed out by Alfred
Cobban, India was composed of many communities, some of
which, always distinct in their culture, were rightly becoming
politically conscious of their s¢parate national identities” 5
Similarly, Professor Hayes noted that the “nationalist impulse
throughout the huge and heterogeneous British Empire of