. THE Dacca DIALOGUE 167
or the external forces working in East Pakistan. Most of the
promunent members of the junta (Hamid, Gul Hasan, Omar, ~
Mitha) were present at Dacca, They had regular meetings
among themselves at the military headquarters in Dacca and
with Yahya. Colonel Hasan told me how, while Yahya was
making concession after concession to make Mujib agreeable
| to a political settlement, the junta warned him of the “dire
consequences” of “weakening” the national Government.
There has always been a tendency among the Pakistani Army
generals to believe that they alone could protect the Izzat
and Gharat (honour and self-respect) of the nation. Since the
early 1950s, the Pakistani Army under Ayub seemed to regard
itself oe sole guardian of the interest” 3 it was also
. against the Oliticians of both East and West
Pakistan.
There wer ¢, however, €xceptions. Many army officers in
1969~70 were Senuinely anxious for a Satisfactory settlement
of the East-West Pakistan issue. The majority of the army as
well as of the common People in West Pakistan would have
accepted Mujib as Pakistan’s prime minister provided he was
willing to keep the Country united. Similarly, the vast majority
of the Bengali Muslims Were not prepared to see Pakistan dis-
membered and their homeland become again a target of domi-
nation by the Bhadralok- (élite from Calcutta, They were in. -
terested in having genuine regional autonomy, In fact, their
basic demand was for the improvement of their economic lot, .
Mujib captured their imagination because he promised them
a “golden Bengal” if they would only vote for his six points—
not because he favoured the splitting of their cherished home-
land into two parts and the setting up of a country whose
geopolitical realities’ would make it a client-state of New Delhi,
But who cared for the “silent majority”, either in East or West
Pakistan? The fate of this country of 120 million people was
instead in the hands of the vested interest groups — the Western
big business and senior civil servants, who had always domin-
- ated the political scene in Pakistan — and two ambitious politi-
Clans, .
Mujib’s negotiating team consisted of the hard-liner in his
Party, Tajuddin Ahmad, and other top Awami Leaguers —
Nazrul Islam, Mustaq Ahmad, Qameruzzaman, and Mansoor