THE FALL OF AYUB 43
Mirza suggested, for instance, shifting the campus of Dacca
-. University to a remote place and setting up a few cadet col-
leges as the panacea for East Bengal! Ayub’s approach was
different in degree but not in kind, He allocated more money
for development work in East Pakistan; his rural works pro-
gramme no doubt benefited the poorest landless Jabourers in
East Pakistan; agricultural employment facilities were increased
in rural areas (facilities the lack of which is now lamented in
Bangladesh); a vast extension of roads in villages was made,
hospitals were opened, educational facilities were increased.
Some of Ayub’s social reforms, such as family planning and a
family law ordinance prohibiting polygamy were commend-
able. Ayub’s record for modernizing the country was better than
that of his predecessors. His. economic policy resulted in an
increase of the gross national product (GNP) from 2 per cent
to about 6 per cent in the 1960s. But, as pointed out earlier,
the growth was not being equitably passed on to the poor.
This created frustration and bitterness among the lower
income groups both in urban and rural areas, notwithstanding
Ayub’s rural works programme, because they were not ade- |
quate to meet the growing demands and expectations. |
Turning to his political order, its greatest shortcoming was |
the lack of effective opportunities for the Bengalis to have |
their share in the decision-making process. By curbing the power |
of parliament, by making the cabinet Ayub’s _ |
political order robbed the Bengalis of their share of partici-
pation in national affairs. Nationalism or patriotism cannot
develop or flourish in a vacuum. The Bengalis could not be |
expected to be conscious of “Pakistani nationalism” when |
they “‘could only react but not act on major national issues”. ?¢
The Army’s atrocities during the civil war in 1971 and the
Indian military intervention backed by Soviet help were the
immediate cause of the disintegration of Pakistan. It was
Ayub’s political order and his inability to appreciate the politi-
cal dynamics in East Pakistan in the late 1960s which were
the real factors, among others, for the rise of Bengali national-
ism and the birth of Bangladesh. 5
His lack of understanding of the basic problems of the Ben-
galis was revealed to me when IJ had my last meeting with him
in New York in the summer of 1971. Ayub had gone to the