"18 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
live in a United Pakistan or to separate. I reminded Yahya of
de Gaulle’s bold steps in the Algerian crisis. But Yahya was not
of de Gaulle’s calibre, Moreover, he was misled both by Mujib
and by his own Governor, Ahsan.
Mujib’s task was simple and easy compared with that of
other pol!'ical leaders. His only theme was the exploitation of
Bengal by the West Pakistanis; his ideal was that of a “Sonar
[golden] Bengal”. This was a most successful appeal to a poverty
stricken people of 75 million. Just as the Muslims of undivided
India were convinced that a separate state of their own
would give them a land of opportunities, so the Bengalis in
rural areas, to whom Mujib had tremendous appeal, listened
to his ideal of a golden Bengal. The only requirement was to
give him and his party votes in the elections. Jinnah’s strategy
in the 1946 elections scems to have been the same and he too
had no difficulty in getting votes. Similarly Mujib had no
threat either from rightist or leftist elements.
Bhashani subsequently decided to wit!.draw from the election
because of Ahsan’s }) icy of persecuting his party and finally
as a protest at the elections being held after the cyclone in
November 1970. The pro-Moscow faction of N.A.P. had no
popular leader; its leader in East Pakistan, a self-styled
Muzaffar Ahmad, me real hold on the -
people. The leftist forces in East Pakistan were also divided
and had no well-organized or reliable power base. They were
weakened by the manoeuvring of various Bhashani’s
group was weakened by the defection of a splinter party Ied by
Mohamed Toaha, who was opposed to parliamentary tactics;
he believed in a lcng-term politicizing process among the masses
in rural areas, The other pro-Peking factions remained with
Bhasani, who had a strong peasant following; but after the re-
signation of Toha, the N.A.P. (Bhashani group) was increasingly
divided; the faction led by Abdul Matin advocated the same
_ revolutionary tactics as those used by India’s Naxalite groups,
particularly in West Bengal. |
Apart from their internal divisions, the provincial Govern-
ment headed by Governor Ahsan did everything possible
to crush the leftist forces in East Pakistan. Why Ahsan adopted
this policy is difficult to ascertain, but it might be due to his
former long association with SEATO. One big problem with