TRIPARTITE NEGOTIATIONS 141
occurred which killed a large number of people in East Paki-
stan. The anti-West Pakistan feelings preached by Mujib
over the central government’s alleged lack of sympathy for the
suffering Bengalis made the situation so fluid and explosive
that it was difficult for Yahya to take bold measures such as I
had outlined to him in September 1970. Ahsan and Peerzada
then arranged three secret meetings between Yahya and Mujib,
_as referred to earlier. Yahya, who habitually showed a lack of
courage for any big or imaginative step, was contented with
these secret parleys with Mujib, rather than challenging him
for preaching against the very existence of Pakistan as a united
country. .
As a result of these secret parleys, Yahya asked me to pre-
pare a constitutional draft on the relationship between the
centre and the provinces. I drafted a plan for an almost con-
federal solution on the basis of the six points, minus the break-
up of the country. My draft was so near to Mujib’s ideas of
autonomy (if he were interested in autonomy and not in seces-
sion) that Yahya asked me: “What is the difference between
your scheme and the six points?” Yet in his final bids to
save the country from dismemberment, he agreed to my plan.
I give below the basic features of my formula for the centre-
provinces relationship and facsimile copies of my letter to
Yahya on December 11, 1970, and his handwritten reply of
January 21, 1971, accepting my plan (facing pp. 142 and
143). Lhe basic points of my plan were:
1. There should be only one list of powers for the Central
Government and all other powers including residuary powers
should be vested in the provinces. If any powers are to be
kept by the centre for the provinces of West Pakistan, that
should be enumerated in the separate list. So far as the
province of East Pakistan is concerned, all powers minus the
central list should be vested in that province.
- g, The central list should be as short as possible, not
exceeding five or six items, which should keep most essential
requirements of the national government but nothing more
nor less than that.
3. (a) No special provision for central intervention on the
ground of national security, economic planning and co-
ordination or uniformity should be provided. Such provision