14 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
to Pakistan problems in both economic and foreign affairs.
That Karachi was no longer a helpless and a rather hopeless
hostage of the West was shown both by the handling of Peking
and by its protests in Washington on the action of the U-2
incident.” It went on to note the “original approach on the
part of President Ayub which characterized the new Pakistan A
Commenting on Pakistan’s new trends in foreign policy under
President Ayub, a “Muslim de Gaulle”, The Economist wrote
that the President wanted essentially what his brother-soldier
sought for France: an opportunity for national self-assertion
and independence (meaning independence of the United States).
Referring to the creation of a “Regional Co-operation for
Development” Plan (R.C.D.), a new scheme for economic
co-operation between Pakistan, Iran and Turkey, The Economist
commented: “C.E.N.T.O., like N.A.T.O., is not dead but
President Ayub has served notice, much like President de
Gaulle, that from now on the decisions that matter to Pakistan
will as far as possible (which is an important proviso) be made
in Rawalpindi and not in Washington.”®
Yet Ayub Khan was removed from the Presidency in March
1969 as a result of agitation which began over a trifling incident
in Rawalpindi, a scuffle between the students and the police
over some allegedly smuggled goods. In November 1969
it appeared like an anomic movement — a sudden sporadic
outburst of political activity engendered by the insecurity and
frustrations usually characteristic of societies undergoing rapid
change.® Political movement against Ayub was not organized
by the politicians, who were caught unprepared; they took
advantage of it only afier it had begun. |
There have been many interpretations of Ayub’s fall. Z. A.
Bhutto, now Premier of truncated Pakistan, has been given
the credit for having played a “revolutionary role” in it after
serving Ayub faithfully for about eight years as one of his .
“nominated” ministers. There were socio-economic interpreta-
tions: Ayub’s economic policy had resulted in phenomenal
growth, but it sadly neglected the distributive aspect of econo-
mic growth; the wealth was concentrated in the “twenty-
two families”. Mahbub-Ul Haq, the Chief Economist of the
Planning Commission headed by Ayub himself, disclosed the
. fact that the wealth of the country was dominated by indust-