40 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
| and Mujib’s demand for total/acceptance of his six points,
He told the cabinet, and Yaltya in particular, that the only |
remedy for saving the country lay in the imposition of martial |
law. The cabinet, as usual, listened to the supreme boss but all |
eyes were fixed on Yahya who, as he narrated to me, listened |
to the debate quietly but without much comment; he indicated
to Ayub that he would talk to him alone. So the Ayub cabinet
was adjourned for good. The two old colleagues and friends, |
Ayub and Yahya, moved from the cabinet room of the Presi-
dent’s House to Ayub’s office in the adjoining room. Ayub put
the final question to Yahya: would he come to the govern- |
ment’s rescue by imposing martial law, which was now the © |
only remedy? Yahya agreed that martial law was now the |
only solution. But he stipulated certain conditions before he
would impose martial law in support of the government:
First, Ayub must sack his provincial governors and his |
Cabinet — to this he agreed at once. Secondly, Ayub must dis-
solve the National Assembly and the two provincial Assemblies;
again came Ayub’s prompt affirmative response. Then Yahya,
after a pause, proposed: ““You must also abrogate your constitu- |
tion as it has proved totally unacceptable to the people, both
in East and West Pakistan. I cannot allow my troops to make |
an unacceptable constitution operate against the wishes of the
, ,
At this stage Ayub exclaimed: “Abrogate the Constitution!
No, that is impossible; the Constitution is bound in the book of
Pakistan and in the soil of Pakistan!” : |
But soon Ayub realized what Yahya was demanding: in the
absence of the Constitution, martial law would be the supreme
law of the land and the chief martial law administrator would
be the final Ayub’s position would the same as
that of President Iskander Mirza from October 7 to October
27, 1958, when Ayub threw him out of the and
sent him abroad into exile for an
the with a significant smile and remark from
Ayub: “I know what you wants all right, let/us mutually work
out the final arrangement.” So Ayub decitled to hand over
power to Yahya and the final preparations/ for the imposition
of martial law began immediately.
It must be added that even if Yahya had/been willing to back