THE DACGA DIALOGUE 165
tion on the basis of Yahya’s transfer of power plan as formulated
in 1969-70 had ceased to exist, The choice before the military
régime was between Tecognizing the de facto independent status
of Bangladesh and challenging Mujib; or, expressed another
way, between presiding over the dismemberment of the country
and embarking On a military venture ‘which would not
only be terribly costly in terms of human lives but would also
be uncertain in ultimate consequences, This was the dilemma
before Yahya.
Of course, there were hawkish generals, like Hamid and a
few others, who were confident of “fixing” the whole situation
in, as they said, seventy-two hours. The calm with which the
imposition of martial law had been accepted in 1969 gave
these hawkish generals a false sense of confidence. They did not
realize that the Bengalis had accepted martial law so calmly
in 1969 because there were behind-the-scenes parleys between
political leaders and the new military régime, with the promise
of an election and transfer of power, By March 1971 the whole
situation was changed, The year-long election campaign
enabled Mujib and his party to preach the gospel of Bangla-
desh in homes all over East Pakistan; Bengali nationalism was
no longer dormant but had become highly articulate and mili-
tant.
Yahya made earnest pleas to Mujib, as I learned from him
subsequently, to avoid the path of confrontation. Yahya and —
_ others who accompanied him to Dacca for the talks were
. rather surprised to see Mujib shaky and nervous, Mujib, who
has never had the reputation of being the bravest or the most
intelligent of politicians, was in a Situation which probably
would lead him nowhere — this was his Own assessment at the
time in spite of his big talk and militant press statements,
The result was that even in this hopeless and dismal situa-
tion, Yahya and Mujib were still talking in terms of a political
. settlement, while Yahya’s militant army generals were getting
ready for a confrontation and Mujib’s militant supporters
were similarly opposed to any compromise. Yet by March 20
| = Le. four days after Yahya’s arrival in Dacca - the press was
reporting that an agreement had been reached on a compro-
| mise constitutional formula incorporating most of the
fundamentals of Mujib’s six points. A formula had reportedly
|