THE FALL OF AYUB 33
took a different shape. There it was not merely an agitation.
ee Ayub or his régime, but a revolt agai the Ben-
' gainst what the
~ galis began to regard as their “domination” Pakis
or, more accurately, by th by West Pakistan
vain ef thee 1¢ Punjabis. It was the most articulate
aa € emerging Bengali nationalism. While the
leaders in West Pakistan demanded th i i
, ¢ restoration of parlia-
mentary democracy and a direct method of election, the
Bengalis raised their voice for exireme regional autonom
namely Mujib’s six-poi oe se
to have adopted as ot oe te pair
que of kicking the enemy
It is true that as the movement progressed, in West Pakistan
too, It was not merely a movement for constitutional reforms;
=” turned into a struggle between the “haves” and the “have
nots”. The unprivileged group seemed to have got their oppor-
tunity to voice their resentment against a. privileged élite,
who in the name of “Pakistan”, “Islamic ideology” and other
high-sounding slogans, had grown fat since the creation of the
state in 1947. In East Pakistan the grand old Maulana Bhashani
was agitating not only for regional autonomy but also as the
spokesman of the “have nots”. Mujib was still in military
custody for his part in the Agartala conspiracy case; his party
had been ruthlessly suppressed by the provincial Governor ;
Abdul Monem Khan since the movement for six points in 1966,
and as such was not well organized although Mujib had ac-
quired tremendous popularity. The opposition parties, includ- ~
ing Mujib’s Awami League but excluding Bhutto's People’s
Party and Bhashani’s National Awami Party, formed an alliance
known as the Democratic Action Committee (DAC). .
Initially, Ayub and his advisers tried to minimize the.
impact of the movement, and Ayub refused to talk to the
opposition leaders. Bhutto was arrested on November 13, two
days after an unsuccessful attempt on Ayub’s life while he
was addressing a public méeting at Peshawar. The reaction
among the students to Bhutto’s arrest was great, as Bhutto had
by. this time become a hero of the students for condemning the
police excesses against them. The more significant develop-
- ment was that after Bhutto’s arrest two new figures, both noted
for clean records, joined the movement: Air-Marshal Ashgar
Khan in West Pakistan and Justice S. M. Murshed in East