208 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
in the subcontinent as visualized b Lord Curzon in the 1
and as disclosed in the Soviet_-Nazi documents captured by
the U.S. Government after the Second World War saying :
‘The Soviet government shared the old czarist interests in the
Persian—Indian Ocean area.”"14 The Kremlin leaders through-
out 1969 and 1970 were assiduously working for some econo-
mC, political and military grouping with the containment of
China as its object. The main objective of new Soviet moves
such as Brezhnev’s Asian collective security plan seemed to be
to isolate and contain China while serving its-own “great-
power” aspirations in the region. The Soviet-Chinese rivalry
was increasingly reflected in diplomatic moves made by the
U.S.S.R. in 1969 and 1970. After preaching against the mili-
. tary pacts for more than fifteen years, the Soviet leaders now
found virtues in the concept and reverted to “Dullesism”
because it suited their national interests against China. .
Pakistan had special difficulties and dilemmas in responding
to the new Soviet moves as she could realize that both Kosy-
gin’s plan for regional economic grouping and Brezhnev’s
Asian collective security plan were directed against her closest
friend China which, since the U.S. embargo on military sup-
plies to India and Pakistan, had become the principal supplier
of arms to Pakistan. Pakistan and China remained opposed
to a Soviet-inspired security system, and Moscow had a size-
able task in seeking to extend ties with Pakistan at China’s
expense.
When Pakistan finally expressed its inability to join the
Russian moves against China, the brief interval of so-called
“friendly relations” between Moscow and Islamabad came to
an end. The soviet press and propaganda media began similar
attacks to those Pakistan had experienced in the 1950s when
she joined SEATO and CENTO. Between 1965 and 1970
there was some relaxation in the Soviet attacks against Pakistan.
Thus Pakistan, which in the mid-1950s had been a “stooge of
imperalist powers”, was elevated all of a sudden to the status
of “the respected southern neighbour’*!5 of the Soviet Union
after Ayub’s first state visit in 1965, but by the beginning of.
. 1970 the Soviet press and propaganda media reverted to their
old campaign of vilification against Pakistan. The New Times,
for instance, wrote a lengthy article on Pakistan on February