THE FALL OF AYUB 31
was no use their contesting the election. The results of the
1964-5 clection had demonstrated that the wishes of the
electorate were not truly reflected in the results of the election
because of the indirect election. Only Mr. Bhutto, whose links
with some particularly his old friend Peerzada, were
growing, w-: hoping to enter the Presidential Palace at any
cost. So he refused to join in the opposition parties’ boycott.
The real and most crucial developments were taking place
at GHQ at Rawalpindi. Ayub’s recovery, though never full,
and his plan to contest the presidential election had upset the
plans and calculations of those generals who had been getting
ready to enter the Presidential House during his illness in
February 1968. It was at this stage that a deal was struck
between Bhutto and Peerzada to initiate a movement
against Ayub. Peerzada himself told me the story gleefully
after his dream of re-entering the Presidential House had been
fulfilled in March 1969.
Lhe climate for anti-Ayub agitation was ripe. As described
in the preceding pages, Ayub’s image and popularity had been
declining both am: .g the and, more important, among
his true constituency — the armed forces — since the war of
1965. The dissatisfaction over the Tashkent agreement, the
growing East-West Pakistan tensions threatening the viability
of a united Pakistan, and economic discontent after the 1965
war were all working against Ayub. Furthermore, in a system
of one-man rul- like Ayub’s political order, constant and vigor- —
ous leadership and guidance from the chief boss is vitally im-
portant. Ayub was no longer able, after his illness in early
- 1968, to exercise an active role; he could no longer, for example,
attend and preside over the annual ceremonial functions of the:
various units of the armed forces. He lost the vital contact
with his real constituency. This gave his arch-enemies like
Bhutto and Peerzada their grand opportunity to topple the
régime. Peerzada assured “Zulfi” (as he used to call Zulfiqar
Ali Bhutto) that army support for Ayub would be lacking in a
mass confrontation, and Bhutto was ready to start the
movement on the popular theme of Ayub’s alleged sacrifice
of “national honour”, preserved at the cost of the blood of the
brave JFawans (soliders) in the battlefield, at the conference
table at Tashkent. Bhutto began to make repeated promises to