DISMEMBERMENT op PAKISTAN, 1971 oe
problem [the Bangladesh crisj isis 3
in the context of the - » » The crisis is unfolding
which gave rise to nue ding and unresolved difficulties —
1965]”.* From the very fare only six years ago [i.e. in
complained of India’s rete of, the ‘crisis, Palcistan
dismember Pakistan. Her fears ent and calculated wish to
expressed at a symposium o were confirmed by the views
World Affairs on March by the Indian Council of
outbreak of the revolt in Fc, at (i.e. within six days of the
agreed with the candid “ag at which — Indians
tor of the Indian Institute of te: mae Direc-
must realize is the fact that ig = pret What India
interest, an opportunity the kk “up of Pakistan is in our
again.”’*! It was further stated re a ee
Bangladesh crisis provided Tndia eis te Semen
the century” to destroy her number o ile po rs Son
Through me enemy, Pakistan.22
ughout 1970 All-India Radio had been broadcastin
a programme every evening entitled Apper Bangla and O :
Slap and the Other Side of Bengal), te
aging the secession movem i i -
India Radio is an official organ, ee ea
Even more significant, however, was the Indian Govern-
ment’s immediate reaction to the crisis. Less than forty-eight
hours after the Pakistan Army action, Mrs. Gandhi said in
Lok Sabha: ““We are deeply conscious of the historic impor-
tance of this movement: .. . . I would like to assure the honour-
able members who asked whether decisions would be taken
on time [my italics], that obviously is the most important
thing to do. There is no point in taking a decision when the
time for it is over.”** The “thonourable members” were pres-
sing for a decision for Indian intervention and Mrs. Gandhi’s
answer was self-evident. In  Rayja Sabha on the same day
she stated: “We are interested in the matter for many
reasons. Firstly, as one member has said, Sri Mujibur Rahman
has stood for the values which we ourselves cherish. . . .”*4
The head of a foreign government commented that just be-
cause the rebel leader subscribed to India’s “cherished values”,
‘India must therefore “‘be interested” in the internal affairs
of a neighbouring country. Then on March 3t, 1971, the
Indian Parliament passed a resolution introduced by Mrs.