204 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
ing all facilities including a clandestine broadcasting station,
and arming the forces of that government, the Mukti-Bahini
or liberation army. How would India react if either
China or Pakistan were to extend such facilities to a federating
unit of the Indian union like Assam or Nagaland, if such a
unit were to make a unilateral declaration of independence?
Would not the Indian Government and press call it an “‘aggres-
sion” against the country?
During the 1971 happenings in East Bengal such issues
could hardly be discussed in their true perspective because of
the wide emotional feelings which had been justly aroused
by the Pakistani Army’s excesses while trying to suppress the
secession movement, but now the true picture is emerging.
The Bangladesh crisis was not merely a conflict between Paki-
stani nationalism and Bengali sub-nationalism. Linguistic,
cultural and racial differences and tensions are not uncommon
in the new Afro-Asian countries; the social order in these
countries is characterized by a lack of integration due to the
“ethnic, religious, racial and cultural pluralism” character-
istic of these societies.? But if a powerful neighbour, backed by a
great power, intended to take advantage of such internal ten-
sions, the stability and territorial integrity of many Afro-
Asian countries would be in danger. As an American scholar,
commenting on India’s role during the Bangladesh movement,
recently pointed out: “In 1971 justifiable humanitarian con-
cern became confused with analysis of a difficult political
situation. Yet at no time in recent history have the internal
affairs of one country been used to justify the invasion and dis-
memberment of
On the Soviet role, an Indian scholar, while trying to‘justify
it, had to admit that the Soviet “objective must have been to
facilitate Indian military action in East Pakistan.” One might
ask why the Soviet Union was interested in such military
action against Pakistan. The Indian author gives the answer:
“Pakistan had become an undependable ally of any power
which wants to pursue the policy of containing Chinese
influence in this part of the world.” Then he bluntly points
out: “Kosygin supported the Bangladesh movement despite
its legal and theoretical snags because he must have thought
that he... . [was] backing a winning horse.’