_
THE CIVIL WAR 183
power to the clected representatives of the people. He gave
me his version of the Dacca dialogues, hich a the Sine
as was given in his speech of March 26, After listening carefully
to his account I further asked him why he had ‘not resigned
when his plan for the transfer of power had proved a failure,
just as Ayub quitted when his Constitution and Basic Demo-
cracies had also proved failures ? Yahya gave a lengthy reply
saying that the two Situations were not similar; in March
1969 when Ayub resigned there was no threat to the existence
of the country, while in March 1971 when Yahya ordered the .
Army action in East Pakistan, he, according to his interpreta-
tion, was carrying out his obligations not only as President
of. the country and also as chief of the armed forces. He
orn me of lp Oath of office to protect the country’s
ependence and territorial integrity. Legally his argument
may have been valid but te iain not. j
I further asked Yahya why he did not call for a referendum
when the political talks failed, and why he had not taken the
Bengalis into his confidence and told them the whole truth.
As already mentioned, I suggested a referendum in August —
September 1970. Yahya’s answers were incoherent and vague.
I realized that he had lost the control over the decision-making
process. From March 15 to 22 the Army, as a member of
the Dipomatic Corps: stationed in Dacca wrote in his notes,
was willing to make big concessions to Mujib and virtually
to accept his six-point plan, but when Yahya’s. own draft
constitutional formula failed to get Mujib’s approval and Mujib
presented his separation plan on March 23, Yahya lost all his
initiative and so on March 24 the generals decided to take
action. Only the exact hour of their operation was yet to be
fixed. ;
From Ballot to Bullet eeu
. General Tikka, who became Commander-in-Chief of the
“New” Pakistan under Bhutto, was appointed to carry out the
military operations in East Bengal. In an unpublished interview
. with the influential Egyptian journalist Muhammad Hasanain
Haykal, Tikka summed the military situation in East Bengal
when he arrived in Dacca in the first week of March 1971: