OE
86 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
decided. Peerzada and myself were engaged almost full-time
in giving final shape to the plan, Them Peerzada met with a
car accident in early November and the main burden fell on
me; I drafted the speech of November 28, 1969, in which
Yahya announced his proposals for the future of the
country.
The Plan
Yahya began his speech by referring to the basic issues relating
to the constitution which have already been pointed out.
He expressed regret that political leaders could not arrive at a
consensus on these three major issues, but he was careful in
_ not blaming them for their failure to do so. He said: “It is
regrettable that they have not been able to do so but one can
understand and appreciate their difficulties.”"* In not putting
all the blame on the politicians he differed from Ayub; this was
a wise gesture. He then referred to the four possible alter-
natives to the holding of elections. These were: (i) “to have an.
elected constitutional convention whose task would be to pro- |
duce a new constitution and then dissolve itself”; (ii) “to
revive the 1956 Constitution’’; (iii) “to frame a constitution
‘and have a referendum on it in the country”; and (iv) “to
evolve a Legal Framework for general elections on the basis
of consultations with various groups and political leaders,
as well as the study of past constitutions of Pakistan and the
- general consensus of the country. This proposal from me would
only be in the nature of a provisional Legal Framework.”’
After pointing out the merits and demerits of the various
alternatives, Yahya opted for the fourth alternative.* Turning
to the three basic issues: “First, the question of ‘one unit’;
secondly, the issue of ‘one man, one vote’ versus parity; and
thirdly, the relationship between the centre and the federating
provinces.”’® Yahya rightly pointed out that the first two issues
/ were connected with the holding’ of elections and must be
‘solved before the election. So he decided these two issues:
elections on the basis of “one man, one vote” for a single-
chamber national assembly and the abolition of the amalga-
mation of West Pakistan into “one unit’’,
Yahya’s plan conceded all the demands put forward by