\
DIS
teil to pen eae OF PAKISTAN, 1971 223
th ctrate all s ;
of an “economic-cultaral life garb
Bangladesh with some Risdon teva - She also provided:
stationed in Calcutta, India. Th IGs — which are, however, |
UN. relief operations in Ban, ¢ Soviet contribution to the
$137 milli Pangladesh in 1971~2 was only abo
37 million or 10-7'per cent, compared vith the US. cnet
i he pared with the U.S. a
bution of about $347 million or 27; —
made a lot of publicity for Saat bl iii Yet the Russians
‘Bengalis. 3 concern” for the suffering
The Soviet diplomatic objective ;
to include it esis the oe a a to be
of Asian collective securi hag cus aig
“adi ty. At present, Bangladesh is
covered indirectly under the Russian plan through New Delhi’
“Treaty of Friendship” with Bangladesh similar to the Indo.
Soviet Treaty of 1971. The Russians have intensified their
campaign for the Asian Security Plan. through non-govern-
mental channels. Their claim that this scheme is attracting
interest in Asia is now shored up’ with references to
speeches at conferences and symposia” and proposals of
various partics and organizations.*® These include the Afro-
Asian Peoples’ Solidarity Organization (A.A.P.S.O.) execu-
__ tive committee, which met in Aden in February 1973, and
peace conventions in India and Nepal this year. A leading
role in this campaign is being played by the World Peace
Council (W.P.C.), whose “‘conference on Asian Security and |
Cooperation” in Dacca on May 23-26, 1973, was among the
preliminaries to a “World Congress of Peace Forces” in
Moscow in October 1973. |
‘The unfriendly attitude of the Soviet Union towards the
“new” Pakistan continues. When Bhutto visited Moscow
in March 1972 he was told bluntly by his Russian hosts:
“If history were to repeat itself we would again take the same
position [referring to the Soviet role in the dismemberment
of Pakistan] because we are convinced that it was correct.”
This was a clear warning to Pakistan in the context of present-
day turbulence in Baluchistan and the North-West Frontier
Province of truncated Pakistan. The alleged Soviet role in
current political unrest in the “Wild West” of Pakistan
was dramatized by the seizure of Russian arms smuggled into
Pakistan through the Iraqi embassy in Islamabad. Baghdad