a. |
50 THE LAST DAYS OF UNITED PAKISTAN
complicated affair to present credentials to a martial law
administrator. The U.S. Government also raised, not publicly
but through diplomatic channels, the question of “recogni.
tion” of the new régime. However, once Yahya became Presi.
dent, diplomatic niceties were solved. Yahya, however, con-
tinued to be the Commander-in-chief of the army. According
to his own order of precedence, he often used to describe him-
self first as Commander-in-chief, then Chief Martial Law
Administrator and lastly President. As Ayub had lost the
confidence of GHQ by becoming an “elective” president and
ceasing to be Commander-in-chief, Yahya always retained his
basic post of Commander-in-chief in the expectation that it
would enable him to have direct access to and links with the
GHQ. |
Next to Yahya at the President’s House was Peerzada;
his official title was Principal Staff Officer (PSO) to the CMLA
and the President. Under the PSO were two brigadiers:
Rahim,,a Punjabi who was given charge: of martial law
affairs, and Karim, a Bengali, who was put in charge of civil
affairs. These two brigadiers (subsequently promoted to major-
generals) were the “super secretaries”; no secretary of any
ministry could send a file to the President without going
through these two, who were under the direct control and
- supervision of the PSO. It was an amusing phenomenon to
see the top bureaucrats waiting in the corridors of the brigadiers
and then at the office of the all-powerful PSO; very rarely
did they have occasion to see the President himself, The Ayub-
Mirza régime in 1958 had been very prompt in having a civi-
lian cabinet, but the new régime decided to have no such
partnership,
The various ministries were divided like this: Yahya was in
charge of Defence and Foreign Affairs, General Hamid, the
Chief of Staff and number two in the armed forces, took the
. Home Ministry. The rest was divided between the two chiefs
' of the Air Force and the Navy: Nur Khan, the Air Commander-
in-chief, became the overlord of the Ministries of Education
Labour, Health, Social Welfare, while the Navy chief, ‘Ahsan,
was given Finance, Planning, Industry and Commerce.
Yahya, Hamid, Peerzada, Nur Khan and Ahsan constituted
a small cabinet known as the Council of “Administration”.
| ‘al
Ine
|