62
expertise when it withdrew these men from active duty (35 pilots and about 25% of its maintenance 
personnel).
The IAF’s superiority was particularly apparent in the east, where eleven Indian combat squadrons 
rapidly overwhelmed the 16 Sabre VIs and three RT-33s available to Air Commodore Inamul Haq 
Khan’s No. 14 Squadron.  Although the Pakistani fighters made valiant efforts to counter Indian air 
power on 22 November and again between 3 and 6 December, their attempts were quixotic.  The 
IAF shot down a few Sabres in air-to-air engagements, but achieved its best results by concentrating 
its attacks on Tejgaon airfield at Dacca, the lone fighter-capable PAF facility in East Pakistan.  The 
Indians had effectively cratered the runway by 6 December and, as continued bombing prevented 
adequate repairs, the remaining Pakistani Sabres became unusable.  Consequently, the Indians 
were able to devote 1,178 of 1,978 sorties in the east to direct support of the ground forces, that is, 
about 80 sorties per day from 3 to 15 December.  The IAF also transported 2 Para for its airdrop 
at Tangail, and its helicopters made a key contribution in enabling IV Corps to cross the Meghna 
during the drive to Dacca.  Toward the end of the campaign, restless IAF transport pilots used two 
old Canadian Caribous on nuisance night bombing raids over Dacca.133   The Pakistan Army kept 
many of its helicopters in the east operational for the duration of the conflict, and several escaped to 
Burma in the last desperate hours of 16 December just before the surrender.134 
In the west, Pakistan opened the war by launching air strikes against several key targets on the 
evening of 3 December.  In addition to inflicting damage on bases and aircraft, it was hoped that 
these early “provocative” strikes would spur the IAF to hasty retaliatory raids allowing Pakistani 
fighters and air defenses to engage the Indians under advantageous conditions.135   The PAF aircraft 
reached their targets undetected, but their accuracy was poor and almost no damage resulted from 
these initial raids or from a number B-57 missions flown later that night.  The effects of these opening 
strikes were limited to shutting down or impeding Indian operations from a few airfields for a few 
hours.  Moreover, the PAF only managed to generate some 20 to 30 sorties in these critical initial 
strikes, rather than the 400 or so it should have been able to organize with the 250 combat aircraft 
available in the west (12 combat squadrons).  Having planned for a six-month war, it continued to 
fight conservatively, even withholding four squadrons for future use in support of the anticipated 
Army ground offensive.136 
For its part, the IAF dedicated considerable effort to counter-air strikes during the first week of the war, 
but shifted its emphasis to interdiction and close air support in the second week, having concluded that the 
losses incurred in counter-air missions were not commensurate with the gains.137   Indeed, IAF losses in the 
west, as in the east, in large measure came from antiaircraft fire (35 of 56 lost); there were only a dozen or 
so “classic” air-to-air engagements.  The IAF also successfully struck facilities around Karachi, albeit with 
only sketchy coordination with the Navy.  Air Force attacks on 4 and 5 December helped pave the way for 
the Navy’s first missile strike, and bombs dropped by Canberras of No. 35 Squadron on 8 December caused 
much of the damage at the oil facilities near the city.138 
The most spectacular incident in the air war was the IAF’s central role in repelling the Pakistani 18 
Division’s advance toward Longewala.  When Indian 12 Division called for help, the IAF had only 
four Hunters available at Jaisalmer, but these aircraft carried out repeated strikes on 5 December, 
destroying at least 20 tanks and blunting the Pakistani offensive.  The Hunters followed up the next 
day, harassing the vulnerable and demoralized Pakistani columns as they struggled back through 
the desert.  Owing to poor army-air force coordination, the PAF was only dimly aware of the army’s 
plans and was not in a position to provide suitable air cover for 18 Division.  The Indian Hunters 
thus attacked unhindered by interference from the air.  Similarly, the PAF was unable to support the 
Navy in the defense of Karachi against air and sea attacks.139 
Two other aspects of the air war deserve mention.  One was that both sides made limited use