6
Conventions
Boundaries: the maps in this atlas depict approximate boundaries only. They are neither 
definitive nor authoritative.
Place Names: for the sake of simplicity, place names are given in the form most common in 
1971: thus Dacca (Dhaka), Bombay (Mumbai), and Calcutta (Kolkata). Two of the major rivers in 
East Pakistan/Bangladesh have dual names: the Ganges is also the Padma, and the Jamuna also 
carries the name Brahmaputra for part of its course. Note that the river that flows past Jamalpur and 
Mymensingh in north-central Bangladesh is generally known as the “old Brahmaputra.”
      Units: 
• Having evolved from the British Indian Army, the Indian and Pakistani armies have followed 
a British-style regimental system and used British designations for the echelons of command since 
independence. Infantry battalions, approximately the same size as their U.S. counterparts, are given 
a numerical designation within their regiments such as 4 Sikh (4th Battalion, the Sikh Regiment). 
Battalions of India’s Gorkha (Indian spelling) Rifles make a small exception, being identified by two 
numbers indicating battalion and Gorkha regiment: 5/5 Gorkha Rifles is thus the 5th Battalion of 
the 5th Gorkha Rifles. Armored and artillery “regiments” are the equivalent of U.S. battalions: 40-
50 tanks and 18 artillery pieces respectively. Several of the older armored regiments bear honored 
historical names dating from the colonial period; India’s 9 Horse is thus also the “Deccan Horse.” 
Note that both countries have a Punjab Regiment on their rolls.
• Similarly, subunits within armored regiments are called squadrons and troops after British 
practice rather than the U.S. terminology of companies and platoons.
• Ranks are likewise based on the British system: brigadiers rather than brigadier generals in the 
armies, and the system of squadron leaders, air marshals, etc. in the air forces. 
• Pakistani units raised in the portion of Kashmir it controls are known by the Pakistani 
designation of “Azad Kashmir” (AK) meaning “free” or “liberated” Kashmir. Note, however, that 
Indian sources usually refer to these troops as “Pakistan Occupied Kashmir” or “POK” units.
• Special units.  Two Indian infantry battalions were mounted on camels for use in the desert (13 
and 17 Grenadiers). The Indian Army included “paracommandos” with missions similar to British 
Commandos or U.S. Rangers. The Indians also had several airborne infantry battalions organized 
into two brigades (50 and 51). The Pakistan Army had Special Service Group units for commando 
missions, but it had no true airborne infantry; the “Para” in 14 Para Brigade was only an honorary 
title.