12
as long as the refugees departed and stability returned to the east either through a resolution that 
gave power to a moderate Awami League regime within the Pakistani state or through the creation 
of an independent Bangladesh.11  From the spring, however, Gandhi began to lay the diplomatic 
and military foundation for the possibility of an armed contest: securing international support, 
increasing assistance to the Mukti Bahini, and boosting military readiness.
Pakistan also placed its military on a war footing during the summer and fall, transferring 
significant forces to the east (9 and 16 Divisions as well as several thousand paramilitary and police) 
and raising new units in the west to take their places (17 and 33 Divisions).  The counterinsurgency 
campaign, however, was not going well for Pakistan.  As the months passed, the Mukti Bahini 
improved with Indian assistance, while the Pakistani security forces, isolated amidst a hostile 
population, struggled with physical and mental exhaustion.  Though relatively secure within their 
cantonments, they were unable to quell the unrest within East Pakistan, collect reliable intelligence, 
or execute unrealistic orders to “seal” the long, twisting border with India in what one commander 
characterized as an exercise in “quixotic dreaming.”12   Eastern Command’s successes were local and 
transitory.  The civil war became a cruel and seemingly endless cycle of raids, ambushes, bombings, 
sabotage, assassinations, and shellings.  Pakistan could not eradicate the guerrillas, and the Mukti 
Bahini by themselves lacked the strength and coordination to force a Pakistani withdrawal.13 
Brutality was commonplace on both sides and the death toll climbed into the thousands.14 
By November, the Indian Army and paramilitary troops were regularly providing artillery 
support to the Mukti Bahini and, toward the end of the month, the army had even made small 
incursions into East Pakistan in several locations.  Cross-border raids and artillery exchanges by 
both sides became common.15   Pakistan, whose strategy for defense of the east called for offensive 
in the west, therefore launched its air force against several targets in western India on the evening 
of 3 December 1971.  That night, the Pakistan Army opened an offensive all along the Western Front 
from Punch in Kashmir to Longewala in the Rajasthan desert.
    India had been preparing for Pakistan to make the first move and had drafted its plans accordingly.16 
Its principal focus was in the east, where it was hoped that a well-conceived offensive would 
crush Pakistani resistance quickly and result in the conclusive establishment of Bangladesh as an 
independent country.  Unleashed, India’s Eastern Command overran East Pakistan in two weeks. 
Despite often spirited resistance, the Pakistani defenders were faced with an impossible strategic 
situation.  Their commander, Lt. Gen. A. A. K. Niazi, therefore signed an instrument of surrender at 
4:31 p.m. on 16 December and a cease-fire went into effect on both fronts at 8 p.m. the following day, 
leaving some 90,000 Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian detainees in Indian hands.17 
    In the west, the two armies sparred indecisively, each side’s small advances being balanced by 
the other side’s gains.  The only exception was the dramatic drive by India’s 11th Division into 
the sandy wastes of Pakistan’s Sindh Province which netted India approximately 4,500 square 
kilometers of Pakistani territory, albeit barren desert.18 
Pakistan’s military debacle naturally started a political upheaval that ended with Zulfikar Ali 
Bhutto coming to power as the truncated country’s new leader.  After prolonged wrangling and 
some additional skirmishing (most notably in the Lipa valley in Kashmir in May), Bhutto and 
Gandhi signed the Simla Accord at the eponymous hill resort on 3 July 1972.  Innumerable details 
remained unresolved, however, and the two sides did not come to an agreement on the redefinition 
of the Cease-Fire Line, from thenceforth to be called the Line of Control (LOC), in Kashmir until 
December 1972.  The first exchange of prisoners also took place that month, but the last of them, 
held hostage to bitter political machinations, did not return home until April 1974.