47
maneuver brigades, pushed back the forward brigade (191 Brigade under Brigadier R. K. Jasbir 
Singh) of India’s 10 Division.103   The Indian forces, initially postured to assume the offensive, had 
been hastily realigned for a defensive mission after the Indian Army’s senior leaders suddenly 
changed their plans at a meeting on the evening of 1 December.  The division was thus ill prepared 
when the Pakistanis attacked.  After three days of heavy fighting which saw, among other things, 
the capture of two batteries of 216 Medium Regiment by infiltrating Pakistani infantry, 191 Brigade 
withdrew behind the river on 6 December.104  Tenacious defense by 5 Sikh was key in delaying the 
Pakistani advance.  Indian 68 Brigade hastily took up the defense of the Manawar Tawi line as the 
broken 191 Brigade pulled back to the west.  Fortunately for the Indians, 23 Division’s mission was 
only to secure the line of the river, so the Pakistanis did not seize the opportunity to pursue during 
this moment of Indian vulnerability.105   On the division commander’s initiative, however, Pakistan 
23 Division soon returned to the attack and, by the morning of 10 December, had established a 
shallow bridgehead across the Manawar Tawi.  This proved to be the limit of 23 Division’s advance. 
The accidental death of the energetic division commander in a helicopter crash on 9 December, 
robbed the attack of its impetus and the lodgment on the Indian side of the river was evacuated 
during the following day (11 December).  The sector remained quiet for the remainder of the war 
and Pakistan retained the area west of the Manawar Tawi in the peace settlement.106 
Southeast of Chhamb, the Indian 26 Division scored a success by capturing a narrow salient known 
as “the Chicken’s Neck” (or Phuklian salient to the Pakistanis) in a quick two-day operation against 
light resistance (6-7 December).  The division also evicted small Pakistani groups that had occupied 
two Indian border posts.  To the frustration of its aggressive commander, Major General Z. C. “Zoru” 
Bakshi, 26 Division was restricted to these minor offensive actions and a prewar plan to push for 
Sialkot was canceled: “After the Pakistani thrust at Chhamb, headquarters was in a flap and they 
took away one of my brigades and told me not to attack.”107  Bakshi’s missing brigade (168) ended 
up with a defensive mission under an ad hoc headquarters called “X-ray Sector” with 323 Brigade of 
39 Division.  “X-ray Sector” thus became the right flank unit of I Corps, protecting the area from the 
Degh Nadi to the left flank of 26 Division.