32
Bangladesh: Chittagong Sector
This remote sector was remarkable for two reasons: the extensive operations by India’s Special 
Frontier Force (SFF) and the only amphibious operation of the war.
Although General Manekshaw initially placed great emphasis on Chittagong as a possible 
ingress port for Pakistani reinforcements or escape route for a Pakistani evacuation, the only Indian 
conventional unit dedicated to this area in early planning was “Kilo Force,” a mix of Indian regular 
and paramilitary troops supported by Mukti Bahini.76 This force captured Feni and pushed down 
the coast toward Chittagong, reaching Sitakund by 12 December.  Here it was joined by 83 Brigade, 
diverted south from 23 Division after the fall of Laksham.  The two brigades had advanced as far as 
Faujdahat by 15 December and accepted the surrender of the Chittagong garrison the next day.  The 
Pakistani 91 and 97 Brigades played almost no substantial role in the fighting.77 
Operating from four bases in India (Marpara, Demagiri, Bornapansuri, and Jarulchari), the SFF 
conducted successful offensive operations in the central area of the Chittagong Hill Tracts against 
Pakistani troops and anti-Indian Mizo tribal guerrillas supported by Pakistan.  Its most spectacular 
accomplishments were the destruction of the Dohazari bridge over the Sangu River and the capture 
of Rangamati.  Thoroughly pleased with this little victory, the SFF commander, Brig. S. S. Uban, 
transferred his headquarters from Demagiri to Rangamati.  Though peripheral to the battles taking 
place further north, Uban and his men displayed determination and resourcefulness in achieving 
considerable success in a challenging campaign with minimal logistical support.78 
Uban’s men attacked the Dohazari bridge because Manekshaw held the baseless fear that 
Pakistani troops would escape south into Burma along the old “Arakan Road.”  This concern also 
motivated him to order an amphibious assault south of Cox’s Bazar toward the end of the war 
under a plan named Operation Beaver.  It quickly became a pet project, which no amount of earnest 
staff advice could scuttle.  With almost no planning or reconnaissance, therefore, 1/3 Gorkha Rifles 
and some other troops from Bengal Area Command were loaded aboard two Navy landing craft 
as “Romeo Force” and dispatched across the Bay of Bengal.  Predictably, the attempt to land on 14 
December failed.  A handful of Gorkhas got ashore, but two men drowned when they disembarked 
in water seven to nine feet deep.  Nonetheless, a platoon eventually landed and sent out a patrol 
that made its way north to Cox’s Bazar and confirmed that there were no Pakistanis in the vicinity. 
The cease-fire came into effect before the bulk of the men could get ashore, which they did at Cox’s 
Bazar from 16 to 18 December using local lighters.79