28
challenges to maneuver and logistics, but 101 Communications Zone in the north and IV Corps in 
the east overcame these hurdles to cut through the defenders and isolate Dacca, leaving Niazi little 
choice but surrender.
The combat in these two sectors generally falls into two phases.  From 3 to 9 December, Indian 
and Bangladeshi troops broke through the crust of the Pakistani defenses in a series of border battles 
and established themselves on the banks of the major rivers in each area.  The second phase, from 
10 to 16 December, was a race to Dacca against increasingly fragmented and dispirited resistance, 
with the lead Indian elements finally coming to a halt within miles of the city just before the cease-
fire.58 
In the north, India’s 101 Communications Zone, an administrative headquarters forced into 
service as a combat command, spent three weeks from 14 November to 4 December battering 
itself against the stubborn resistance of a small Pakistani border post at Kamalpur.  When the 
outnumbered band of Pakistani defenders (from 31 Baloch) finally ran out of food and ammunition, 
however, the road to the south was open and 95 Brigade pushed on to Jamalpur.  The reduction of 
this well-defended town consumed several more days, but by the 11th it was in Indian hands and 31 
Baloch, half of the regular Pakistani force in this sector, was no longer an effective fighting force.59 
The same day, Indian troops of “FJ Sector” entered Mymensingh unopposed.60   The stage was set 
for the drive on Dacca.
In the east, Indian IV Corps, with all eight East Bengal Regiment battalions, had made small 
gains in the last weeks of November.  An enclave south of Akaura served as a springboard for 57 
Division, which advanced along the rail line to Ashuganj.61   In seesaw fighting that featured several 
successful Pakistani counterattacks, 27 Brigade of Pakistani 14 Division fell back across the Meghna 
and destroyed part of the rail bridge, blocking immediate passage of the river.  General Sagat Singh, 
however, saw Dacca as “the final answer” and decided “to go beyond my assigned task.”62   In an 
impressive display of improvisation, IV Corps began crossing the broad Meghna on 9 December in 
a hastily assembled helicopter lift operation supplemented by every variety of local water craft.63 
Pakistan’s 14 Division was no longer a hindrance as its 27 Brigade had retired to Bhairab Bazar and 
its other two brigades (202 and 313) were isolated at Sylhet.64 
Further south, Indian 23 Division also reached the Meghna on 9 December, seizing both 
Daudkandi and Chandpur against light resistance.  The isolated Pakistani force at Laksham 
capitulated the same day, leaving only the garrison of Mayanmati to offer organized resistance east 
of the Meghna.  Pakistan 39 Division had disintegrated.65   A sense of imminent victory drove the 
Indians, and, as 57 Division painfully built up its strength west of the river, 23 Division (shedding 
83 Brigade and “Kilo Force” to push toward Chittagong), prepared to make its own improvised 
crossing.  In another colorful, tenuous helicopter and boat operation, 301 Brigade landed at Baidya 
Bazar on 14 December and closed on the Lakhya the following day.  “Like the Mughal army of yore,” 
recalled the brigade commander, “we marched northwards helped and surrounded by civilians.”66 
India’s 57 Division was also advancing: 311 Brigade and “Sierra Force” were threatening Demra 
and 73 Brigade had reached the Balu east of Tungi.  General Sagat Singh’s decision to “go beyond 
his assigned task” had paid off.
The Indians were also approaching Dacca from the northwest, hindered more by severe logistics 
constraints than by the near-nonexistent Pakistani opposition.  Indeed, Pakistani 93 Brigade, over 
the protest of its commander, had been withdrawn toward Dacca in a desperate attempt to shield 
the unprotected capital against the Indian troops advancing rapidly from the east and northeast.67 
The Indian airborne drop of 2 Para at Tangail on 11 December accentuated the menace to Dacca. 
Although 2 Para’s appearance made only a marginal contribution to the tactical battle, it helped to 
unnerve Niazi and others in Eastern Command headquarters, already anxious because of the lack