5
Author’s Preface
The 1971 War is the most recent major India-Pakistan conflict and the most important in the 
confrontational relationship of the two South Asian rivals. India’s dramatic victory not only brought 
Bangladesh into being and reduced Pakistan by half, it also resulted in the formalization of Soviet-
Indian ties in a prewar treaty, generated enduring suspicion in US-India relations, and launched 
Pakistan’s nuclear program on the course that ended with its weapons’ tests in May 1998. Similarly, 
the accord signed between the two combatants at Simla in July 1972 has been a touchstone of Indian 
foreign policy for thirty years, framing interaction with Pakistan as well as relations with external 
powers.
   These dramatic results notwithstanding, many of the fundamental issues of the subcontinent 
remained unresolved.  Pakistan was traumatized, but even India, as the years have passed, has found 
itself not entirely satisfied with the outcome: questions of national identity and the pertinacious 
Kashmir problem have retarded progress in the region for the past three decades. Moreover, the 
India-Pakistan dynamic has moved no closer to balance, the relationship between a struggling 
middle power and a potential major power remains a dangerous rivalry rather than a partnership 
of reconciled neighbors. In addition to these underlying considerations, the 1971 War has become 
a key facet of the complex lens through which decision makers in New Delhi and Islamabad view 
themselves, their bilateral relations, and their interaction with the rest of the world.
     The 1971 War thus continues to reverberate today at the highest levels of national policy in South 
Asia. Abiding bitterness over the war within Pakistan’s military leadership, for example, was a 
contributing factor leading to the Kargil incursion in 1999; latent but visceral mistrust between 
Pakistan and Bangladesh concerning alleged atrocities during 1971 resurfaced in the fall of 2000; 
aspects of the conflict featured prominently during the July 2001 India-Pakistan summit in Agra; 
Pakistan’s President General Pervez Musharraf offered regrets for the events of 1971 during a visit to 
Bangladesh in August 2002; and the war featured in acrimonious Indian state election campaigning 
in Gujarat during December 2002.
    The present study concentrates on the military operations of the 1971 War. It does not pretend 
to encompass the complex weave of domestic and foreign policies of the two belligerents except 
insofar as these influenced the actions of their armed forces.1 Rather, this atlas is intended to provide 
policy makers, diplomats, military analysts, and historians a ready resource for objective study of 
the war and for comparison of operations during 1971 with previous and subsequent events. Every 
effort has been made to utilize the best available public sources, but any errors of interpretation or 
analysis, of course, are the author’s alone.