20
aspect of the plan, however, was Niazi’s desire, with which Army General Headquarters initially 
concurred, to launch offensive operations into India at several points.  A subsequent Pakistani 
commentator regarded this proposal as “sheer folly.”37 
Across the border was India’s Eastern Command, under Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Aurora. 
The orders issued to Aurora instructed him to destroy the bulk of the Pakistani forces in the east 
and to occupy most of East Pakistan.38   These two objectives seem to have been allotted equal 
priority by Army headquarters and Aurora addressed them by preparing plans to seize territory up 
to the lines of the major rivers through offensives in the southwestern, northwestern, and eastern 
sectors.  One corps was allotted to each of these sectors: II Corps in the southwest, XXXIII Corps 
in the northwest, and IV Corps in the east.  Indian offensive operations in the east were to begin in 
the first week of December, and New Delhi was thus both pleased and relieved when the Pakistani 
air strikes on the afternoon of 3 December (and ground attacks that night) came in advance of the 
planned advance.39 
Notably absent from the Indian plans was any formal reference to Dacca.  Army planners thought 
it would be impossible to secure the city within the time frame of a short war.  As a result, the best 
approach to the East Pakistani capital, the central or northern sector, was initially assigned only one 
regular brigade under an ad hoc headquarters called 101 Communications Zone Area.  Nonetheless, 
several senior Indian generals certainly had their eyes on the city.  Verbal coordination between 
Major General Gurbax Singh Gill, commander of 101 Communications Zone, and the Chief of Staff 
at Eastern Command, Major General J. F. R. Jacob, led to an outline plan for a possible advance 
on Dacca including a parachute drop at Tangail in battalion strength.40  Likewise, Lieutenant 
General Sagat Singh, commanding IV Corps, clearly intended to head for Dacca if the opportunity 
arose even though this was not part of his written orders.41  More than Dacca, the possibility that 
Pakistani forces would escape by sea had been on General Manekshaw’s mind in New Delhi.  The 
Indian Navy, however, promised to deny Pakistan the use of Chittagong and Chalna, reducing his 
concern for this eventuality.  He would later come to worry about the potential for an overland 
withdrawal into Burma.
With six full divisions (plus parts of 6 Mountain Division), four additional brigades, and the 
equivalent of three armored regiments, India’s Eastern Command decidedly outnumbered General 
Niazi’s defenders.  Several additional brigades and the headquarters of 6 Mountain Division would 
be added to this imposing force as the war progressed and the likelihood of Chinese intervention 
diminished.  Although the mountain divisions composing Eastern Command had few vehicles, a 
squadron of approximately 12 operational Mi-4 helicopters was available to enhance mobility and 
there were sufficient transport aircraft to airdrop up to a battalion of 50 Para Brigade at any one 
time.  In combat aircraft, the IAF contributed 11 fighter squadrons and one squadron of Canberra 
bombers to the offensive in the east.14   The Indian Navy’s principal surface combatant, the light 
carrier INS Vikrant, with her task force would seal the coast and support inland operations with air 
strikes and naval gunfire.
    The various Mukti Bahini groups multiplied the strength of India’s armed forces.   Some of these 
groups had been formed from men with experience in the Pakistan Army or with various Pakistani 
paramilitary organizations.  During most of the rebellion, the Mukti Bahini guerrillas operated 
in geographically defined “sectors.”  As open war approached, however, some of these troops 
were assembled into three brigade-sized groupings called “forces.”  Designated “Zulu,” “Kilo,” 
and “Sierra” according to the initials of their commanders, they provided a total of eight infantry 
battalions (East Bengal Regiment) and three artillery batteries under the overall command of India’s 
IV Corps.43   These “forces” were capable of limited conventional operations in cooperation with 
the Indian Army, and were closely intermingled with Indian units during the actual fighting.44 
Although some battalions were attached to Indian brigades individually, Sierra Force and Kilo