Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
131
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Death Stalks Rangpur
Militants of the Awami League and the Bengali rebels from the East Pakistan
Rifles went on the warpath against the non-Bengalis in Rangpur town in the
second week of March 1971. Non-Bengalis who lived in Bengali-inhabited
localities were terrorised and driven from their homes. Some were kidnapped
and hacked to death in nearby paddy fields. The police force had joined the
rebels. The Bengali rebels declared total war on the non-Bengalis in the last week
of March 1971 when armed mobs attacked the predominantly non-Bengali
localities in the town and stayed more than 5,000 innoccent men, women and
children.
The flames of strife and bloodshed engulfed almost every town in the Rangpur
district. The loss of non-Bengali lives was particularly heavy in the towns of
Saidpur, Nilphamari and Lalmonirhat. Estimates of the death toll of non-
Bengalis in these three towns range from 6,000 to 10,000. An impediment in the
way of arriving at a correct estimate was the fact that the murderers floated the
bodies of many of their victims in the rivers or incinerated them in blazing
houses.
Twenty-five-year old Mohammed Yusuf, who worked as a Motor Mechanic in
Rangpur and lived in the Alamnagar colony in a thatched hut, was the lone
survivor in a family of twelve. His parents, his five brothers and four other close
relatives were liquidated by a killer gang in the last week of March 1971. Yusuf,
who was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in February 1974, had this
recollection of the carnage of non-Bengalis in Rangpur town:
“In the night of March 27, 1971, about 500 armed Awami Leaguers and soldiers
from the East Pakistan Rifles encircled our Bihari-inhabited locality, looted and
burnt many huts and opened a barrage of gunfire as their victims tried to escape
from the conflagration. The killers smashed into our little house and sprayed us
with bullets from their blazing guns. All of us writhed in a stream of blood which
spouted from our bullet-riddled bodies. I was hit in the left thigh and I lost
consciousness. When I woke up the next morning, I was the only one alive in our
family of twelve. An abondoned barn was my hideout for a week until the
federal troops arrived and the rebels fled on April 26, 1971. “