Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
115
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Killer Gangs in Meherpur,
Zafarkandi
Abdul Aziz, 33, clerk in the Jute Mill at Meherpur, gave this harrowing account
of the massacre of non-Bengalis in his town in the last week of March 1971:
“Since the beginning of March 1971, Bengali militants conducted sporadic
attacks on the houses of non-Bengalis. Some of them were belaboured on the
streets and a few were injured.
“The Jute Mill at Meherpur had about 150 non-Bengali work men. They were a
small minority in the overall labour force at the Mill. These non-Bengalis lived in
shacks in a shanty colony not far from the Mill. In the night of March 25, the
Awami League militants and rebel Bengali soldiers unleashed death and
destruction on the houses of non-Bengalis in this locality and slaughtered them
en masse. The death toll in this incident was nearly 750. I do not think that there
were more than a dozen survivors of this dreadful massacre.
“As I was a bachelor, I lived in a small room in the Mill premises. The Mill was
not damaged by the killer gang. For four days, I lived confined in this room. I am
grateful to my Bengali colleagues who did not betray me to the rebels otherwise I
would have been dead. I stirred out of my hideout after the Pakistan Army
regained control over Meherpur. The rebels had offered strong resistance but
they were enventually routed. When I toured the devastated non-Bengali
hutments, I was appalled by the savagery with which the Bengali rebels had
liquidated the innocent non-Bengalis. Hundreds of dead bodies lay on the roads,
in tanks, inside burnt-out houses, in the fields and in deserted, spooky buildings.
The Army arranged their mass burial in view of the decomposed state of most of
the corpses. The inmates who rushed out of their blazing houses, it appeared,
were fired upon ruthlessly by the killers.
“Hundreds of blood-stained Saris and other female garments testified to the
tortures inflicted on kidnapped women by their captors. The soldiers said that
not more than a dozen non-Bengalis survived this gory killing.
“Heaps of burnt human bones, found in the debris of the gutted shacks of the
non-Bengali labourers of the Mill, gave tell-tale indications of the many human
bodies which were tossed into this inferno for in Generation by their killers “.