Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
108
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Brutality in Kushtia
Awami League militants and rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles unleashed their
genocidal fury on the non-Bengali population in the town of Kushtia in the last
week of March 1971 and it continued without a let-up right up to April 16 when
the Pakistan Army liberated it. It is estimated that more than 2,000 non-Bengalis
perished in the massacre in Kushtia town. Amongst the other towns in Kushtia
district, where non-Bengalis were liquidated en masse, were Chuadanga,
Meherpur and Zafarkandi. The death toll of non-Bengalis at these places was
well over 2,500.
Dulari Begum, 35, whose husband, Mohammed Shafee, was a Railway employee
and who lived in Quarter No. 13 in the Harding Bridge Colony in Kushtia,
punctuated her pathetic story with sobs and tears. She said:
“On March 23, the Bengali rebels ordered all the non-Bengalis in our residential
colony to congregate in the building of a school for safety. As they were the
rulers of the town, we had no choice but to obey their order. Once we were
inside the school building, the rebels cordoned it off. In the evening, a killer gang
armed with guns, daggers, sickles and spears attacked all the non-Bengali men in
this school-turned-abattoir. One of the killers stabbed my husband in the chest
and he died on the spot. They piled up the dead bodies in trucks and dumped
them in the river Ganges, if there was some life left in one of these bodies, he had
no chance of survival in the watery grave. The executions continued all through
the night and the killers took delight in torturing their victims.
“The next morning, the killer gang sprayed petrol on the doors and windows of
the school building and set it ablaze. Hundreds of wailing widows and I broke
through the locked gate of the building, rushed towards our houses and some of
us were wounded on the way by the rebels’ firing. I locked myself inside my
house; I found my eight year old son cowering under a table. My house was
looted by the vandals. After a few days, a band of Bengali rebels again raided my
house and tried to kidnap my son. But, miraculously, a posse of federal troops
reached our colony just in time and the rebels bolted. The Pakistan Army moved
me and my son to a camp in Ishurdi where widowed women and orphaned
children were accommodated. Except for my son, all my relatives had perished
in this cyclone of murder. My son and I underwent fresh suffering after India’s
conquest of East Pakistan in December 1971. We were repatriated to Karachi in
January 1974 “.