Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
29
Killer gangs shanghaied non-Bengalis on the streets and from their homes
and the Bengali police had gone into purdah. The non-Bengalis thanked
God when the federal Army went into action against the ruthless rebels.
But on December 17, 1971, when the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini
seized Dacca, hell burst upon the non-Bengalis again and hundreds of
thousands of innocent people were butchered by the Mukti Bahini victors
and their trigger-happy supporters “.
Shah Imam, 30, who was engaged in business in Dacca and who lived in the
Bikrampur locality, testified:
“In the third week of March 1971, a Bengali killer gang murdered my
paternal uncle, my elder brother and his teenage son in a steamer on way
from Barisal to Dacca.
“I learnt from the Bengali bargeman that, in midstream, about 50 armed
thugs, shouting ‘Joi Bangla’, attacked the non-Bengali passengers. They
forced the Sareng (captain) to anchor the steamer on a deserted bank of
the river. The killer gang lined up the non-Bengali passengers on the bank
of the river and gunned them to death. They pilfered every article of value
from the bodies of the slain men, women and children and threw the dead
into the river. After the federal troops routed the rebels, I tried to locate
the dead bodies of my murdered relatives and visited the scene of the
slaughter but there was no trace of them although there were bloodstains
at many places along the bank. “
Shah Imam was repatriated to Karachi in March 1974.
“My only daughter has been insane since she was forced by her savage
tormentors to watch the brutal murder of her husband “, said Mukhtar
Ahmed Khan, 43, while giving an account of his suffering during the Ides
of March 1971 in Dacca. Repatriated to Karachi in January 1974, he said:
“We lived in a rented house in Abdul Aziz Lane in Dacca. I was in
business and we had prospered. I had married my daughter to a
promising young man.
“In the third week of March 1971, a gang of armed Bengali rebels raided
the house of my son-in-law and overpowered him. He was a courageous
young man and he resisted the attackers. My daughter also resisted the
attackers but they were far too many and they were well-armed. They tied
up my son-in-law and my daughter with ropes and they forced her to
watch as they slit the throat of her husband and ripped his stomach open