Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
166
wailing women and crying children. There was no water, no food. I tore a part of
my sari and my suckling son lay on it. I begged a Bengali attendant in the
Mosque to get us some water; he obliged. For two days we had no food. On the
third day, the Imam (priest) of the Mosque gave us some food to eat. Although a
Bengai he was an angel to us. I was harried day and night by the fear that the
killers had perhaps killed my eldest son. On the fourth day, my prayers for his
safety were answered when he joined us in the Mosque. A Bengali neighbour, he
said, had taken pity on him and smuggled him into the Mosque. On April 21, the
Pakistan.
Army occupied Mymensingh and rescued us. It took many days to bury the
rotting dead bodies of slain non-Bengalis. I went back to my house to look for the
dead body of my husband; there was no trace of it. Deep and large bloodstains
on the floor were reminders of his gruesome murder. The Pakistan Army moved
us to a Relief Camp in Dacca where we lived in peace. On December 17, 1971 our
travail began afresh when the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini seized East
Pakistan. We had become so inured to torture and misery that we were prepared
for the worst; we had only our bare bodies to lose. In March, 1974, my three
children aud I were flown to Karachi from Dacca “.
Fifty-year-old Qamrunnissa, whose husband, Mohammed Qasim and her eldest
son, were killed by the insurgents late in March 1971, in Shankipara in
Mymensingh, broke down in sobs as she gave an account of her woes:
“It was the last week of March 1971. Our hearts were chilled by rumours that the
Awami Leaguers and the rebel soldiers were planning the massacre of all the
Urdu-speaking people in Mymensingh. In some localities, killings of non-
Bengalis had taken place. Every day, processionists, shouting “Joi Bangla “ and
armed with lethal weapons, used to parade in the non-Bengali localities. In the
evening, some Bengali boys knocked at our door and asked to see my husband.
He opened the door and a group of armed men burst in. At the point of a gun,
they ordered my husband and my grown-up son to go with them. I appealed to
them for mercy and to spare the lives of my dear ones but they were heartless
brutes. I never saw my husband and my son again; the killers murdered them.
Poking a bayonet in my arm, they double-marched me to a nearby school where
hundreds of crying women and children were held in captivity. On the way, we
had seen the blood-soaked dead bodies of their unfortunate husbands and
fathers, lying on the roads and the wayside. I saw one of our captors touching
with a burning cigarette a dead body which he thought showed signs of lifc. He
was dead as a doornail. The next day, the women and children, who were lodged
in the school for the night, were marched to a big mosque where hundreds of
other widows and orphans, bemoaning the recent loss of their male kith and kin,
were interned. The Bengali imam (priest) of the Mosque was kind and helpful,