Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
24
morning of March 25 and asked my brother to arrange to give my captors
Rs. 3,000 within 24 hours. The deadline set by the Bengali captors for the
receipt of money was the morning of March 26. But God was merciful and
late in the night of March 25, the Army went into action against the rebels
in Dacca and they were routed in the Jagannath Hall encounter. We were
rescued by the federal troops“.
“I am the lone survivor of a group of ten Pathans who were employed as
Security Guards by the Delta Construction Company in the Mohakhali
locality in Dacca; all the others were slaughtered by the Bengali rebels in
the night of March 25, 1971 “, said 40-year-old Bacha Khan. He said he
escaped death by climbing a tree in the darkness of the night.
Repatriated to Karachi from Dacca in September 1973, Bacha Khan said:
“I was one of a group of ten Pathans employed by the Delta Construction
Company in Dacca. We lived in the staff quarters in the Company’s
premises. Since the first week of March, the Awami League militants and
young thugs were intimidating non-Bengalis, particularly the West
Pakistanis. So all of us were on the alert.
“On March 25, a killer gang of Bengali rebels raided our staff quarters. As
it was a surprise attack, they succeeded in killing three Pathan guards. I
and the other surviving Pathans decided to put up a fight with the three
guns we had. We held the raiders at bay for some time but they had more
ammunition than we had. Taking advantage of the darkness all around, I
slipped away from the scene and climbed a tree. The next morning I saw
the dead bodies of the six other Pathans whom the rebels had killed at
night after their ammunition was exhausted. The rebels took away our
guns. “
“The rebels burnt my hut and killed my nine-year-old son on March 17,
1971 “, said 36-year-old Chand Meah who was employed in the Bengal
Rubber Industries in Dacca. He lived in a hut in the Nakhalpara locality in
the Tejgaon suburb on the way to the Dacca Airport. Chand Meah was
repatriated to Karachi from Dacca in January 1974. He said: “Nakhalpara
was very near the factory where I worked. I had saved some money and
bought a small plot of land in this locality. I had erected a hut because I
could not just then afford to build a pucca house. My wife, my 9 year-old
son and I lived in it. Our relations with our Bengali neighbours were
friendly. Since the first week of March, an element of tension had crept in
because of inflammatory harangues by Awami League demagogues and
there were rumours that there would be a carnage of non-Bengalis.