Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
163
“Some unfortunate Biharis sought refuge in a Mosque in the neighbourhood
which was given the nickname of “TheBihari Mosque “ by the Bengalis. A large
gang of armed killers smashed the doors of the Mosque and killed 175 non-
Bengalis right inside this House of God. About 300 non-Bengalis had left their
homes in Shankipara and they took refuge in the building of a primary school.
They had no weapons with them. Early in April, they were liquidated by the
rebels. After the Pakistan Army captured Mymensingh, I buried my four sons in
the graveyard. I visited the nearby Bihari residential localities of Chalisbari,
Chattisbari, Islamabad and Ikya. Except for a few aged stragglers like myself, all
traces of human habitation had vanished from these once populous colonies. The
stench of rotting dead pervaded the entire neighbourhood. Scores of houses had
been burnt and reduced to a shambles. I was told that the insurgents had
kidnapped and raped more than 1,500 Bihari young women from the Shankipara
Colony during the period of their accursed control over Mymensingh. Some
Bihari women had jumped into wells to escape the clutches of their rapists.
“An angel was the Bengali Pesh Imam (Muslim Priest) of the big Mosque near
the Police Station who gave shelter to more than 500 Bihari survivors of the
carnage in Shankipara. He pleaded for their lives with the Bengali mutineers
who were after their blood. With the help of a Bengali Moazzin (the man who
calls Muslims to prayers), the Pesh Imsm collected boiled rice from God-fearing
Bengalis in other localities and fed the terror-stricken non-Bengali men, women
and children in the Mosque. The Awami League hoodlums were planning his
murder but the timely arrival of the Pakistan Army on April 21 saved him and
the Biharis sheltered in the Mosque. As a rickshaw driver, I knew the
Cantonment very well and had some Punjabi and Pathan friends amongst the
soldiers stationed there, before the March killing of non-Bengalis. When I visited
it three days after it had been re-occupied by the Pakistan Army, I learnt of the
terrible massacre of the non-Bengali military personnel and their families by the
rebels of the East Bengal Regiment in a midnight swoop on the Cantonment on
March 26/27. There was no trace of my West Pakistani soldier friends. I came to
Karachi in February 1974. “
Anwar Hussain, 31, who was employed in a trading firm in Mymensingh, and
whose life was saved by a Bengali friend, said:
“On March 24, 1971, the Awami League took out a large procession in
Mymensingh. They yelled slogans against the non-Bengalis. Many of the
processionists were armed with rifles, spears, axes, daggers and staves. My local
Bengali friends told me that quite a few amongst the processionists were not the
inhabitants of Mymensingh. The procession passed through my locality and
shouted slogans against the Biharis. The Awami League militants, who were
leading the procession, announced through a megaphone that all the non-