Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
56
“I am a Bengali by birth, having been born in Faridpur. My husband, Shahid Ali,
hailed from Lucknow in India and I liked him and we were married. He was a
gentle person who loved Chittagong and respected our Bengali friends.
“In a raid on our house in the Shershah Colony in the third week of March 1971,
the killer gang murdered my husband. I begged them to spare his life and even
fell at their feet. But they were mad thugs who were out for a kill. Amongst the
raiders were some Hindus whose hatred of the non-Bengalis was intense
“If the Government had swiftly crushed the violence and terror unleashed by
the Awami League militants in the first week of March 1971, the trouble may
nave been nipped in the bud. By giving the long rope to the rebels, the
Government emboldened them and they got ample time to plan and execute
their Operation “Loot, Burn and Kill “ against the non-Bengalis in Chittagong
.
“Amongst the thousands massacred in Chittagong in March, 1971, were many
Bengalis who were loyal to Pakistan. Some Bengalis, who protected non-Bengalis,
were also killed by the rebels.
“My four children are my late husband’s legacy to me. I am in Pakistan with
them because they are born Pakistanis. “
Mrs. Rahima Abbasi, 40, who worked as a teacher in the Lions’ School in
Chittagong, gave this account of the raid on her school on March 21, 1971:
“We lived in our own house on M. A. Jinnah Road. My husband was in business
and I worked as a teacher in the Lions’ School which was an English medium
school. We had students from Bengali and non-Bengali middle class families.
“On March 21, a violent mob of Bengalis, led by Awami League militants, raided
our school. They injured the School’s Chowkidar (Watchman) who had closed
the front gate. As a Bengali, he appealed to them not to cause a disturbance in the
school. One of the attackers shot him in the leg and he collapsed. The vicious
crowd then swarmed into our office and the classrooms. They molested the
female teachers and students. When we realised that they had plans to kidnap
our girls, we raised a hue and cry and our screams for help attracted the
neighbours. About 50 of them, led by a prominent pro-Pakistan Bengali leader of
our locality, came to our rescue and grappled with the raiders. In the fight that
ensued, three of the raiders were killed and the others escaped. No one amongst
the teachers and the students was injured. The school was closed for some days
after this incident. “
Mrs. Abbasi, her husband and their children were repatriated to Karachi from
Chittagong in March 1974.