Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
98
CHAPTER EIGHT
Carnage in Parbatipur
“March 1971 was like a typhoon of fire and death for thousands of innocent non-
Bengali men, women and children in Parbatipur, “ said 42- year-old Azizullah
Ansari, a school teacher, who lost his wife and two children in the massacre.
Ansari, who taught in the Model High School in Parbatipur, said that before the
March 1971 carnage in his town, it was utterly unthinkable for him that the non-
Bengalis would be the victims of such brutality. He lived in Dacca for a year after
this tragedy in his life and was repatriated to Karachi in December 1973. He
testified:
“The Awami Leaguers had started terrorising the non-Bengalis in Parbatipur
since the early days of March 1971. As many non-Bengalis were employed in the
Railway establishment at Parbatipur, they and their families, who lived in the
Railway Colony, were one of the main targets of harassment by the rebels. Non-
Bengalis who lived in clusters of houses in other localities of the town were also
terrorised by armed Bengali miscreants.
“In the last week of March 1971— I think it was the 22nd of the month— armed
Awami League volunteers and the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles ran amok
and unleashed an orgy of murder, arson, loot and rape on the non-Bengalis. We
closed the school before the scheduled time and the children, mostly Bengalis,
left for their homes. I heard from an attendant in the school that a killer mob had
gone towards my locality and I ran in the direction of my house. There were a
dozen non-Bengali houses in my vicinity. As I neared my house, I saw it aflame.
Some other houses were also burning. Unmindful of the flames, I entered it. My
world collapsed when I saw the burnt bodies of my wife and my two little
children; they were lifeless. I pulled them outside, hoping to revive them. They
were dead as scorched mutton. I cried over my loved ones all through the night; I
was nearly insane. The fire had subsided and one of the two rooms was intact. I
put the bodies of my wife and my two children under a partly burnt mattress in
the room; their burial just then was out of the question; the killers would have
got me. I lived inside this grave of a house for more than a week until the federal
troops arrived and rescued me. A part of me is still in Parbatipur — my wife and
children who lie buried in a graveyard there. “
Eye-witnesses of the carnage in Parbatipur estimate that about 3,000 non-
Bengalis lost their lives in March-April, 1971.