Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
86
their captors for inflicting a swift death on them, instead of torturing them, still
echo in my cars.
“Our Bengali captors dumped us in a cluster of huts in the village of Baraul. At
night, they fell upon us like vultures. Some women who resisted their violaters
were shot “to teach a lesson to the others. “ Their bodies were mutilated; their
breasts were slashed off and
“Joi Bangla “ was carved with knives on their
lifeless foreheads. On April 10, a unit of the Pakistan Army captured the village
and rescued us. “
Noor Jahan was shifted to Dacca in mid-1971 and accommodated in a Relief
Camp there. In January 1974, she was repatriated to Karachi.
Twenty-year-old Sakina Bibi, whose husband, Abdus Shakoor, was done to
death by the Bengali rebels in a raid on her house in Neelmati in Dinajpur on
March 22, 1971, gave this grisly account of her plight:
“The non-Bengalis in our locality lived in hutments. A killer mob of Bengali
rebels attacked our locality at night; they burnt the shacks and looted every
article of value in our homes. In less than half an hour, they gunned to death all
the non-Bengali male adults in our locality. They wounded my husband with a
scythe and then shot him. “
“After killing all the non-Bengali men, they lined up about four hundred
sorrowing non-Bengali women and, at gunpoint, stripped off their Saris. I
wanted to throttle myself when one of our tormentors, brandishing a scythe in
my face, tore off my clothes. With guns ready to shoot, they forced us to parade
in the nude. A few women, who tried to escape, were mowed down by the
gunmen. In this march of the naked women, I spotted the wife of my brother.
She said the killers had done him to death; they had also killed her little son. We
walked five miles to Narkuldanga. By the time we reached this place, not more
than 150 captive women were left. A few were shot; many were taken away by
the other rebels on the way as their share of the loot. One of them was my sister-
in-law; she was young and pretty. I never saw her again.
“Our Bengali captors detained us in six huts. For the first three days, we had not
a morsel of food. We lived on water and wild fruits picked from the trees. All
through the period of our captivity, the hapless captive women were subjected to
multiple rapes. Six teenage girls who tried to escape were shot. On April 10,
when the Pakistani troops routed the rebels, the retreating Bengalis tried to
slaughter all of us but we were rescued in the nick of time. “