Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
40
Hussain, 38, who witnessed the massacre of 22 non-Bengali men, women and
children on March 21, 1971, close to a bus stand in Narayanganj. Repatriated to
Karachi in November 1973, Gulzar Hussain reported:
“I was engaged in the Jute Trade in Narayanganj and I lived in a rented
house not far from the commercial hub of the town. Since the first week of
March 1971, the Awami Leaguers were trying to stir up trouble in
Narayanganj and their goal was to wipe out the non-Bengali population.
“On March 21, our Dacca-bound bus was stopped on the way, soon after
it left the heart of the city. I was seated in the front portion of the bus and I
saw that the killer gang had guns, scythes and daggers. The gunmen
raised ‘Joi Bangla’ and anti-Pakistan slogans. The bus driver obeyed their
signal to stop and the thugs motioned to the passengers to get down. A
jingo barked out the order that Bengalis and non-Bengalis should fall into
separate lines. As I spoke Bengali with a perfect Dacca accent and could
easily pass for a Bengali, I joined the Bengali group of passengers. The
killer gang asked us to utter a few sentences in Bengali which we did. I
passed the test and our tormentors instructed the Bengalis to scatter. The
thugs then gunned all the male non-Bengalis. It was a horrible scene. Four
of the gunmen took for their loot two young non-Bengali women and
raped them inside the empty bus. After they had ravished the girls, the
killers shot them and half a dozen other women and children. Some shops,
owned by non-Bengalis in Narayanganj, were looted by riotous mobs on
that day“.
Nasima Khatoon, 25, lived in a rented house in the Pancho Boti locality in
Narayanganj. Her husband, Mohammed Qamrul Hasan, was employed in a
Vegetable Oil manufacturing factory. Repatriated to Karachi in January 1974,
along with her 4 year old orphaned daughter, from a Red Cross Camp in Dacca,
Nasima gave this hair-raising account of her travail in 1971:
“Since March 3, there was tension in Narayanganj. The Awami Leaguers
were inciting the Bengali labourers to kill the non Bengalis. In the night of
March 25, a Bengali mob, led by Awami League militants, tried to loot the
houses of non-Bengalis in our locality but the cowards melted away when
the news of the Army’s action against the rebels reached them.
“On December 16, when the surrender decision of the Pakistan Army in
Dacca to the Indian Army was announced, violent crowds of Bengali
militants went on the rampage against the non-Bengalis in Narayanganj.
A killer gang attacked my house and stole all my ornaments, my clothes,
crockery and the furniture. The thugs did not spare even the kitchenware