Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
100
Another survivor of the March 1971 butchery in Parbatipur is Maimunnissa, 40,
who said:
“My husband, Shajiuddin, had retired from Railway service. He and I and our
grown up son lived in our own house in a crowded locality in Parbatipur. In the
last week of March 1971, a large gang of armed Bengali militants raided our
house and looted it. My husband and my son were luckily out of town. The
attackers asked me to leave the house and they burnt it. Utterly helpless, I
watched my house burn. A neighbour sheltered me. After the federal army re-
established its control over Parbatipur, my husband and my son returned to our
burnt home. In the middle of April, we rebuilt our house and we again lived in it.
My son, Mohammed Ali, joined the Pakistan Army and he was posted in a
border area. We were very proud of him.
“On December 17, 1971, after the surrender of the Pakistani troops to India in
Dacca, armed gangs of Bengali killers were again on the rampage in Parbatipur.
We decided to escape to Saidpur where we had some relatives. My husband put
me in a train bound for Saidpur in the evening of December 17. He said he
would come the next day. A former Railway colleague of his, a Bengali, had
promised to shelter him for the night in his house. The next day, I learnt from an
old friend of his at Saidpur Railway station that a killer mob had caught my
husband in the vicinity of the Parbatipur Railway Station and hacked him to
death. I lived in Saidpur in abject poverty and suffering for two years. I wrote to
the Red Cross about my son in the Army. To this day, I have no news of him. I
was repatriated to Karachi in February 1974 “.
Fifty-year-old Sitara Bano, whose husband. Abdul Qadir, owned a provision
store in Parbatipur, testified:
“In the March 1971 massacre in Parbatipur, my husband, my son, my teenage
daughter and I escaped from the town just before a raid on our locality. My
husband’s shop was looted; our house was burnt. We returned to the town after
the federal army regained control over it. We rebuilt our shop and our house; my
son got a clerical job in a firm. But on December 17, 1971 when the surrender of
the Pakistan Army in Dacca to the Indian Army was announced, the Mukti
Bahini supporters and other Awami Leaguers began the slaughter of the non-
Bengalis and pro-Pakistan Bengalis. In the evening, I learnt that my husband and
my son were butchered by a killer mob. My daughter and I left that very evening
for Saidpur. We took up employment in a Bengali home. But we lived haunted
lives because almost every week there were rumours that the Mukti Bahini
would kill all the surviving non-Bengali women and children. My daughter was
married in 1972 and is some where in East Pakistan. I was repatriated to Karachi
from Saidpur via Dacca in January 1974.