Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
50
“The scenes of that dreadful month are scared in my memory. Whole groups of
adult people, it seemed, had gone mad with the urge to kill, burn, loot and rape.
All the victims of this bloodlust were non-Bengalis. Some pro-Pakistan Bengalis,
who tried to save their non-Bengali friends, were severely punished and even
done to death“, said Noor Mohammad.
Forty-year-old Sharifan, whose two adult sons and husband were slaughtered
before her dazed eyes on March 3, 1971, had this painful memory:
“My husband, Shamsul Haque, who was employed in a trading firm in
Chittagong, my two grown-up sons and I lived in a hut in the Latifabad locality
in Chittagong. On March 3, a violent mob of Bengalis attacked the non-Bengali
hutments and houses in our locality. They set hundreds of huts and houses
ablaze. They either shot the non-Bengali men or took them away in trucks as
captives. Some non-Bengalis, who tried to escape from their burning houses,
were mowed with rifle-fire; many perished in the conflagration.“
“A killer gang looted my hut and then set it ablaze. As we ran out, one of the
killers opened fire on us. My two sons were injured. My husband and I were
utterly helpless; I tore my Sari to bandage their wounds but in about ten minutes’
time they were cold and dead. Wailing in anguish, we sought shelter in the
mosque nearby. My husband, who was heart-broken, kneeled in prayer to the
Almighty God. I washed the stains of my sons’ blood from my torn Sari. Just
then there was a loud yelling and a killer mob swarmed into the mosque. They
said they would kill all the non-Bengali men sheltered in the mosque. I fell on my
knees and begged them to spare our menfolk as most of them were advanced in
age. One of the attackers struck me with his boot. There was a rifle shot and, to
my horror, I saw my loving husband falling to the ground as blood gushed from
his chest. I fainted and remained unconscious for some hours.
“The women in the mosque, whose dear ones had been shot and killed, moved
their dead bodies to a corner in the compound of the mosque, made sheets from
their Saris and covered up the corpses. We had no axe or shovel with which we
could dig graves for our dead. We lived in the mosque in tears, fear and terror
for more than three weeks. Late in March, the federal troops lodged us in a Relief
Camp in a school building. After the Indian occupation of East Pakistan in
December 1971, the Mukti Bahini harassed us but the Red Cross saved and
helped us. We were repatriated to Karachi in February 1974 “.
Syed Sami Ahmed, 37, the lone survivor of a family of eight members, gave this
grisly description of the slaughter in the Halishahar locality in Chittagong on
March 23, 1971: