Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
149
It took many days before all the rotting dead bodies were interred in mass graves.
The rebels had thrown many scores of wounded men into blazing houses; their
charred skeletons were discovered after the federal troops cleared the rubble.
Bashir Ahmed, 31, who owned a shop in the Mujgunni locality of Narail and
who escaped death because of his excellent command of Bengali language, gave
this account of the March 1971 tragedy after he was repatriated to Karachi in
January, 1974:
“I had lived for many years in Jessore. After the death of my father, my wife and
my in-laws persuaded me to shift to Narail. I spoke Bengali so well that I easily
passed for a genuine Bengali. I owned a small shop in the Mujganni locality. I
had friendly relations with my non-Bengali as well as Bengali neighbours. In the
third week of March, Narail came under the grip of tension and the non-Bengalis
felt panicky. On March 26, I went to the main Bazar and consulted a Bengali
friend who owned a bicycle shop. He told me that the Awami leaguers and some
Bengali Hindus were spreading rumours against the non-Bengalis and were
inciting the Bengalis to kill them. He suspected that Indian agents had infiltrated
into Narail from West Bengal in India. He advised me to shift my family for a
few days to the house of a common Bengali friend on the outworks of Narail. I
acted on his advice.
“On March 29, on the way to my house, I saw a frenzied Bengali mob lynching
two non-Bengali young men. They clouted their victims with spears and iron
bars and hacked them to death. Another mob of heavily armed Bengalis, some
blazing away their guns to strike fear, attacked the houses of the non-Bengalis en
masse. They mistook me for a Bengali and I escaped to the hideout in my Bengali
friend’s home. That night, the bulk of the population of non-Bengalis in my
locality was wiped out and their houses were looted and burnt. “
Abdul Sattar, 26, who, along with his wife and two children, survived the March
1971 butchery in Narail was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in January 1974.
He gave the following account of his dramatic escape and of the killings in Narail:
“I was employed in a commercial firm in Narail. We lived in the Sonadanga
locality of the town. In the middle of March 1971, my wife and my two children
went to participate in the wedding of a relative in neighbouring Jessore. In the
absence of my family, I used to eat at the house of a very dear Bengali friend.
“Around March 28, my Bengali friend rushed to my house at night and
implored me to shift to his home at once because the rebels from the East
Pakistan Rifles and the armed Awami League militants had decided to murder
all the non-Bengalis. I accompanied him to his house and lived with him until the
federal army liberated Narail. When I went back to my house, it was a burnt out