Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
6
very hard for me to believe that any Bengali would indulge in the savagery
which my informants from Chittagong attributed to the Awami League militants
such as M. R. Siddiki, a high-ranking member of the party’s hierarchy. I counted
amongst my esteemed Bengali friends his illustrious father-in-law, Mr. Abul
Kasem Khan, a former federal Minister and legislator, and was impressed by his
sartorial perfection and his amiable manners. As I browsed last month in the
heaps of harrowing eye-witness accounts from Chittagong of the rebels’ savagery
in March 2971, I became aware of the reasons which made the non-Bengali
victims nickname M. R. Siddiki as the “Butcher of Chittagong “. He gave a new
dimension of cold-blooded violence to the Awami League’s terror apparatus.
In the third week of April, the federal Information Ministry (whose Bengali head
had been replaced by a West Pakistani) requested me to proceed post haste to the
United States on deputation to the Embassy of Pakistan in Washington D. C. and
to project before the American public the rationale for the federal military
intervention in East Pakistan. India’s well-organized propaganda machinery and
the liberally-financed India Lobby in the United States were working in top gear
to malign Pakistan and to smear the name of the Pakistan Army by purveying
yarns of its alleged brutality in East Pakistan.
Pakistan’s Public Relations difficulties in the United States were compounded by
the unremitting hostility of the American press correspondent who were
bundled out of Dacca on March 26. When I spoke to a friendly Senator at Capitol
Hill about the massive burst of violence let loose all over East Pakistan by the
Awami Leaguers on West Pakistanis, Biharis and other non-Bengalis during the
murderous month of March 1971 and told him that more than 100,000 non-
Bengalis had perished in this dreadful carnage, he looked at me in disbelief,
“Why was not the massacre reported in the press in March?“ was his logical
query.
Late in April, 1971, the Pakistan Embassy in Washington published a booklet
containing a chronology of the federal intervention in East Pakistan. It
highlighted the Awami League’s pogrom against West Pakistanis, Biharis and
other non-Bengalis which was waged in March 1971. The immediate impact of its
mass
distribution
in
the
United
States
was
that
many
legislators
and
academicians sought information from the Embassy about the genesis of the
word Bihari and the ethnic background of the Biharis.
On May 6, 1971, a group of six foreign correspondents representing the New
York Times, Reuters, Associated Press of America, TIME Magazine, the Financial
Times of London and the New China News Agency (Xinhua) flew to Dacca and
made a fairly comprehensive tour of the rebellion-damaged areas of the province.
Their uncensored despatches from East Pakistan spoke of the widespread killing