Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
45
In a pre-emptive strike late in the night of March 25 in Dacca and other
important towns in East Pakistan, the federal troops went into action against the
rebels. But the federal military force in the province was too inadequate to
contain swiftly the challenge and revolt of the more than 176,000 armed Bengali
rebels. At many places, it took from a week to a month for the federal army to
retrieve the rebel-controlled areas. In Chittagong, the federal troops regained
control over strategic parts of the city, such as the Port and the Airport, swiftly
but a large number of residential localities remained under the terror rule of the
rebel gunmen till April 9, 1971. In this period of hell and fire, many more
thousands
of
non-Bengalis
were
butchered
en
masse.
The
operational
headquarter of the rebels was located at the East Bengal Regimental Centre in
Chittagong and the principal human abattoir was housed in the main town office
of the Awami League. It had torture cells and a chamber of horror where blood
was drained through syringes from the bodies of non-Bengali victims before they
were killed by their inhuman captors.
The killing of the non-Bengali employees and their families in the Usmania Glass
Works, Hafiz Jute Mill, Ispahani Jute Mill and other factories in Chittagong and
the Amin Jute Mills at Bibirhat and the Karnaphuli Paper and Rayon Mills at
Chandraghona and its neighbourhood surpassed the savagery of the Huns. Most
of the massacres at these places were conducted by the rebels in the last five days
of March and some early in April 1971. In many localities, there were hardly any
non-Bengali survivors—so thorough and complete was the racist pogrom of the
rebels.
In the notorious slaughter-house in the Government Rest House in Chittagong,
about 4,000 non-Bengalis were done to death. Blood was taken out of their bodies
and corneas were extracted from their eyes by Bengali doctors who had become
the tools of the rebels. The corpses were dumped in hurriedly-dug, shallow pits.
Any victim who showed signs of life was shot in the skull.
The Awami League militants had compelled some Bengali Imams (priests) in the
Mosques to decree the killing of the Biharis as a religious duty of the Bengali
Muslims. In a mosque, near the office of the Chittagong Fire Brigade, half a
dozen non-Bengalis, who had been kidnapped from their homes by killer gangs,
were murdered.
In the Kalurghat industrial area, some 5,000 non-Bengalis, including 300 women,
were butchered by the Bengali rebels. Not more than a score of non-Bengalis
survived the Kalurghat massacre. The non-Bengali women were raped by their
captors — some on the roads in broad daylight—before being shot.