Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
156
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
Destruction in Barisal
The Awami League’s rebellion had injected a severe strain in the relations
between Bengalis and non-Bengalis in many parts of the Barisal District from the
second week of March 1971. The proliferation of baseless rumours that the
Bengalis in West Pakistan were being killed and that the Pakistan Army had
massacred Bengalis in Dacca was one of the weapons used by the Awami League
activists for inciting the Bengali population to violence against the West
Pakistanis and other non-Bengalis. In the beginning, there were stray incidents of
violence against the non-Bengalis but in the fourth week of March there was a
forest-fire of arson, loot and murder in Barisal town and in other parts of the
district. The death toll in this genocidal epidemic was in excess of 15,000.
Ahmed Alam, 23, who was repatriated to Karachi in October 1973 from Dacca,
lived in Barisal all through the period of turmoil. He gave a vivid account of the
extermination of some sixty non-Bengali families in the vicinity of the Barisal
Steamer Jetty in the night of March 25, 1971:
“The Awami League militants of the area invited the non-Bengali residents of
this locality to attend a meeting of the local Peace Committee and assured them
that their families would be protected. The meeting was held at about 9 o’clock in
the night. All of a sudden, the Awami League militants, who carried weapons,
pounced on the non-Bengalis in the meeting and killed many on the spot. Some
non-Bengali; escaped the dragnet and ran to their huts to take their families to
safety.
“Just before midnight, a frenzied mob of Awami Leaguers, police rebels and
hoodlums attacked the non-Bengali colony and burnt dozens of houses. They
murdered almost all the adult males, kidnapped some fifty women and raped
many of them. The federal troops, who reached the site after some days,
recovered 112 dead bodies from the rubble of the burnt out non-Bengali colony.
Many bodies of strangled women were discovered in a pond. No trace of other
kidnapped non-Bengali women could be found. The survivors of this pogrom
numbered barely a dozen. “
Twenty-seven-year-old Farzana Khatoon, whose husband was employed in the
Postal Department in the Ferozepur sub-division of Barisal district, narrated the