Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
180
with them the loot which they had collected from the homes of non-Bengalis and
the Government Treasury. The federal troops conducted the mass burial of
hundreds of rotting dead bodies of non-Bengalis who were murdered by the
Bengali insurgents in March 1971. Indian propagandists and Awami League
fibsters, who were ensconced in India, duped the world by fabricating the yarn
that these graves were of Bengalis killed by the federal troops. Comilla was the
headquarters of the 9th Division of the Pakistan Army; its officers and men were
disciplined soldiers who had instructions not to shoot unless they were shot at.
Many of the Bengali rebels, who had plundered and killed the non-Bengalis in
Comilla, retreated to Feni. An Army brigade, sent from Comilla, mopped up the
insurgents at Feni. Some escaped with their weapons, across the border, to India.
Witnesses from Comilla said that the Awami League rebels had occupied the
Comilla Telephone Exchange on March 3, 1971 and snapped Comilla telephone
links with the rest of the province. The same day, a train from Bhairab to
Laksham was stopped by a mob at Comilla and the rebels tried to burn it but the
presence of mind and courage of the Railway staff on duty saved it from disaster.
Some 300 prisoners lodged in the Jail in Comilla town tried to escape on March
12 and loyal prison guards opened fire on them to prevent the jail-break. An
armed mob raided a field unit of the Pakistan Army at Feni, near Comilla, but
the troops repulsed the attack.
In the middle of March 1971, rioting spread to a number of tea gardens in the
Comilla district. Incited by the Awami League militants, many Bengali labourers
in the tea gardens attacked the West Pakistani, Bihari and other non-Bengali staff
and their families.
An Awami League gang burnt Pakistan’s national flag at Shamshernagar on
March 13. A section of the police, which was loyal until then, arrested the
culprits. The Aawmi League leaders tried to smash their way into the prison to
free the detained men.
AKHAURA
Heavy loss of non-Bengali lives was reported from Akhaura, an important
railway station. In the last week of March 1971, a killer gang raided the Railway
station and the quarters of the non-Bengali employees and slaughtered a number
of non-Bengali men. One of the non-Bengalis killed by the Awami League
militants and rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles was the Station Master of
Akhaura, Mr. Laiq Akhtar who had kept the Railway station functioning all
through the troubled month of March 1971. Witnesses said they had heard that
the Station Master had courageously resisted the attackers and put up a brave
fight. The Awami League rebels also murdered a number of well-to-do non-
Bengali businessmen in Akhaura. The rebels kidnapped many non-Bengali girls