Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
109
Raj Bibi, 30, whose husband, Noor Khan, was a car driver in the Mohni Mill in
Kushtia, gave this sad account of his slaying by the Bengali rebels early in April
1971:
“On March 23, 1971, the Bengali rebels, who carried rifles and machine guns,
raided non-Bengali houses in the Arwapara locality near the Mohni Mill in
Kushtia. We lived in a rented house in this locality. The raiders ordered the non-
Bengalis to surrender their firearms which many of them did. Some non-Bengalis,
we learnt, were accused of storing firearms and they were clapped in a jail. Many
reports of the belabouring of non-Bengalis on the roads were received by us.
“On March 30, 1971, a band of Bengali rebels broke into our house. My husband
had slipped out of the backdoor into the paddy fields, but my brother, who was
well-built, fought the six attackers with amazing courage. My aged mother, who
ran to the resale of my bleeding brother, was struck on the head by a rebel with
his stave. She fell down and fainted. Blood gushed from her skull. In a burst of
wailing, I ran to the side of my mother. In the mean time, my brother injured
some of the attackers and escaped in the fields. For four days, my mother and I
lived in fear in our looted house. On April 4, a killer gang raided our area and
ordered sixty non-Bengalis to go with them to do forced labour. When they
refused and resisted their tormentors, a dozen armed rebel soldiers liquidated
them with machine guns. My husband and my brother returned to our house
within hours of the arrival of the Pakistan Army on April 16. My brother’s
wounds festered and despite medical treatment in hospital he died after a few
days. “
Raj Bibi’s mother was killed in the Indian bombing of Kushtia in the second week
of December 1971. The Mukti Bahini jailed her husband early in 1972 along with
many other Biharis and they were liquidated by their Bengali captors. In
February 1974, Raj Bibi was repatriated, along with her three-year-old daughter,
to Karachi.
Rasoolan, 40, whose husband, Mohammed Shakoor, was jailed and killed by the
rebels early in April 1971, said:
“In the last week of March 1971, armed bands of Awami Leaguers and rebel
Bengali soldiers raided non-Bengali houses in our locality and drove away
hundreds of non-Bengali men to the Kushtia jail. In a raid on my house, they
grabbed my husband, who was employed in the Telegraph Department, and
took him away. One of the raiders said he would be lodged in the jail. My aged
mother, my two children and I begged the raiders to spare my husband’s life but
they were brutes.