Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
162
was delirious; I raved day and night. The women wailed and the children cried
with hunger and thirst. Some women and children died; there were hardly any
teenage girls left; the thugs had kidnapped them for lust. On the fourth day of
our incarceration, a contingent of the Pakistan Army rescued us. I was taken to a
Relief Camp in Dacca from where I was taken by my father to his home in
Chittagong. I was repatriated from Chittagong to Karachi in February 1971. “
Sixty-year-old Sheikh Habibullah, who owned and drove an auto-rickshaw
(pedicab) and lived in House No. 14 on Daulatmunshi Road in the Kishtopur
locality in Shankipara in Mymensingh, broke down in sobs when he narrated in
Karachi, in February 1974, the slaughter of his four grown-up sons by the Awami
League militants late in March 1971. He said he and his sons spoke Bengali
exceedingly well but they were dubbed as Biharis because he had migrated from
the Indian State of Bihar to East Pakistan shortly after Partition in August 1947,
(He had forgotten the Urdu script and he signed his testimony for this book in
Bengali). Nervous and haggard, Habibullah said:
“Tension gripped Mymensingh town in mid-March, 1971. The non-Bengali
population was subjected to intimidation and insults and there were rumours
that the Awami League militants would attack them with the arms they had
looted from the police armoury and also smuggled from India. The first raid by
the Awami League hoodlums on the Bihari-inhabited Shankipara colony took
place on March 23. All through the last week of March and the first half of April,
armed gangs of Awami Leaguers and rebel Bengali soldiers looted and burnt the
homes of non-Bengalis and murdered them by the thousands. Early in April, a
yelling mob of 50 armed rebels broke into my house. My grown-up sons,
Sanaullah, Shafi Ahmed, Ali Ahmed and Ali Akhtcr, resisted the attackers but
they had no weapons to defend themselves. I lunged at one of the gunmen who
had raised his gun to kill my eldest son. He struck me on the head and I
collapsed. Just before I lost consciousness, there was a burst of machine gunfire
and my four sons fell down in a pool of blood. I saw the crying wives of
Sanaullah and Shafi Ahmed rushing into the room where their husbands were
being butchered. I passed out and the killers thought I was dead. The next
morning when I regained consciousness, I saw the dead bodies of my four sons; I
was nearly mad. I kissed their blood-spattered faces; I looked for their heartbeats;
they were lifeless. There was no trace of my two daughters-in-law. My house
was looted and every valuable was gone. I was too scared to take the dead
bodies of my sons to the graveyard. There was not a soul in the houses in my
neighbourhood; in the distance I heard occasionally the echo of rifle shots and
gunfire. The whine and whimper of dogs was the only sign of life in this ghost
colony; dead bodies littered the rough road near my house.