Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
84
CHAPTER SEVEN
Hell in Dinajpur
The Awami League’s terror machine had swung into action in Dinajpur from the
first week of March 1971. Bengali mass militancy, whipped up by the Awami
League’s demagogues, manifested itself in protest rallies, street violence and
terrorisation of non-Bengalis. The Awami League’s storm troopers paralysed the
local administration and set up their own regime of force and intimidation.
The crescendo of violence gained momentum in the second week of the month
when the Awami League militants, beefed up by the rebels from the East
Pakistan Rifles and encouraged by their initial success in grabbing civil authority,
unleashed death and destruction on the hapless non-Bengalis.
All through the second fortnight of March and the first week of April 1971, the
genocidal liquidation of the non-Bengali population was conducted with
demonic fury. Estimates of the death toll of non-Bengalis in Dinajpur town in a
month of the Awami League’s hellish rule range from 15,000 to 30,000, while in
the district of Dinajpur the non-Bengali death toll was about 100,000. Eye-
witnesses claim that one of the main reasons for this disparity in figures is the
fact that the bodies of thousands of non-Bengalis, slain by their captors in an
open-air human abattoir on the bank of the Kanchan river, were dumped in its
waters. Hundreds of corpses were incinerated in the houses of non-Bengalis
which were put to the torch after their inmates had been decapitated.
On March 22, the Awami Leaguers, brandishing sten guns and rifles, led a
violent procession through the heart of the town, inciting the Bengali populace to
eliminate the non-Bengalis. On March 25, a killer mob burnt a passenger bus,
which was owned by a non-Bengali, on the outskirts of Dinajpur. Its driver and
seven non-Bengali passengers were done to death. The Bengali rebels, on the
same day, burnt a postal service van on the Dinajpur-Saidpur Road, shot its
conductor and wounded its driver. They also ambushed a Pakistan Army jeep
and wounded the five soldiers who were riding in it. The treatment meted out to
thousands of women and children was fiendish and debased. More than 400
non-Bengali young women were kidnapped to India by the retreating rebels.
In the last week of March 1971, the pogrom against the non Bengalis reached its
peak. Violence mushroomed into the sacking and setting afire of all the stores,
businesses and houses owned by non-Bengalis. Yelling, frenzied and roaming
crowds — at times 10,000 strong— held marches and rallies all over the town,
swearing death and destruction of the non-Bengalis and the federal government.
Even at night, the town shook all through the week with bursts of gunfire by the