Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
153
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
Bloodbath in Noapara, Darsona
Noapara, a little town in the Jcssore district, felt the repercussions of the Awami
League’s rebellion in the second week of March 1971. It had a small population
of non-Bengalis; many were employed in the local jute mill or did business with
it. As the owner of the jute mill was a non-Bengali, it became a target of the
homicidal frenzy of the Bengali rebels.
Twenty-nine-year-old Sheikh Aziz, who was employed as a Security Guard in
the Jute Mill, witnessed the massacre of the non-Bengali staff and their families in
the Mill area on March 21, 197I. His uncle was butchered but his wife and
children were spared. He made a dramatic escape with them to Dacca from
where he brought them to Karachi via Nepal in March 1973. His narrative runs
as follows:
“I was one of the six non-Bengali Security Guards in the Carpeting Jute Mill in
Noapara. The other 13 Security Guards were Bengalis. The Chief Security Officer
was a gentle-hearted and God-fearing non-Bengali, Mr. Farid Ahmed. His wife
was a Bengali. He had given employment in the mill to a number of Bengali
young men.
“On March 21, a gang of armed Awami League militants stormed the Jute mill.
They enlisted the support of some of the Bengali millhands who had a
propensity for agitation and strikes. The first victim of their insane fury was the
Security Officer, Farid Ahmed. They belaboured him in his office; they dragged
him to the lawn in the Mill. They clubbed him with staves; they hit him with iron
bars. A Bengali security guard, whom he had employed some years ago, shot
him dead. As the killers had seized control of the Mill and locked up the main
gate, there was no escape for the non-Bengali staff which was in imminent
danger of liquidation. The homicidal gang murdered almost all the non-Bengalis
in the mill premises. I hid myself in a store room for two days. My uncle was
amongst those who were slaughtered.
“The killer gang then turned on the families of the non-Bengali staff of the mill
who lived in mud-houses and huts nearby. All the male adults were butchered;
young women were raped and many were kidnapped. My slain uncle’s wife and
two children were miraculously saved and I brought them to Pakistan. “