Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
135
SAIDPUR
“At least 5,000 non-Bengalis perished in the massacre in Saidpur, an important
Railway Centre, in the last week of March I971 “, said Nuruddin Ahmed, 42, an
employee of the East Pakistan Railway at that time.
Nuruddin Ahmed lived in Railway Quarter No. 59/A in Saidpur. Amongst those
killed was his son-in-law. His daughter was kidnapped by the rebels. His
account of the gory events in Saidpur reads:
“In 1947, I had opted for service in Pakistan and was transferred from the
Howrah Railway Station to Chittagong. Later on, I was posted to Saidpur where
I lived for 11 years. I had married my daughter, Shahla to a young Railway
employee and they lived in a separate Railway Quarter.
“On March 25, a large mob of armed Awami League volunteers and rebels from
the East Pakistan Rifles attacked the non-Bengali residential areas in Saidpur,
including those in the Railway Colony. They killed my son-in-law and his
brothers and kidnapped my daughter and her sister-in-law. When the Pakistan
Army re-establishcd its control, I did my best to locate them but to this day I am
unaware of their fate. “
Nuruddin was not in his house on the fateful day when the non-Bengali homes
were attacked and he escaped the massacre. He added:
“After the Pakistan Army re-occupied Saidpur early in April, 1971, the local
Administration set up a Peace Committee to maintain peace and to dissuade the
non-Bengalis from seeking revenge for the massacre conducted by the Bengali
rebels. After India’s military victory in East Pakistan in December 1971, we
underwent woeful suffering and many non-Bengalis were killed by the Mukti
Bahini and their supporters. With great difficulty I succeeded in escaping to
Nepal from where I was repatriated to Karachi in July 1973. “
Another eye-witness from Saidpur, Hasina Begum, whose son was a Railway
employee at Kamlapur Railway Station, reported that on March 25, 1971, her
house was looted by the Bengali rebels when they went on the rampage against
non-Bengalis. Her son escaped the March 1971 killing but late in December 1971,
he was kidnapped by the Mukti Bahini and remained untraced. Hasina, 42, came
to Karachi in December 1973.
Other eye-witnesses reported that a mob of at least 8,000 armed Bengalis staged
the bloodbath of non-Bengalis in Saidpur on March 24-25, 1971. Before starting
the pogrom, the killer mob had blueprinted the plan of slaughter and the houses
of non-Bengalis in Saidpur were marked. Prior to the raid on their homes, every