Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
188
I saw the spectre of death all over the place. I ate wild fruits and slaked my thirst
at night with muddy water from a nearby stream. I was sick. I often heard the
roar of guns and the whining of bullets. Late in April, troops of the Pakistan
Army entered Santahar. They buried the dead body of my father in the
graveyard and sent me to Dacca where I stayed in the Relief Camp at
Mohammedpur. They searched the entire neighbourhood to retrieve my mother
and sister but there was no trace of them. After the Indian Army ard the Mukti
Bahini captured Dacca on December 17, 1971, life again became a torture for me.
I was penniless and I had no relatives and friends. God was my only anchor of
hope and I prayed every night. On January 29, 1974, the United Nations airlift
brought me to Pakistan — to safety and freedom. “
The agony of the past three years was writ large on the face of Shakoor. His
knees trembled as he spoke of the impaling of his father by his killers and the
traumatic days and nights he spent in the graveyard before the Pakistan Army
rescued him.
Twenty-seven-year-old Qamrunnissa, whose husband, Abdul Majid, was killed
by the Bengali insurgents in Santahar in the last week of March 1971, gave the
following account of her agony and suffering:
“In the third week of March, the Awami League activists and their supporters
had set up a so-called Peace Committee in Santahar. In the name of the Peace
Committee, they called upon the non-Bengalis to surrender their firearms and
other weapons. Believing the Awami Leaguers’ assurances of protection, the
non-Bengalis handed over to them whatever weapons they had. On March 25, a
big mob of armed rebels raided our locality. They set fire to some houses; they
fired their guns indiscriminately to frighten us. Some fifty cut-throats, armed
with rifles, daggers, spears and staves, rushed into my house and brutally killed
my husband, my three brothers-in laws, my father-in-law and my teenage
nephew. We begged the killers to spare the lives of our dear ones. I clasped the
dead body of my husband and wailed over it. The brutes hit me with the butt of
a rifle and almost broke my arm. They pulled me by the hair and dragged me
outside the house. My legs were singed and I could hardly walk. At the point of
their blazing guns, they marched me and many other wailirg Bihari and Punjabi
women to the Railway Station. They forced us to hand over to them the
ornaments some of us wore. Many of the girls were raped by their inhuman
captors.
“In the last week of April, I and a few other women escaped from the captivity
of these brutes. My feet were blistered but we succeeded in reaching a cluster of
shady trees on the bank of a river. Our captors launched a search for us but a
squall hit the area and these human hounds could not trace us. The next day our