Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
140
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Inferno in Jessore
Jessore, a cantonment town of strategic importance near the Indian border,
witnessed a bloodbath of thousands of non-Bengalis and some pro-Pakistan
Bengalis between the first week of March and the early days of April 1971. The
killers were the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles and police, armed Awami
League volunteers and Hindu Bengali infiltrators from India.
The strength of the beleaguered West Pakistani troops in the Jessore cantonment
was too inadequate to contain the xenophobic fury and homicidal frenzy of the
rebel soldiers and their Awami League supporters. The first gruesome incident
during this period of gunfire and gore occurred on March 4, 1971 when a train
coming from Khulna was derailed by a gang of saboteurs at Jessore. Scores of
non-Bengali passengers—men, women and children—were pulled out of the
train compartments by armed Bengali militants, looted and done to death. Their
dead bodies were strewn on the rail track. Estimates of the dcath toll of non-
Bengalis in Jessore in a month of the Awami League’s rule of terror range from
12,000 to 20,000.
In the Jhumjhumpur Colony in Jessore, rebel soldiers of the East Pakistan Rifles
killed, maimed or kidnapped more than 5,000 non-Bengalis between March 25
and April 4. Some 500 non-Bengali young women were abducted to India where
many of them were sold to brothel-operators. On March 29 and 30, a cluster of
non-Bengali hutments in the Ramnagar colony was burnt to ashes by the rebel
Bengali soldiers and Awami League hoodlums. More than 150 non-Bengalis,
including some escapees from the neighbouring Jhumjhumpur locality, perished
in the conflagration.
There were very few survivors amongst the 4,500 non-Bengali who lived in the
Taraganj colony after the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles and the Awami
League storm troopers had made it the target of their genocide on March 30. At
least a thousand non-Bengalis were slaughtered by the Bengali rebels between
March 26 and April 5 in the Hamidpur, Ambagaon, Bachachar and Puratan
Qasba localities of Jessore town.
In the neighbouring shanty townships of Mobarakganj, Kaliganj, Kotchandpur
and Tasfidanga, non-Bengali houses were marked for attack in the first fortnight
of March by Awami League militants and the carnage of non-Bengalis were