Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
53
“The killer gang tore off the locked door of our house in the course of their full-
scale raid on our colony in the night of March 23. They machine-gunned my
husband who collapsed with blood streaming from his chest. When the butchers
turned their attention to my three young sons I grappled with the killers and
snatched one of their guns. I did not know how to operate it. Waspishly, a rebel
hit me on the head with his rifle and I fell down. They trussed me up with ropes
and said that they would slaughter my children before me. One by one, they
beheaded my three sons and kicked their severed heads. The killers bayoneted
my little daughter and I fainted in horror. Imprinted on my memory is that
dreadful scene—the terrorised look in the innocent eyes of my pretty little child,
her desperate attempt to run towards me as the sharp gleaming edge of the
bayonet touched her throat and her stifled groan of
“Ami Bachao “ (Mother,
Save me). God will certainly punish those killers; they were not men but beasts. “
Fahmida lived in a Relief Camp in Chittagong and was repatriated to Karachi in
February 1974.
Bashir Hussain, 47, who lived in a small house in Tajpara in the Halishahar
township in Chittagong, lost his two sons in the massacre of non-Bengalis in his
locality on March 25, 1971. He was severely wounded and the killers left him as
dead. But after two days he regained consciousness and has lived to tell the
world of the tragedy in his life. He said in Karachi, after his repatriation from
Chittagong, in February 1974:
“Between March 15 and 26, Halishahar was a special target of attack by the
rebels. They conducted their genocidal operations against the non-Bengalis in
various localities of the township every day, all through this period of fire and
death.
“On March 25, they attacked my house and machine-gunned me and my two
grown-up sons. I lost consciousness as I saw my two loving sons fall to the
ground in a pool of blood. I was hit in the back and the thighs. The federal troops
rescued me on the fifth day and I was treated in a hospital. My two sons were
dead.
“The rebels, to a great extent, succeeded in their goal of exterminating the male
members of non-Bengali families in my locality. They kidnapped non-Bengali
young women by the thousands; many were ravished and some brutally killed. “
Shahid Hussain Abdi, 24, whose father worked as a Stores Officer in the Ispahani
Jute Mills in Chittagong, gave this harrowing account of the massacre of non-
Bengalis in the Mill area and its neighbourhood and the fiendish human abattoir