Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
8
In psychological warfare, the element of time is often of crucial importance,
especially when one is pitted against an unscrupulous enemy with scant regard
for truth and ethics. By August 1971, India had so virulently poisoned a large
segment of public opinion in the West by blatantly magnifying the refugee influx
and blaming the Pakistan Army for this exodus that our White Paper neither set
the record straight nor did it counter the many scores of books and pamphlets
with which India flooded the world to malign Pakistan and its Army.
The federal Information Ministry’s film documentary on the restoration of
normalcy in East Pakistan was a timely effort. Although shot in the second half
of April 1971 and despatched to Pakistan’s overseas missions in May, it was
viewed by small audiences abroad. If adequate funds were available, it could
have been shown on important television networks in the United States by
buying time. It showed the rubble of homes and shopping blocks shot up or put
to the torch by the rebels but it gave very little evidence of the infernal slaughter-
houses and torture chambers set up by the rebels in March 1971 to liquidate
many thousands of their non-Bengali victims. The blood-chilling savagery of the
Awami League’s genocide and the colossal wreckage of human lives it had left in
its trail were not fully exposed.
“The Great Tragedy“, written by Mr. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, Chairman of the
Pakistan People’s Party and published in September 1971, shed revealing light on
the genesis of the East Pakistan crisis, the secessionist ambitions of the Awami
League’s leadership. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s obdurate and uncompromising
stance in the constitutional talks in Dacca in the third week of March 1971 and
the Pakistan People’s Party’s efforts for forging
“a Grand Coalition of the
majority parties of the two Wings“ within the framework of a single, united
Pakistan. Mr. Bhutto’s vindication of the constitutional stand and role of his
Party was forceful and logical. “The Great Tragedy“ deserved global circulation
on a mass scale which, to our loss, was then denied to it.
After my return to Pakistan from the United States late in November 1971, I
spoke to one of the ruling Generals at Islamabad about the urgent need for the
publication and mass distribution of a book based on eyewitness accounts of the
survivors of the Awami League’s holocaust of March-April 1971. I learnt that
some reliable evidence had been collected from eye-witnesses but the Generals
were then too busy with India’s virtual invasion of East Pakistan and the
preparations for a full-scale military showdown with India.
Early in 1972, I met a number of non-Bengali war-displaced persons from East
Pakistan who had taken up abode in shacks in the shanty township of Orangi in
Karachi. I was horrified by the accounts they narrated of their suffering in East