Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
19
Army’s strength in Dacca was adequate to enable it to scotch the Awami
League’s rebellion but in the rest of the province the federal troops were thinly
spread out. It took them from three days to three weeks to rout the more than
176,000 Awami League-led rebels who conducted
“Operation Loot, Kill and
Burn“ with savage ferocity against the non-Bengali element in the population.
Even in some suburbs of Dacca, armed hotheads of the Awami League murdered
non-Bengalis by the hundreds in the night of March 25/26, 1971.
There is evidence to warrant the belief that the Awami League rebels were using
a transmitter in the Indian diplomatic Mission in Dacca for round-the-clock
contact with the Indian authorities who were giving support to the rebels,
especially in the border belt. The “Free Bengal Radio “, which went on the air on
March 26 and which broadcast news of the phantom victories of the rebels, was
undoubtedly an Indian innovation, installed on Indian soil. The Niagra of lies,
which surged across the columns of India’s Press and the air-waves of All India
Radio, (such as the cock-and-bull story of the imaginary slaying of General Tikka
Khan by a Bengali rebel), originated from the fertile imagination of a group of
Indian propagandists and Bengali rebels who operated a psychological warfare
outfit in Calcutta.
Many of the rifles which the federal troops captured from the rebels were
manufactured at the Rifle Factory in Ishapur in India while the ammunition
stocks bore the marking of the ordinance factory at Kirkee in India. India threw
some eight battalions of its Border Security Force in aid of the Awami League
rebels in the last week of March 1971 in vital border areas. In the Nawabganj area
in Dacca, the federal army seized a secret letter from an Awami League leader to
an Indian agent, seeking a meeting across the border to discuss the “supply of
heavy arms“ from India to the Awami League-led rebels.
In Dacca, the rebels burnt a predominantly Bihari settlement of shacks in the Old
city, but the Awami League informants of foreign newsmen told them in the
morning of March 26 that the Army had set the shanty township on fire. In the
twin industrial city of Narayanganj, non-Bengalis, who were kidnapped and
murdered by the rebels, were thrown into the Buriganga river or incinerated in
houses set ablaze.
Peggy Durdin, an American journalist, who, with her husband, also a journalist,
had gone to Dacca to cover the National Assembly’s session scheduled for March
3, gave this account of the mass hysteria whipped up by the Awami League
leadership in the Bengali populace in the city since the beginning of the month in
an article in the New York Times Magazine of May 2, 1971: