Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
93
Khatoon and her three children were repatriated to Pakistan in February 1974.
Khatun said:
“Since March 2, 1971, the Awami League militants and their supporters in
Dinajpur were on the warpath against the non-Bengalis. Some shops and houses
belonging to non-Bengalis were looted. But from March 17, they started
murdering the non-Bengali men and molesting their women. We became so
panicky owing to the militancy of the Awami Leaguers that in the night of March
21, when it was rumoured that our locality would be raided, my husband, Abdul
Ghaffar, my three children and I slipped out of our house by a back door and
went into hiding in a large cluster of shady trees about a furlong from our
dwelling. We found that a score of non-Bengali men, women and children were
already ensconced in this hideout. After an hour, we heard the noise of gunfire
from our locality, the yells of the Awami League attackers and the cries of the
victims for mercy and help. We also saw tongues of fire leaping from the houses
which had been set ablaze. The killers were tipped off about our escape and there
was a burst of firing in our direction.
“Some of us were injured but we kept quiet. We crawled towards the graveyard
where the graves could afford us protection from the volleys of bullets fired on
us. Early in the morning, we moved into a deserted school building and stayed in
it unobtrusively for three days. Most of us lived on water, brought at night from
a nearby pond, and wild fruits and roots. In the afternoon of March 29, an armed
band of Bengali rebel raided our hideout and rounded up all the non-Bengali
men, including my husband. Some who resisted were ruthlessly beaten and tied
up with ropes. The women begged the rebels to spare the lives of their menfolk
but the killer gang was heartless.
“We will spare you; you will make good
maidservants in our homes “, the rebels said to us. Under a blazing sun and with
lifted guns, the killer gang marched their non-Bengali captives to what we later
on learnt was the execution ground on the bank of a river two miles away. The
next morning the killer gang returned and ordered us to accompany them post
haste.
“A shiver of fear ran down our spines when we neared the bank of the river and
saw the human slaughter-house which the rebels had established for killing the
helpless non-Bengalis. It was hell on earth. A wooden frame on which the
victims were decapitated, hanging nooses attached to trees, metallic urns with
boiling water for dipping victims to extract information and an assortment of
gleaming daggers, knives, scythes and spears gave this patch of verdant land by
the placid waters of the river a macabre setting of torture, fire and death. There
was blood all over the place. Heaps of dead bodies, awaiting a watery grave,
generated a nauseating stench. After a dozen men had been butchered before our
glazed eyes, a Bengali soldier shouted an order:
“Take these women and