Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
197
humanitarian excuse, initially, to milk the world for hundreds of millions of
dollars in compassionate aid, and subsequently, to invade East Pakistan.
The refugees gave India its most powerful weapon in psychological warfare. By
inflating their number from a million in May to more then nine million in
November 1971, India deceived world opinion and gave Pakistan a bad name all
over the world. India was allergic to Pakistan’s demand for a count of the
refugees in India by an impartial agency, such as the United Nations. It did not
accept Pakistan’s claim that only 2.02 million people had left East Pakistan due to
the civil strife.
The Indian authorities deliberately encouraged the vast hordes of unemployed
Bengalis, who swarm Calcutta and its neighbourhood, to move into the refugee
camps as inmates so that the population of these camps could be magnified to
impress and mislead foreign visitors and United Nations officials. If the Indian
Government was so overburdened with tile refugees from East Pakistan, it could
have promptly negotiated with the Pakistan Government their speedy return to
their hearths and homes in East Pakistan, especially when the Pakistan
authorities were anxious to take them back and a general amnesty had been
granted to those who looted and killed during the Awami League’s March 1971
uprising. India’s rulers uttered haughty words to tell the world that they would
allow the Bengali refugees to return to East Pakistan only when the province was
turned over to the Awami League secessionists. A Goebbels-style propaganda
machinery, which drugged the Indian people for weeks with the fiction of
Pakistani General Tikka Khan’s imaginary death in the last days of March 1971,
had no qualms of conscience in inflating the number of refugees to earn more
money and sympathy from gullible nations and individuals and to malign its
arch enemy, Pakistan.
Pakistan agreed to the United Nations Secretary-General’s proposal in the
autumn of 1971 for the stationing of monitors on the India-East Pakistan border
but the Indian Government contemptuously rejected it. The UN observers would
have bared the fact of India’s military patronage, sanctuary and logistic support
to the Bengali guerrillas and India’s massive preparations for the invasion of East
Pakistan.
India’s claim that it had maintained a complete record of the incoming refugees
was a mere fiction. After the federal army went into action against the Bengali
rebels on March 25, 1971, India opened its borders to provide sanctuary to the
hordes of fleeing rebels from East Pakistan. They were the killers who had
enacted one of the bloodiest pogroms of modem times. Subsequently India
encouraged more Bengalis in East Pakistan, especially the Hindus, to cross over
to India. In June 1971, when United Nations officials wanted to check on the