Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
87
Sakina lived for two years in Dacca before being repatriated to Karachi in
January 1974.
Abdul Majid, 26, who lived in Paharpur in Dinajpur and who escaped the March
1971 massacre of non-Bengalis by dint of good luck, had this recollection of the
sorrowful events in his home town:
“On March 3, the Awami League militants went on the warpath in Dinajpur.
They disrupted the Rail track and wrecked the train services. They looted the
Railway godowns and burnt some trains. They belaboured those non-Bengalis
who had refused to boycott work at the Railway station.
“In the first week of March, riotous mobs of Bengalis looted non-Bengali shops.
They also wrecked the Iqbal High School where many non-Bengali boys studied.
Some teachers, who tried to dissuade the Bengali miscreants from destroying the
furniture of the school, were manhandled.
“In the third week of the month, a huge mob of armed Awami Leaguers and
their supporters, many with sten guns and rifles, attacked the Balwadanga
colony. I believe that more than 2,000 non-Bengalis perished in the slaughter in
this locality. Some of the non-Bengalis sought refuge in the Iqbal High School.
The next day, the Bengali rebels ransacked the school and killed all those
sheltered in it.
“The Bengali rebels started mass slaughter of non-Bengalis all over Dinajpur
from March 22 and it continued without a let-up until April 10 when the federal
army retrieved the town. Thousands of non-Bengalis were taken by the rebels to
open-air slaughter-houses along the bank of the Kanchan river and done to death.
Their dead bodies were flung into the river. Leaders of the Awami League, such
as Abdul Bari, a member of the East Pakistan Assembly, Dr. Khalilur Rahman,
Riyazul Islam, an advocate, and a Major Usman were in the forefront of those
Bengali militants who planned, instigated and organized the killing of the non-
Bengalis in Dinajpur. Hundreds of non-Bengali women were marched in the
nude by their Bengali captors through the town and driven to nearby villages
where their tormentors ravished them in huts which were hurriedly turned into
billets for sexual assault. “
After the Pakistan Army re-established its authority over Dinajpur, Majid
emerged from hiding and helped the federal troops in burying the non-Bengali
dead. He said:
“I led the federal troops to the Iqbal High School where I knew that the non-
Bengalis had been slaughtered. Nearly 2,500 rotting dead bodies, with bullet