Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
133
“Almost all the non-Bengalis in Kishoreganj were liquidated by the Bengali
rebels in the last week of March 1971 “, said Jamal Ahmed, 48, who lived in the
Alamnagar colony in Rangpur town. Employed in a retail store in Rangpur, he
often visited neighbouring towns on business errands. Very fluent in Bengali,
Ahmed had many Bengali and non-Bengali friends in Kishoreganj. On March 23-
24, he was in Kishoreganj when the militants in an Awami League-sponsored
procession went berserk and looted the shops and houses owned by non-
Bengalis. Over the next few days, he said, the avalanche of the Awami League’s
terror hit the non-Bengalis with catastrophic suddenness and there was a
wholesale slaughter of the non-Bengali population. The killer gangs, he added,
asked no questions from their victims; they just sprayed them with bullets. Jamal
Ahmed’s Bengali business friend in Kishoreganj protected him in his house for
more than a week. When he returned to Rangpur in the third week of April, he
found, to his utter dismay, that his house in Alamnagar had been looted and his
wife and sister-in-law were kidnapped. For months, he frantically searched for
them but they remained untraced. He was repatriated to Karachi in November
1973.
Jamal Ahmed reported that small groups of non-Bengalis, who lived in
Badarganj, Mahiganj, Pirgacha and Kaunia, were wiped out by the Bengali rebels
in the last week of March and the first fortnight of April 1971. Most of the Awami
Leaguers and their supporters, who had masterminded and executed the grisly
killings in Rangpur, he said, fled to West Bengal in India after the Pakistan Army
regained control over the area late in April 1971. He claimed that he had seen
Bengali Hindus from the Cooch Behar district of West Bengal in Kishoreganj and
they
were
well-armed.
According
to
Jamal
Ahmed,
many
non-Bengali
passengers were murdered by Awami League cadres in launches in the Tista
river and he came to know of it from a Bengali friend who was related to a
Serang (Captain of the boat).