Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
127
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Shootings in Molvi Bazar, Bheramara, Narkuldanga
“The Bengali insurgents made their non-Bengali captives dig their own graves
before gunning them to death “ reported 34-year-old Qamruddin Khan, who
owned a tailoring shop in the Tulsitala locality of Molvi Bazar.
“There were very few survivors of the March-April, 1971 massacre of the non-
Bengalis in Molvi Bazar “, he added.
Qamruddin Khan, who was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in October 1973,
had this recollection of that heart-chilling pogrom:
“I had migrated in 1950 from Bihar to East Pakistan. I liked Molvi Bazar and I set
up my business of tailoring. I spoke Bengali very well and I had Bengali and non-
Bengali customers.
“There had never before been any tension between the Bengalis and the non-
Bengalis. Since early March 1971, the Awami League militants were fanning
hatred for the non-Bengalis by spreading all manner of false rumours.
“On March 19-20, the lava burst and the Awami Leaguers and the rebels of the
East Pakistan Rifles and the police conducted the wholesale slaughter of the non-
Bengalis—men, women and children. Non-Bengali men who resisted the Bengali
attackers in their homes were gunned to death right inside their homes; others
were dragged to paddy fields or the banks of rivers where they were lined up
and machine-gunned. Many dead bodies were thrown in heaps in shallow
graves; others were tossed into the river. The killers showed no mercy to children,
particularly boys. Good-looking teenage girls were kidnapped for sexual assault
by the insurgents; most of them were shot or throttled to death before their
violators fled from the town after the Pakistan Army liberated it on April 28,
1971. “
Qamruddin had a miraculous escape; he sought refuge in a small Mosque where
he lived as a dumb mendicant for a month.
He added: “Some Bengalis tried to protect their non-Bengali neighbours. This
was at a grave risk to their own lives. The police had ceased to function; the
policemen had joined the rebels in plunder and murder. Anyone who challenged
the Bengali rebels was swiftly liquidated. My estimate is that some 2,000 non-
Bengalis perished in the March-April, 1971 massacre in Molvi Bazar. “