Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
36
They had dumped the bodies, she said, into a hastily dug pit at the back of
the office building.
“My orphaned children and I lived for two years in the Red Cross Camp.
The Mukti Bahini seized my house and told me that the Biharis would not
be permitted to own even an inch of land in Bangladesh.“
“For two hours, my house in Mohammedpur was riddled and pocked with
bullets by a gang of armed Bengali marauders late in March 1971“, said Qaiser
Jahan, 22, who escaped to Nepal from East Pakistan in 1972 and was repatriated
to Karachi in December 1973.
Qaiser Jahan and her husband, Aziz Hussain, a prosperous businessman, lived in
their own house on Noor Jahan Road in the Mohammedpur locality in Dacca.
They had escaped the March 1971 massacre of non-Bengalis and the gunmen
who fired on her house did not loot it. But in the third week of December 1971,
when the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini seized East Pakistan, her
misfortunes began. Early in December 1971, her husband had gone on a business
visit to Chittagong. Weeks passed and there was no news of him. Qaiser Jahan
heard of the massacre of non-Bengalis in Chittagong on December 17, 1971. The
next day, at midnight, a gang of armed Mukti Bahini soldiers attacked the
Mohammedpur locality and they continued machine-gunning her house till the
early hours of the morning. Panic-stricken, she decided to leave for Khulna
where some relatives of hers lived. Qaiser Jahan said:
Kulsoom, 35, whose husband, Abdul Kareem, had his own small business firm in
Dacca, lived in their own house on Jagannath Saha Road. She was widowed early
in 1971. Her 24 year old son was employed in a trading firm in central Dacca. In
the third week of March 1971, a gang of armed Awami Leaguers raided and
looted her house. Her son was not at home when the raiders came. But in
December 1971, Kulsoom’s little world was shattered:
“It was December 12. My son, Mohammad Yasin, had gone to his office.
My son was a brave young man. He said he was not frightened by India’s
bombing and would go to work. In the evening, I was stunned when some
Civil Defence workers brought me his battered dead body. He was killed
when Indian aircraft bombed the building where he worked.
“I was benumbed by the loss of my son. In the third week of December
1971, a Mukti Bahini gang raided and looted my house and threw me and
my three small children on the streets. We lived for more than two years
in a Red Cross Camp in Dacca. In February 1974, we were repatriated to
Pakistan“.