Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
23
“Ten days of piecing together the details in East Pakistan have revealed a huge
and almost successful mutiny in the Pakistan Army and the brutal massacre of
thousands of non-Bengalis— men, women and children. More than 20,000 bodies
have been found so far in Bengal’s main towns but the final count could top
100,000.
“Eye-witnesses in more than 80 interviews tell horrifying stories of rape, torture,
eye-gouging, public flogging of men and women, women’s breasts being torn
out and amputations before victims were shot or bayoneted to death. Punjabi
Army personnel and civil servants and their families seem to have been singled
out for special brutality. “
White with fear and with dazed, unbelieving eyes, I saw a Bengali student jingo
behead a non-Bengali captive in a room in the Jagannath Hall of the Dacca
University on March 24, 1971 because his relatives failed to send the demanded
ransom of Rs. 3,000, said Mohammed Hanif, 23, who lived in Quarter No. 49 of
“B“ Block in the Lalmatia Colony in Dacca. Employed in the Tiger Wire
Company in Dacca, Hanif said on his repatriation to Karachi in January 1974:
“In the afternoon of March 24, I engaged a motorised Rickshaw (three-
wheeled taxi) and asked the driver to take me to my home in Lalmatia
Colony. I had spoken to him in broken Bengali and he knew that I was a
non-Bengali. All of a sudden and in spite of my shouts in anger, he drove
the vehicle into the compound of the Jagannath Hall where six armed
students grabbed me. They took me inside a shuttered room where they
frisked me thoroughly and snatched my watch and Rs. 150 from my
pocket. They told me that I should write a letter to my close relatives,
asking them to hand over to the bearer Rs. 3000 as ransom money to save
my life. I hesitated and asked for some time to make up my mind. They
tied my hands with strong ropes and marched me to a large hall where
many roped non-Bengali captives squatted on the ground.
“The student jingo who had asked me to write the ransom letter paced
towards a hapless victim at the far end of the hall. He told his prey in
Bengali that the ransom money had not materialised and the deadline
given to his relatives had passed, so he must die. The terrified victim
shouted, squirmed and tried to run. But six toughs grabbed him while the
jingo in the lead slit his throat with a ‘Ramdao’ (a kind of dagger) and
decapitated him
“I was horror-stricken by what I had seen. At midnight, I told my captors
that I would write the ransom letter to my elder brother. I wrote it in the