Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
57
Rahim Afindi, who was employed in a shipping firm in Chittagong and who had
a miraculous escape from death when the Bengali insurgents murdered non-
Bengalis in the Chittagong port area, gave this account of his hair-raising
experience in March 1971:
“I was employed in the shipping firm of Messrs. Yaqub Ah and Sons in
Chittagong. The owner of the firm, Mr. Yaqub Ali, was a God-fearing Muslim,
devoted to Islam and the ideology of Pakistan. A Bengali, he was in the Pakistan
Movement in pre-Independence Bengal and knew many prominent Muslim
League Bengali leaders. He was closely related to a one-time Speaker of the
Pakistan National Assembly, Mr. Fazlul Qader Chowdhury. He had many non-
Bengali employees in his firm and he treated them as well as his Bengali
employees.
“On March 20, Mr. Yaqub Ali took me to the Chittagong harbour where a ship
whose unloading was to be done by his firm was docked. We went on board the
ship and Mr. Yaqub Ali talked to the Captain. Suddenly, we heard yells for help
and the echo of gunshots from down below. We rushed from the Captain’s cabin
to the deck and saw that killer mobs, armed with guns, were slaughtering people
on the wharf. Mr. Yaqub Ali asked me to stay on board the ship with the Captain
and he rushed down the gangway to the quay. A very brave man, he ran into the
crowd of the killers and appealed to them in the name of God not to slaughter
the innocents. Some one in the killer gang shouted that Yaqub Ali was pro-
Pakistan and a Muslim Leaguer. In a matter of minutes, the killer gang killed him
and chopped up his dead body before flinging it into the sea. Subsequently, I
learnt that Yaqub Ali Saheb shouted “Pakistan Zindabad “ (Long Live Pakistan)
as the killer gang ordered him to shout “Joy Bangla “ (Long Live Bangla) before
they killed him. “
Rahim Afindi was sheltered by the Captain of the ship for some days. He
escaped the massacre of non-Bengalis. In March 1974, he was repatriated to
Pakistan. He is certain that more than 50,000 non-Bengalis perished in the March
1971 carnage in Chittagong and its neighbouring localities.
Nasim Ahmed, 22, who lived with his father, a prominent Muslim League
activist, in their own house in Pahartali area of Chittagong, gave this narrative of
his father’s murder by the rebels:
“My father, Mr. Wasim Ahmed, was a well-known and thriving businessman in
Chittagong. He was devoted to the ideology of Pakistan and was active in the
local Muslim League. Bengalis and non-Bengalis alike respected him for his
integrity and for his courage. He helped many charitable causes.