Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
182
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
Grief in Brahmanbaria
The population of non-Bengalis in the town of Brahmanbaria was small. Most of
them had come from the Indian State of Bihar at the time of Partition in 1947.
They had learnt the Bengali language. They were mostly traders; some were
employed in commercial firms.
In the third week of March 1971, the Awami League militants and the rebels
from the East Pakistan Rifles and the East Bengal Regiment began intimidating
the non-Bengalis. On March 23, some shops of non-Bengalis were looted and
burnt by riotous mobs. The local police gave no protection to the non-Bengalis.
On March 26, the Bengali insurgents launched a full-scale attack on the non-
Bengalis. Their houses were ransacked by armed gangs. Many non-Bengalis who
resisted the hoodlums were shot deed. The attackers included the rebel soldiers
from the East Bengal Regiment who were armed with machine guns and
bazookas. They indulged in wanton destruction of property owned by the non-
Bengalis.
At gunpoint, some 500 Biharis — aged men, women and children — were driven
out of their homes by the insurgents and herded in the dingy jail in
Brahmanbaria. The insurgents had killed most of the Bihari young men. Inside
the prison, the Bihari hostages were the victims of inhuman brutality. Many
hungry children who cried for food and water were slain by the trigger-happy
prison guards. Dozens of Bihari girls were spirited away at night by the
secessionist gunmen and their protesting relatives were beaten up with rifle butts
and truncheons. For days on end, the Bihari hostages had no food to eat. Quite a
few died of hunger and thirst inside this veritable inferno.
On April 17, 1971, as a column of the Pakistan Army closed in on Brahmanbaria
and the Bengali insurgents retreated, the jail was turned into a slaughter-house
by the mutineers. The rebel company commander of the East Bengal Regiment
ordered the execution of all the non-Bengalis lodged in the jail. Just before sunset,
a dozen Bengali machine-gunners wiped out every non-Bengali inside the prison.
After accomplishing the massacre of the innocents, the hatchet-men made a bee-
line for the Indian border. “We had never even dreamt of such butchery “, said
the Pakistani soldiers who buried the murdered Biharis the next day.
The Sunday Times of London, in its issue of May 2, 1971, reported the gory
killing of the non-Bengalis in Brahmanbaria after its Pakistan Correspondent,