Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
136
shop owned by a non-Bengali was looted and burnt. A jeep of the Pakistan Army,
which was moving on the highway on the fringes of the town, was ambushed by
an unruly mob. The five West Pakistani soldiers riding in it were overwhelmed
and done to death. The jeep was grabbed and used by a group of insurgents from
the East Pakistan Rifles for their lawless and destructive operations in Saidpur.
Witnesses from Saidpur said that by the third week of March 1971, the entire
local administration had joined the Awami League’s insurrection. On March 19,
the Deputy Commissioner of Rangpur presided over a meeting of Awami
League leaders and district officials where specially-summoned leaders of the
non-Bengalis were told that they would be wiped out if they did not support the
rebellion actively.
Late in the night of March 23, 1971, more than 1,00,000 armed Bengali rebels
attacked the non-Bengali settlements in Saidpur and Golahat and the Pakistan
Army’s garrison in Saidpur Cantonment. The siege continued for some 36 hours
during which the Bengali rebels put to the torch 94 houses and shops belonging
to non-Bengalis in Saidpur town. In the Cantonment, the Bengali troops of the
East Bengal Regiment rebelled and attacked the West Pakistani officers and
soldiers. Swiftly recovering from the initial surprise, the West Pakistani troops
overpowered the Bengali mutineers and the Awami League raiders from the
town and its neighbourhood. A daring Army officer from West Pakistan, Captain
Fateh Mohammed Shah, struck out from the Cantonment with a company of
soldiers and rescued the beleaguered non-Bengalis in Saidpur town and the
Railway Station. By the forenoon of March 29, 1971, Saidpur town and Golahat
were firmly under the control of the Pakistan Army and the Bengali rebels
retreated in disarray. For days, before the Bengali rebels attacked the Saidpur
Cantonment on March 23-25, the Awami League insurrectionists had blocked the
despatch of supplies from the Saidpur Railway Station to the Army garrison. But
as the Army was under instruction from Islamabad to show the utmost restraint,
the West Pakistani troops in Saidpur cantonment took no punitive action against
the Awami League militants. It was only after the insurrectionists, abortive
attempt to seize the cantonment that the West Pakistani troops went into action
on March 25, 1971.
The Government of Pakistan’s White Paper of August 1971 on the East Pakistan
crisis contained this account of the grisly events in Saidpur on March 25, 1971:
“In Saidpur, four violent mobs, armed with rifles, shot guns and daggers, who
had come from neighbouring villages, converged on Saidpur town and attacked
Golahat, an adjacent locality, killing three persons and injuring 17.
“Among the wounded, two had sustained bullet injuries while another seven
were hurt from shot-gun fire. The remaining persons were injured by poles and
clubs. Fifty houses were also burnt. The troops had to open fire and three