Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
4
Some Biharis in Dacca, whose relatives had been murdered in the city and at
other places in the province, tried to contact foreign press reporters based at the
Hotel Intercontinental. Awami League toughs who controlled all the access
routes to the Hotel prevented their meeting. Conversation over the telephone
had become a hazard for the non-Bengalis because of the Awami League’s
seizure of the Telephone Exchange and the tapping of telephone lines. A British
press correspondent, who was in Dacca in March 1971, told me that a Bengali
telephone operator cut off his long-distance conversation with his newspaper
colleague in New Delhi in the third week of the month the moment he made
mention of the blood-chilling massacre of non-Bengalis all over the province.
The Pakistan Government paid very dearly for its folly of banishing from Dacca
some 35 foreign newsmen on March 26, 1971, a day after the federal Army had
gone into action against the Awami League militants and other Bengali rebels.
Amongst them were quite a few American journalists of eminence and influence.
They bore a deep grouse against the military regime in Pakistan, and all through
1971, no good word about Pakistan flowed from their powerful pens. They
inundated the American press with grisly, highly exaggerated accounts of the
Army’s toughness towards the rebels and ignored the virtual annihilation of a
massive segment of the non-Bengali population by the Bengali rebels in March-
April, 1971.
For millions of gullible Americans and West Europeans the printed word in the
daily press is like gospel truth and they readily believed the many fibs about the
Pakistan Army’s conduct in East Pakistan which surged across the columns of
their newspapers.
The forced exit of the foreign news corps from Dacca, the ire and anger of these
articulate newsmen over their banishment from East Pakistan and the reluctance
of the American and the British newspapers to give credence to the censored
dispatches from Karachi on the military operations in the eastern half of the
country prevented, to a great extent, the world-wide publication of the
harrowing details of the bloodbath undergone by the non-Bengali population in
the Awami League’s March 1971 uprising. Thus one of the bloodiest slaughters
of modern times went largely unreported in the international press.
Late in the first week of April 1971, the federal Information Ministry took a
group of Pakistani press correspondents on a conducted tour of the rebel-
devastated parts of East Pakistan. I was invited to go with the group but just then
I was busy completing the Report of the Sind Government’s Social Welfare
Evaluation Committee (of which I was the Chairman). As I was keen to submit it
to the provincial administration before the deadline of April, 12, 1971, I politely
declined the invitation.