Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
178
CHAPTER THIRTY
Woes of Comilla
In the middle of March 1971, tension between the Bengalis and the non-Bengalis
in Comilla reached an alarming pitch. Fibs and yarns invented by the Awami
League activists and the hostile broadcasts of All India Radio were a major factor
in the creation of tension. Mutineers from the East Bengal Regiment and the East
Pakistan Rifles worked in concert with the Awami League cadres. Roving bands
of armed Awami League militants had marked the houses occupied by non-
Bengalis. In the third week of March, the insurgents went on the rampage,
looting the homes of non-Bengalis and slaying those who resisted. Eye-wimcsses
said that at least 4,000 non-Bengalis were butchered by the insurrectionists and
their supporters before the Pakistan Army regained control over Comilla early in
April.
Abu Saeed, 29, who lived with his brother, Qamruddin, in his well-furnished
house on Kazi Nazrul Islam Road in Comilla, gave the following heart-rending
account of the murder of five members of his family in the third week of March
1971:
“My elder brother, Qamruddin, was a well-to-do businessman. We had
migrated to East Pakistan from India early in 1948. All of us had learnt the
Bengali language and we were fluent in it. Our relations with our Bengali
neighbours were excellent. Political developments in Dacca had their impact on
Comilla, and the non-Bengalis felt uneasy. Qamruddin’s family consisted of his
wife, his two College-going sons and his teenage daughter. Our aged mother also
lived with us. On March 23, we were startled by the sound of gunfire. We saw in
the distance a group of armed men advancing towards our house. Some houses
and shops were on fire. The Bengali gunmen yelled outside our house. My
brother, Qamruddin, spoke to them in Bengali and appealed for mercy. A burst
of bullets was their response. They broke the front door and again opened fire.
My brother collapsed in a pool of blood. My two nephews grappled with the
intruders and lost their lives. As their wailing mother leaned over their lifeless,
blood-splashed bodies, a bullet from a guman’s rifle killed her. While the Bengali
raiders were busy in looting the house, I escaped into the backyard through a
window and lay still in the bushes. I heard the shrieks of my young niece who
was still in the house but I was too scared to go to her help. I heard the report of
gunshots. Around midnight I tiptoed into the house; it was a ghasdy sight. The
only survivor was my aged mother who had fainted. In the early hours of the
morning she regained consciousness. In my brother’s bedroom lay the dead body
of my niece; her hands were tied with a rope and her clothes were torn. I learnt