Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
170
starving children. We were told that our rebel tormentors were planning our
massacre. But Gcd willed otherwise, and on April 21, in the forenoon, the
Pakistan Army rescued us. Earlier in the morning, our captors had vanished
from the Mosque. All the destitute women and children, whose male relatives
had been slaughtered by the Bengali insurgents, were taken to a Relief Camp in
Dacca. I was repatriated to Karachi in January, 1974. “
Thirty-two-year-old Saira, whose husband, Abdul Hamid Khan, was employed
as a driver in the Mymensingh police force and who saw him slain by a killer
gang in the second week of April 1971, had the following recollection of that
dreadful scene:
“As my husband was a non-Bengali and a Pathan, the rebel soldiers and
policemen were after his blood right from the middle of March 1971. A group of
them broke into our house in the first week of April, overpowered my husband
and dragged him to a nearby paddy field. Unmindful of the crying of my three
little children who were shocked by the plight of their father, I ran to the killer
gang in the rice field and entreated them, in the name of Allah, to spare the life of
my husband. But these ruthless men were out for a kill, and one of them slit my
husband’s throat with a large knife. I was horrified; I was speechless. As I rushed
towards him, the killers grabbed me and hurled me to the ground. I heard the
groans of my dying husband as they stabbed him in the chest and in the stomach
to hasten his end. In the mean time, four gunmen arrived on the scene and
pulled me back to my house. It had been looted. My terror-stricken children
stood at the doorstep. Our gun-toting captors marched us to a big Mosque. On
the way, we saw hundreds of dead bodies on the road and the sidewalks. Many
houses had been burnt. Life inside the Mosque was an infernal torture; more
than a thousand women and children wailed and groaned. I saw very few
teenage girls in this terrified mass of humanity. The Bengali attendants in the
Mosque got us some water from a nearby pond which enabled us to survive. The
Pakistan Army freed us from this hellish captivity on April 21, 1971. My
orphaned children and I were transported by the Army to Dacca where we lived
in a Relief Camp. In November 1973, we were flown to Karachi. “
Nasima, 27, a Bengali, whose husband, Abdul Jalil, a Bihari, owned a retail shop
in Mymensingh, gave this account of the slaying of her husband late in March
1971:
“Some of my Bengali compatriots hated me and my family because I had
married a Bihari. On March 26, 1971, a riotous crowd of miscreants went on the
rampage, looted our shop and hacked my husband to death. When the shocking
news of his murder reached me in my house, I ran to the shop to retrieve his
dead body. There was no trace of it, but fresh bloodstains were visible. I was told