Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
32
Zaibunnissa and her son were repatriated to Pakistan from Dacca in December
1973.
Shamim Akhtar, 28, whose husband was employed as a clerk in the Railway
office in Dacca, lived in a small house in the Mirpur locality there. They had
escaped the March 1971 massacre because of the strong resistance put up by the
Bihari young men of the locality against the rebels who attacked them. But after
the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini seized East Pakistan in the third week of
December 1971, life became an ordeal for Shamim, her husband, Fasihuddin and
her three little children. She described her tragedy in these words:
“On December 17, 1971, the Mukti Bahini cut off the water supply to our
homes. We used to get water from a nearby pond; it was polluted and had
a bad odour. I was nine months pregnant. On December 23, 1971, I gave
birth to a baby girl. No midwife was available and my husband helped me
at child birth. Late at night, a gang of armed Bengalis raided our house,
grabbed my husband and trucked him away. I begged them in the name
of God to spare him as I could not even walk and my children were too
small. The killers were heartless and I learnt that they murdered my
husband. After five days, they returned and ordered me and my children
to vacate the house as they claimed that it was now their property.
“Biharis“, said the gang leader, “have no right to live in Bangladesh.“ At
gunpoint, they drove me with my children to an open plot of land where
we slept on the bare earth in the cold for three days. My children starved; I
was too weak to get them even a morsel of food. A foreign Red Cross team
took pity on us and moved us to a Relief Camp in Mohammadpur.“
Shamim and her children were repatriated to Pakistan from Dacca in January
1974.
Zaibunnissa Haq, 30, whose journalist husband, Izhar-ul Haque, worked as a
columnist in the Daily Watan in Dacca, gave this account of her travail in 1971:
“We lived in our own house on Razia Sultana Road in Mohammedpur in
Dacca. My husband had, in the past, worked in the Daily Pasban and was
well-known as an Urdu writer and journalist.
“On March 25, 1971, a gang of armed Awami League storm troopers
raided our locality and looted my house. My husband was not at home;
otherwise the raiders would have kidnapped him.