Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
79
rebels. I took her to the hospital where she was treated for her wounds. The
raiders were angry that there were no ornaments in the house; they tortured my
mother-in-law to get clues to our wealth. We had none left.
“After the federal Army took over Khulna, I took up a job and earned some
money to feed myself, my children and my mother-in-law. I had no news of my
husband. Subsequently, I learnt that the killers slayed him in Darsana.
“My ordeals began afresh after the Mukti Bahini captured Khulna in the third
week of December, 1971. There was again a carnage of non-Bengalis in the city.
Luckily, we escaped it. In January 1974 we were repatriated to Karachi from
Dacca “.
Rabia’s view is that there were many God-fearing Bengalis who strongly
condemned the killing of the non-Bengalis but they were utterly helpless. “The
guns were with the Awami Leaguers and other rebels and not with these good-
hearted Bengalis “, she said. She had also heard of the slaughter-houses set up by
the Bengali rebels to torture and murder their non-Bengali victims.
PHOLTALA
Firdous Alam, 65, who lived in the Liaquatabad Colony in Pholtala town near
Khulna, had this tearful recollection of the March 1971 killing of the non-Bengalis:
“Pakistan’s first Prime Minister, Mr. Liaquat Ali Khan, was the founder of the
Liaquatabad colony in Pholtala. Four hundred Muslim refugee families from
Bihar and West Bengal, who had sought refuge in East Pakistan, were sheltered
in this colony in 1948. With the passage of years, more non-Bengali families
converged here and its population reached 15,000.
“On March 23, a large procession of Awami Leaguers paraded our locality and
raised slogans against Pakistan. The elders in our locality prevailed upon our
young men not to be provoked by the Awami League militants and their anti-
Pakistan slogans. In the evening, the Awami Leaguers returned with a horde of
armed men, perhaps the rebels from the East Pakistan rifles. All of a sudden, the
killer gang started setting the hutments of the non-Bengalis ablaze. The Bengali
rebels spread the flames with dried coconut fronds which make excellent
kindling. As the terrified non-Bengalis emerged from their burning huts, the
killer gang mowed them with gunfire.
“Provoked by this wanton savagery, a score of our young men, who had guns,
engaged the killer gang in combat for four hours. But when their ammunition
was exhausted — the Bengali rebels got reinforcements and fresh supplies —
these brave defenders of non-Bengali honour were done to death with
indescribable savagery. All through the night and till the small hours of the