Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
69
CHAPTER FOUR
Massacres in Chandraghona , Rangamati
Wajihunnissa,
35,
whose
husband
was
employed
in
the
Central
Excise
Department and was posted at Chandraghona, gave this account of the March
1971 slaughter of non-Bengalis in her township:
“In the second week of March 1971, Awami League gangs visited the non-
Bengalis in our locality and assured them that no harm would touch them if they
surrendered their weapons. My husband, Maqsood Alam, who was an excellent
marksman, complied with their instructions and gave up his gun.
“In the third week of March, roving bands of armed Awami Leaguers terrorised
the non-Bengalis and extorted money from them. They had blocked all the
escape routes.
“On March 26, an armed group of Awami Leaguers called at our house and
ordered my husband to go with them to his office, I knew that it was a ruse and
that they were after the blood of my husband....
“On March 27, another killer gang raided my house. They told me and the three
brothers of my husband that the Deputy Commissioner of Rangamati had
instructed that we should be taken to his office to protect us. As we prepared to
go, the killers asked me at gunpoint to stay back. They roped my brothers-in-law
together and put them in a truck.
“In the afternoon, a huge mob of Bengali rebels raided our locality and looted
the houses of non-Bengalis. Our menfolk had been kidnapped. A killer gang
ransacked my house and looted everything, except the ceiling fans and
wardrobes. They drove the non-Bengali women and children, like cattle, to a
large compound where we were ordered to stay. For fifteen days we were
starved, and we prayed to God for help. On April 13, our captors learnt that the
Pakistani troops were marching towards Chandraghona. The rebels ordered us
to fall in line and we knew that they would open fire on us. Some of us tried to
break loose and there was a melee. All of a sudden a shell fell and burst a few
yards away from the compound where we were herded by our captors. We saw
in the far distance a company of Pakistani soldiers, waving the Green and
Crescent flag, racing towards us. Our cowardly captors took fright and
scampered like mice running away from a cat. The Pakistani troops gave us