Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
167
and he brought us some water and food. He did his best to dissuade our captors
from killing us. On April 21, we were saved from the jaws of death by the timely
arrival of the Pakistan Army. They rescued us and transported us to a Relief
Camp in Dacca. After the Indian troops and the Mukti Bahini captured Dacca on
December 17, 1971, I underwent more physical and mental suffering. In January
1974, I was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi. “
Sixty-year-old Ghaffurunnissa’s account of her woes and suffering in March-
April 1971 in a suburban locality of Mymensingh, which had a sprinkling of non-
Bengalis, was heart-rending;
“In the last week of March 1971, killer gangs of Awami Leaguers and rebel
soldiers of the East Bengal Regiment went on the rampage in our locality.
Initially, their victims were the Punjabi residents of our locality. All the young
and middle-aged men of the nearly 70 Punjabi families in our neighbourhood
were taken at gunpoint to a far away place which, we learnt, was the rebels’
slaughter-house for the non-Bengalis. Early in the second fortnight of April, these
killer gangs attacked all the other non-Bengalis in our locality — looting, burning
and killing. They broke into our house and dragged my husband and my
married son to an open field half a furlong away.
“I spotted in this crowd of hostages my brother and his teenage son. Their
captors lined up their non-Bengali captives and asked them to salute a flag which
they said was of Bangladesh. Many of the non-Bengalis ignored the guns pointed
at them and refused to salute this flag. A fusillade of bullets burst forth from the
cruel guns of the rebels and hundreds of innocent men were killed. After the
killers had made sure that there were no men survivors — they pumped bullets
into the hearts of those who took time to give up the ghost — they returned to
the non-Bengali houses where the sorrowing women rent the skies with their
wailing. I heard the leader of a killer gang tell his accomplices that the non-
Bengali women should be spared so that they could be made domestic servants.
With me was my widowed daughter-in-law and her one-year-old son. We were
marched to a school; the next day we were taken to a big Mosque. For six days
we lived inside this House of God in agony and suffering; most of us prayed
most of the time for our husbands and our sons and for our deliverance. On
April 21, the Pakistan Army entered Mymensingh and rescued us. We were
moved to a Relief Camp in Dacca. After the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini
seized East Pakistan on December 17, 1971, we lived in terror in a Camp for
Biharis in Mohammedpur in Dacca. Our travail ended in December 1973 when
the United Nations repatriated me and my daughter-in-law and her little son to
Karachi. “