Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
77
Saifullah escaped from Khulna after the Mukti Bahini gave it a second bloodbath
late in December 1971 and early in January 1972. Through a tortuous route, he
came to Pakistan in 1972.
Shahjahan Khan, 50, who was employed in the Star Jute Mill in Chandi Mahal in
Khulna, had this pathetic recollection of the massacre of the non-Bengalis in
March 1971:
“I had migrated to East Pakistan from Calcutta in 1970 and I settled in Khulna. I
joined the Star Jute Mill when it was started and I rose to the position of Weaving
Master in the Mill. On March 28, a large killer gang, armed with machine guns,
rifles and spears attacked the non-Bengali employees of the Jute Mill and their
families. The attackers overpowered some of the non-Bengali millhands and
flung them alive into the steaming boilers in the Mill. Many of the non-Bengali
workers who tried to escape were sprayed with machine gunfire.
“I escaped from the Mill and ran towards my home. A pursuer’s bullet hit me in
the arm but I continued sprinting towards my house. Just on the doorstep, a
sniper’s bullet hit me in the leg and I fell down. The killers had ransacked my
house and killed my wife and my three children earlier in the day. I lost
consciousness. After three days, I found myself in the Khulna hospital. The
federal troops had entered the city and the injured persons were taken to
hospital. The death toll of the non-Bengalis in my locality ran into thousands.
The Bengali rebels kidnapped hundreds of non-Bengali young women and
teenage girls and killed them by the riverside after ravishing them. Their usual
practice was to dump the dead bodies into the river. I was repatriated to Pakistan
in November 1973 “.
Shakoor Ahmed, 69, who lived in his son’s house on Khan Jahan Ali Road in
Khulna, recalled the murder of his only offspring in the March 1971 massacre in
these words:
“I had lived and worked in East Pakistan long before the Partition of the sub-
continent. I hailed from Monghyr but most of my life was spent in East Pakistan.
My son was born in Khulna. We spoke Bengali very well. But the local Bengalis
called us Biharis.
“Since the first week of March 1971, armed gangs of Awami Leaguers used to
parade in our locality to intimidate the non-Bengalis. In the second week of the
month, violence against non-Bengalis openly erupted. On March 23, a killer gang
attacked our house, slaughtered my son and his wife. They spared me and his
two small sons. They are now my life, my hope. We were repatriated to Karachi
in February 1974.