Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
75
Nisar Ahmed Khan, 37, who was the headmaster of a high school in the
Khalispur industrial township in Khulna, had this grim recollection of the
Awami League’s terror regime in March 1971:
“On March 23, armed bands of Awami League volunteers and rebels from the
East Pakistan Rifles and the police desecrated the Pakistani flag in Khalispur and
hoisted their Bangla Desh flag atop buildings and factories in our township.
Since the middle of March, the Bengali rebels were on the warpath against the
non-Bengalis and we heard rumours that elaborate preparations were being
made for our slaughter.
“I lived in a rented house in the G-10 sector in the Satellite Town in Khalispur
locality. My school was located in the vicinity of the People’s Jute Mill. Close to it
lived some 15,000 non-Bengalis, many in shanties. They were assured by the
local Awami Leaguers early in the first week of March that they would not be
disturbed or harmed. In fact, local Awami League leaders and some Bengali
police officers met the representatives of the non-Bengalis in the main Mosque in
this locality. In the presence of the non-Bengali Imam (Priest), they took an oath
that no non-Bengali would be harmed. This assurance dissuaded the non-
Bengalis from taking any self-defence measures or moving to Dacca for safety.
“In the night of March 23 and all through the next day, the Bengali rebels went
on the rampage against the non-Bengalis in this locality. The rebels blocked all
the access roads and sealed off the routes of escape for the non-Bengalis. Armed
with rifles, sten guns, hand grenades, knives and spears, a huge killer mob fell
upon the hapless non-Bengali men, women and children. The rebels burned and
blasted the entire neighbourhood; they looted the homes of non-Bengalis and as
the victims ran out of their houses, a hail of gunfire mowed them down. Many
women and children sought refuge in the main Mosque and in my school
building. The killers murdered the Imam (Priest) who begged them in the name
of Allah to spare the innocents. The word mercy had become alien to the rebels.
“Teenage girls and young women, kidnapped by the Bengali rebels, were
lodged in the school building. At night, they were raped by their captors. Those
who resisted were immediately shot. Some hapless women jumped from the roof
of the sex assault chambers to escape their violators.
“Some old men, women and children were marched by the rebels to the river-
side human abattoir where they were slaughtered and dumped into the river.
The killers trucked away many dead bodies from the town to the river bank
where they were flung into the water.