Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
173
Mohammed Amin, 24, who lived near the Jinnah Hall in the Campus of the
Rajshahi University, reported that on March 2, 1971, a mob of more than 3,000
Awami League-led secessionists stormed the offices of,the Deputy Commissioner
and the District Judge and ceremoniously burnt the Pakistan flag and destroyed
the office records. The mob, which yelled “Joi Bangla “, shouted threats at the
non-Bengalis and looted some shops owned by them. At night, Mohammed
Amin saw lurid tongues of fire lightning the sky as killer gangs went on the
rampage, burning, looting and killing the non-Bengalis. On March 3, when the
Awami League ordered a general strike, killer gangs ignored the curfew and
roamed at will in the city, preventing Government employees from going to their
offices and forcing traders to close down their shops. The conscientious Bengali
District Judge succeeded in reaching his office; a killer gang yelled death at him
and burnt his office after sprinkling petrol on the woodwork. A bloodthirsty mob
prevented the Bengali Deputy Commissioner, Mr. Rashidul Hassan, from going
to his office. On March 26, the police force in Rajshahi revolted and threatened to
slaughter all the non-Bengalis in the city. On March 29, the small Pakistan Army
contingent in Rajshahi attacked the rebel policemen in their Police Lines
strongpoint after a West Pakistani soldier was shot at and wounded by a rebel
sniper. In barely an hour, the rebel policemen were routed and they fled in
disarray to neighbouring India. Indian-supplied machine-guns and bazookas
were found in the police stronghold. Seme policemen who surrendered said that
Indian military personnel had sneaked across the border to help the rebels.
Amin said that on March 31, a posse of Bengali rebels from the East Pakistan
Rifles kidnapped the Deputy Commissioner to Nawabganj, 30 miles from
Rajshahi and lodged him in the local jail. In the night of April 15, a gang of 20
armed rebels slaughtered some 175 non-Bengalis, including women and children,
who were detained in the jail. Their dead bodies were dumped at the human
abattoir by the riverside. As the federal troops reoccupied Nawabganj, the
fleeing rebels kidnapped the Bengali Deputy Commissioner of Rajshahi to their
sanctuary of Maldah in India where the Indian Border Security Force welcomed
them and jailed the Deputy Commissioner. On May 6, he made a daring escape
bid and reached East Pakistan by swimming across the Padma river. The non
Bengali teachers of the Rajshahi University were terrorised by the armed rebels
and their houses were ransacked but their Bengali colleagues, at great risk to
themselves, shielded them in the Campus all through the insurgency period.
Very fluent in Bengali, Amin dodged the killer gangs by posing as a Bengali.
Afsar Ali, 35, whose brother was employed in the Rajshahi Unit of Radio
Pakistan, said that the Broadcasting House was shelled and wrecked by the
rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles in the first week of April, 1971. “I learnt from
my brother “, said Afsar Ali, “that on April 7, armed personnel from the East
Pakistan Rifles caught hold of the Bengali Regional Director of Radio Pakistan