Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
37
Ayesha Begum, 40, who was repatriated to Karachi from Dacca, with her three
orphaned children, in December 1973, testified:
“In the third week of March 1971, a gang of armed Awami Leaguers had
fired on our house in Mirpur in Dacca but the appearance of an Army
patrol made them run away.
“For nine months, my husband, Abdul Bari, a Bank employee, lived in
peace in our house in Mirpur. But in the third week of December 1971, a
posse of Mukti Bahini soldiers, led by some gangsters of our locality, came
to my house and looted it. They ordered us to leave the house at once and
go to the Red Cross Camp. Just then my husband returned home from
work and in a matter of minutes the killer gang overpowered him and
shot him in the chest. I was stunned and utterly speechless. One of them
slapped me and threatened that if I did not vacate the house immediately I
would be killed. I begged them to give me some time to bury my husband
but they refused. I appealed to them in the name of God and two of them
agreed to help me in burying my husband. We dug a grave in an open
space nearby and laid him to eternal rest. My children and I walked to the
Red Cross Camp where we lived for two years.“
Najmunnissa, 30, and her three orphaned children were repatriated from Dacca
to Karachi in January 1974 after they had spent two years in the Red Cross Camp
in Mohammedpur. Her husband was an employee of the East Pakistan
Government and he owned a small house in Mirpur where he and his family
lived. In the third week of March 1971, when he was away on duty, some armed
thugs had looted his house. In the third week of December 1971, the Mukti
Bahini murdered him while he was on his way to his office. A Mukti Bahini gang
raided Najmunnissa’s house in the evening of December 18th and told her that
her husband had been executed. They gave her no clues to the whereabouts of
his dead body. Brandishing sten guns, the raiders ordered her to leave the house
at once as the Bengalis returning from India had to be accommodated.
Najmunnissa said:
“I was a widow; my children were orphans. My tormentors shoved a gun
in my face to force me to quit the house where we had lived for years. We
were on the streets. Subsequently, the thugs changed their mind and
carted us away to a big building where many hundreds of hapless non-
Bengali women and children were herded. The male members of their
families had been liquidated by the Mukti Bahini in human abattoirs. Life
in the captivity of the Mukti Bahini in this prison was a hell. A Red Cross
team located us and took us to a Camp in Mohammedpur. They said our