Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
1
INTRODUCTION
In the first week of March 1971, when the Awami League had fired the first salvo
of revolt in East Pakistan and it triggered off a forest fire of lawlessness, arson,
loot and wanton murder all over the province, a senior official of the federal
Information Ministry instructed me that my news service should not put out any
story about the atrocities that were being committed on non-Bengalis by the
rebels in the eastern half of the country. All other press services and newspapers
in West Pakistan were given similar instruction.
When I remonstrated with the Information Ministry official that it was unethical
to damp a blackout on the news, he explained that press reporting of the killing
of non-Bengalis in East Pakistan would unleash a serious repercussions in West
Pakistan and provoke reprisals against the Bengalis residing in the western wing
of the country. “It would exacerbate the current tension in the relations between
the two Wings“, he argued, “and it would also undermine the prospects of a
negotiated settlement with the Awami League“. The argument had an element of
sound logic and a humanitarian veneer. Consequently, the news media in West
Pakistan faithfully followed the federal government’s instructions to suppress all
news pertaining to the genocidal frenzy unloosed by the Awami League against
the hapless West Pakistanis, Biharis and other non-Bengalis in rebellion-hit East
Pakistan.
The Awami League militants had gained control over the telecommunications
network in East Pakistan during the first few days of their uprising and they
showed meticulous care in excising even the haziest mention of the massacre of
non-Bengalis in press and private telegrams to West Pakistan and overseas world.
Word of the mushrooming, organised violence against non-Bengalis in East
Pakistan reached West Pakistan through the West Pakistanis who fled from the
Awami League’s terror regime in planes and ships. But no newspaper in the
Western Wing of the country dared report it in print.
Early in the third week of March, a shipload of some 5,000 terror-stricken West
Pakistanis and other non-Bengalis reached Karachi from Chittagong. Not a word
of their plight filtered into the daily press in West Pakistan. In fact one of the
local newspapers had the audacity to report that the arrivals from Chittagong
said that the situation in the province was normal as if this broken mass of
humanity had run away from an idyllic state of blissful normalcy.