Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
168
Thirty-year-old Zaibunnissa, whose husband, Mohammed Ibraheem, was a
Railway
employee
in
Mymensingh,
narrated
the
pathetic
story
of
her
widowhood in these words:
“We had lived in peace with our Bengali neighbours for years. My husband was
a quiet and hardworking man who had no interest in politics. In the last week of
March 1971, a score of yelling and armed Bengalis, whom I had never seen before
in our locality, broke the door of our house and overpowered my husband. I
begged them to spare my husband and my three little children. They slapped me
and kicked my crying children and pushed my husband outside the house.
Another mob of angry Bengalis lynched him and dragged him to the execution
ground. The killer gang looted my home and marched me and my little children
at gunpoint to a small building which, I learnt, was an old jail. We lived in that
hell for more than three weeks. The suffering had become so acute and
unbearable that I prayed for death. On April 21, the Pakistan Army delivered us
from this inferno. For three days, I wandered all over Mymensingh in search of
my husband but there was no trace of him. Our soldiers consoled me. I and my
orphaned children were moved to Dacca in mid-1971. The nightmare ended for
us in February 1974 when the United Nations transported us to safety and
freedom in Karachi. “
Shahzadi Begum, 24, whose husband, Akhter Hussain, worked as a postman in
Mymensirgh, gave a harrowing description of the carnage in which her husband,
her father-in-law and her brother-in-law were executed by a gang of rebels in the
first half of April 1971:
“We owned a small house in a suburban colony in Mymensingh. Since the
middle of March 1971, we lived in terror because of alarming reports that the
Awami League militants were planning to kill all the Punjabis. On March 23, my
husband returned home in panic and said that a lot of his Punjabi friends had
been butchered by Awami League militants, rebel soldiers and policemen. In the
second week of April, a mob of Bengalis, many armed with guns, forayed into
our house and dragged away my husband, my father-in-law and my teenage
brother-in-law. At gunpoint, they ordered the women to stay indoors. The non-
Bengali men, including my husband and my in-laws, were marched to an open
field where they were shot dead.
“Our tormentors forced me and my two little daughters to go with them. We
passed through a green field and we saw a ghastly scene. Scattered on the
ground were the dead bodies of hundreds of non-Bengalis who had been
executed by firing squads. Some, it seemed, had been killed with daggers and
butcher’s knives. One of our Bengali captors, who saw a body move, promptly
stilled it with a gunshot. I closed my eyes in sheer horror and fright; my two little