Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
122
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Terror Rule in Noakhali
Although the population of non-Bengalis in Noakhali did not exceed 2,500, they
commanded respect in the town and their relations with the Bengalis were
friendly. Most of them were employed in trading firms; some owned shops and
small businesses. Since the middle of March 1971 tension was felt in Noakhali
and the non-Bengalis felt unsafe. On March 21-23, 1971, armed bands of Awami
Leaguers and the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles and Ansars conducted the
extermination of the non-Bengali ethnic minority in Noakhali. It is estimated that
some 2,000 non-Bengali men, women and children were butchered in this
carnage. The rebels kidnapped many non-Bengali teenage girls, raped them and
killed most of them before the Pakistan Army routed them in the last week of
April, 1971.
An eye-witness of the March killing in Noakhali was Fazlul Haque, 37, who
worked in the Noakhali branch of the Eastern Federal Insurance Company.
Before his posting in Noakhali in 1969, he lived in Chittagong. He was all by
himself in Noakhali; his parents and other relatives were in Chittagong. His
testimony reads:
“All the nine inmates, two others, like me, were forewarned and had stayed
away. Almost three-fourth of the non-Bengali population in Noakhali perished in
this pogrom. Even women and children were slaughtered by the hundreds “.
Witnesses from Noakhali said that they had received reports of violence against
non-Bengali families in Maijdi, Begumganj, Chaumohni, Hatia and Lakshmipur.
The population of non-Bengalis at these places was not large and they were
scattered. Some non-Bengali traders, it seems, were held for ransom and their
retail shops were looted. At Maijdi Railway station, some non-Bengali Railway
employees were manhandled and killed during the March 1971 disturbances.
Between the last week of March and the last week of April 1971, a few non-
Bengalis were killed by the Awami League militants in some of the off-shore
islands, including Sandwip, South Hatia, and Dakhin Shahbazpur.
“A dozen Urdu-speaking employees of the Eastern Federal Insurance Company
had rented an apartment on New Road in Noakhali. It was like a Mess. I lived in
this apartment. My co-residents and I had good relations with our Bengali
neighbours.