Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
172
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
Pogrom in Rajshahi, Natore
The murderous frenzy of the Awami League militants and the rebels of the East
Pakistan Rifles against the non-Bengalis in Rajshahi erupted in the last week of
March I971. Across the three-mile-wide river Padma lies the Indian border. The
Bengali mutineers, who were in control of the city during the Awami League’s
rebellion, were supplied with military equipment from India. Armed infiltrators
from India also moved into Rajshahi ard its neighbouring towns for sabotage and
for aiding the Bengali rebcls. They abetted in the mass murder of thousands of
innocent non-Bengali men, women and children. In their resistance to the
advancing Pakistan Army, the rebels used Indian-supplied bazookas and rocket
launchers. Indian artillery shelled the outworks of Rajshahi as the federal troops
closed in and the Bengali rebels fled in disarray to the sanctuary of the Indian
border across the river. The federal troops regained control over Rajshahi on
April 15, I971. Three weeks later, a group of six foreign newsmen visited
Rajshahi.
Maurice Quaintance of the Reuters News Agency, in a despatch from Rajshahi,
dated May 9, 1971, reported:
“An eye-witness said the man defending this section included deserters from the
East Pakistan Rifles, reinforced by what he described as ‘Indian Military’.
Another claimed that Bangla Desh (Land of Bengal) dissidents burned and
looted stores in the market which are largely-owned by non-Bengalis. Villagers
close by showed the journalists a well where bodies were seen rotting below.
They said the bodies were thrown there in a massacre before the Army took over
the area and claimed that 700 were killed by secessionist Bengalis in the villages
of non-Bengalis. “
Malcolm Browne of the New York Times reported in a despatch from Rajshahi,
dated May 9, 1971:
“The impression based on the testimony of hundreds of witnesses is that when it
seemed that the Awami League was about to come to power, Bengalis in some
communities looted and burnt Bihari houses and slaughtered their occupants. “