Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
44
emboldened to attack other non-Bengali habitations in the city. Killer gangs
looted and burnt hundreds of non-Bengali houses in Raufabad, Halishahar,
Dotala, Kalurghat, Hamzabad, and Pahartali localities. Non-Bengali men,
kidnapped from their houses, were taken by the rebels to slaughter-houses and
done to death.
All through the first fortnight of March, the process of phased liquidation of the
non-Bengali male population was continued in Chittagong and its neighbouring
areas. The Awami League leadership trained its volunteers in the use of firearms,
some looted from arms shops and the police armoury and many smuggled from
India. The Army and Navy personnel had instructions not to shoot unless they
were attacked; the local police had become ineffective. Thus the law and order
machinery in Chittagong was totally paralysed. The civic fire fighting unit,
manned mostly by Bengalis, had lapsed into a coma; fire engines which tried to
reach the burning shanties were wrecked by the rebels.
In the third week of March, the terror regime of the rebels in Chittagong was so
firmly established that they challenged even the military personnel in the area.
Late in the night of March 18, armed killer gangs went on the rampage in every
residential colony where non-Bengalis lived. For many thousands of non-
Bengalis, it was “the night of long knives and blazing guns“. Killer gangs burst
into homes, asked no questions and sprayed gunfire on the inmates.
“Shoot
anything that moves in the house of a non-Bengali“ was the order to the killer
gangs and they observed it with sadist devotion.
On March 23, Pakistan’s National Festival Day which the Awami League
renamed as “Resistance Day “, the rebels held massive displays of their strength,
tore up the Pakistan flag at a number of places and again went on the rampage
against non-Bengalis at night. The Awami League storm troopers were
reinforced by the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles, the para-military Ansars
and the local police. The rebels were well-armed and appeared to have a surfeit
of ammunition supply. On March 25, the rebels went on the warpath against
Army and Navy personnel in Chittagong’s port area and tried to block all the
access roads leading to the city. They erected huge barricades on the highway
from the suburban locality of Agrabad to the Port area of Chittagong to prevent
the transport of military personnel and arms to the Army cantonment. They dug
trenches on the main road, and piled up burnt trucks and lorries and bitumen
drums all along the highway to block vehicular traffic. Warehoused munition in
the Port area was looted by the rebels. Bengali troops from the East Bengal
Regiment mutinied and joined the rebel force. This was the zero-hour setting for
the Awami League’s armed uprising and total seizure of the cantonments in
Chittagong and Dacca planned for March 26.