Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
91
thrown in the river. I believe that at least 30,000 non-Bengalis were done to death
in Dinajpur town in March and April 1971.
“An example of the trickery and fraud used by the Bengali rebels to liquidate the
non-Bengalis was the invitation from the Deputy Commissioner to 25 leading
non-Bengali businessmen of Dinajpur to attend a meeting of the local Peace
Committee in the Iqbal High School building. When they arrived at the school
building for the meeting, each one of them was murdered by the Bengali rebels “
We were awaiting our execution in a slaughter-house on the bank of the river in
Dinajpur when the Pakistan Army rescued us “, said 55-year old Hamida
Khatoon. She had worked for years as a nurse in the Sadar Hospital in Dinajpur.
Repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in February 1974, Hamida gave the following
account of the unfortunate events of March 1971 in her home town:
“We had lived for the past many years in Dinajpur and it had never occurred to
us that life would become a nightmare for the non-Bengalis as it did in March
1971 during the Awami League’s rebellion.
“On March 23, a group of Awami Leaguers ordered all the non-Bengali menfolk
in our locality to attend a meeting of the Peace Committee of the area. While the
non-Bengali men were gone for the meeting, armed gangs of Bengali rebels
attacked their houses in the locality and looted every article of value with the
thoroughness of seasoned thieves. At midnight, a non-Bengali neighbour, who
had gone to the meeting, came running to us and informed us that all those who
had gone to attend the so-called meeting had been butchered in the school
compound by the rebels. The next day, the rebels rounded up all the non-Bengali
women and children in our locality and took us to a camp on the bank of the
river where we saw the horrifying massacre of the non-Bengali men. Their
bodies were being flung into the river. We were told that in a couple of days we
would also be done to death. There were very few young women left in our
group; the killers had kidnapped the young ones for rape. I can never forget that
hell-like, open-air slaughter-house run by the murderers on the river bank On
April 10, when we had resigned ourselves to fate and death because of the
physical and mental torture we had undergone, a posse of the federal troops
rescued us from the jaws of death.
“We were shifted to a camp in Saidpur. In the last week of December 1971, the
Mukti Bahini killers were after my blood because I had told the Pakistan Army
about the gruesome killings done by the rebels in March 1971. I was jailed for 18
months in Saidpur and tortured for weeks. In the first week of February 1974, I
was released from prison, and shortly afterwards I was repatriated to Pakistan. “