Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
157
murder of her husband by an Awami League killer gang in a motor launch in the
third week of March 1971:
“We had lived for six years in the Ferozepur sub-division. Our relations with
our Bengali neighbours were cordial but after the December 1970 general
elections a little strain had crept in. From the beginning of March 1971, the non-
Bengalis in our town were apprehensive and uneasy. Some non-Bengali boys
were roughed up by Awami League militants.
“On March 20, my husband and I decided to leave Ferozepur and we boarded a
Khulna-bound passenger launch at night It was jam-packed. Amongst the
passengers were some sixty non-Bengalis— men, women and children—who
were leaving the town because of insecurity and fear. We knew some of them.
After two hours, when the launch anchored at a small jetty, a gang of fifty armed
miscreants, shouting ‘Joi Bangla’ and ‘Long Live Awami League’, greeted our
launch. A dozen of them, armed with guns and daggers, boarded our launch.
They roughed up some non-Bengalis; they pulled the Saris of young women. The
killers barked out the order that all the Bengalis should leave the launch; it
became easy for them to make mincemeat of the non-Bengalis. They slaughtered
all the non-Bengali men on board the launch; they tossed children into the river.
As their desperate mothers jumped into the water to rescue them, the killers
opened fire on these drowning women and children. The thugs kidnapped some
teenage non-Bengali girls. My husband was amongst the dead. The Serang
(Captain) of the launch, a gentle Bengali who had known my husband, took pity
on me and my little son and hid us under a bundle of mats in his cabin. He
dropped us at Khulna where I stayed with some relatives for a few months and
escaped the carnage there. I sold my ornaments and raised some cash which
enabled me and my son to travel to Nepal. It was a perilous and tortuous journey.
In July 1973, we were flown to Karachi. “
Abdul Shakoor, 50, whose Bengali wife and two sons were murdered by an
Awami League gang in Kurmitala in Jhalokathi in the Barisal district in March
1971, testified:
“I had migrated from Bihar to East Pakistan shortly after the birth of Pakistan in
1947. I had attended meetings addressed by Molvi Fazlul Haq, Mr. H. S.
Suhrawardy, Khwaja Nazimuddin, Mr. Nurul Amin and Maulana Tamizuddin
in pre-Partition Bengal, I believed in the ideology of Pakistan. Shortly after I
came to East Pakistan, I married a Bengali girl. I started a small business and I
prospered. I had excellent relations with the Bengalis and I spoke their language
nearly as well as my Bengali wife. We had two sons and a daughter who were
Bengalis by birth; their mother tongue was Bengali.