Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
142
“The merchants—pictured here by a BBC Panorama team which reached
Jessore—were rounded up, roped together and marched off by Militia men.
Shortly after, Western reporters came across their bodies. They had been battered
and stabbed. One man still writhed in his death agony.
Malcom Browne of the New York Times, who visited Jessore a month after the
Pakistan Army had regained control over it, said in a despatch published on May
9, 1971:
“The night of special horror for Jessore was April 4, four days after the local East
Bengal Regiment had revolted against the national army.
“Jessore and Khulna are among the most heavily damaged towns in East
Pakistan. Many market areas and buildings are burned out; the streets deserted
“Throughout the tour, Government authorities and persons produced for
interview have told of thousands of non-Bengali residents, including women and
children, having been slain by the separatists, often after having been tortured. “
Mohammed Zubair, 57, a trader, who lived in Block N in the Satellite town in
Jessore, had this sad recollection of the dreadful Ides of March, 1971:
“All through March 1971, the non-Bengalis lived in panic and fear in Jessore.
The explosion came in the last days of the month when the Awami League killers
and the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles and the police went on the rampage
in the Bihari-inhabited localities of the town. The rebels had barricaded the
access road from the town to the military cantonment to prevent food supplies to
the West Pakistani soldiers. They had also blown up the main water pipeline
from the town to the cantonment.
“Some non-Bengali young men, who had friends amongst the West Pakistani
soldiers in the cantonment, stuffed food inside a truck and headed for the
cantonment. Armed with shot guns, they tried to blast their way through the
barricades and the gunfire of the Bengali rebels. But the numerically-superior
rebels wiped out the non-Bengali relief squad on the fringes of the cantonment. A
dozen non-Bengali young men perished in this desperate bid to break the
Bengali blockade of the cantonment. Their dead bodies were dumped in a nearby
stream.
“As some of these non-Bengali boys hailed from middle class families who lived
in the Satellite town of Jessore, hundreds of insurgents raided this locality on
March 28-29 and committed acts of unimaginable savagery. They looted and