Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
195
and aid, and (b) all federal taxes would be collected by the provincial
governments and not by the federal government. Such provisions are alien to the
concept of federalism and do not exist in the constitution of any truly federal
state. The Awami League’s proposal for two separate constituent conventions
“for the purpose of framing constitutions for the state of Bangladesh and for the
states of West Pakistan “ was undoubtedly a constitutional formula for the
eventual secession of East Pakistan from the fold of the federation. Under this
constitutional formula, the Awami League demanded for Bangladesh the power
to sign treaties and agreements of foreign trade and aid in total disregard of the
federal government and to maintain trade representatives overseas. This was the
platform of independence, not of provincial autonomy. The rigid stand of the
Awami League leaders and their refusal to budge even an inch from their
demand for virtual independence for Bangladesh wrecked the constitutional
talks in Dacca in the third week of March 1971.
General Yahya Khan’s postponement of the National Assembly’s inaugural
session, scheduled for March 3, 1971, was a temporary measure. It was intended
to give more time to the political leaders to devise a consensus on the form and
shape of the proposed constitution instead of openly wrangling in the forum of
the National Assembly. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman over-reacted to the temporary
postponement of the National Assembly’s session and hastily took to the path of
rebellion against the federal government and usurped the authority of the
lawfully-established government in East Pakistan. It is a tragedy of the grimmest
dimension that because of the Awami League’s chauvinism and power lust,
millions of innocent people in East Pakistan suffered the most dreadful trauma in
sub continental history.
India’s support to the Awami League encouraged Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in his
bid to wrest the reins of power in East Pakistan from the federal government
through the majesty of force and terror. India’s rulers have not reconciled
themselves to the reality of Pakistan as a separate, sovereign state. Muslim-
majority Pakistan has been a constant eyesore for Hindu-majority India. One of
the reasons for India’s all-out support to Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his
secessionist movement was spelled out in mid-1971 by the Chairman of India’s
Institute of Public Affairs, Mr. R. R. Kapur, a retired senior officer of the Indian
Civil Service, in these words:
“Our support to Mujibur Rahman is based; let us be candid enough, on our sub-
conscious hate complex of Pakistan. Platonically, we may plead all virtue but the
harsh reality is that Pakistan was wrested from us, and its basis — the two
nations’ theory — has never been palatable to us. If something ever happens
which proves the unsoundness of that theory, it will be a matter of psychological
satisfaction to us. That is, by and large, our national psyche and it is in that