Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
124
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Sorrows of Sylhet
The intensity of the Awami League’s rebellion in most parts of the Sylhet district
was not as severe as in many other districts of the province. One of the reasons
was that the population of non-Bengalis in Sylhet was not large. Another reason
was that the indigenous inhabitants of Sylhet (of Assamese origin) were opposed
to the Awami League’s plans for establishing an independent Bengali state. In
the 1947 British-supervised referendum on the issue whether Sylhet should stay
in India or join Pakistan, the people of the district gave a massive vote in favour
of Pakistan. The proposal for a province of North Bengal drew immense support
from the indigenous Assamese inhabitants of Sylhet district.
The Awami League’s terror machine wrecked the peace in Sylhet in March 1971
and some non-Bengalis were slaughtered by murderous gangs of Awami League
militants who received arms smuggled from neighbouring India. In the tea
gardens in Sylhet district, Awami League activists incited the Bengali labour to
violence against the non-Bengali executives and other staff members and some
families were slaughtered. The exact number of the non-Bengalis in Sylhet who
were killed in March 1971 is difficult to ascertain but it is believed to be in the
neighbourhood of 500.
“The killer gang broke into our house in Sylhet and gunned my only son and his
wife to death “, said 50-year-old Mrs. Wahida Khatoon in Karachi. Her son, Zafar
Ahmed Siddiqi, employed as an Accountant in the Sylhet office of the Pakistan
International Airlines, and his wife, Siddiqa, were shot dead on April 4, 1971, by
a posse of rebel gunmen in their home in the heart of the town. When Wahida
Khatoon tried to save her son, a killer shot at her and the bullet scraped her skull,
leaving a gash in it. She still bears the scar of that wound. But far worse is the
scar on her heart caused by the slaughter of her son and his wife. Wahida Begum
said in her testimony:
“The killers said they were shooting us because we did not belong to Bengal and
because Urdu was our mother tongue. They looted our house.
“I was wounded and I bled profusely. My son, Zafar’s six children were
orphaned. In this horrifying tragedy, our 18-year-old Bengali maidservant,
Hajera, was a tower of strength. She shielded my grand-children from the fire
and fury of the rebels who had killed my son and his wife. The Bengali land lord
of our house, moved by our plight, sheltered us in his own home and arranged