Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
92
Forty-year-old Ladli Masroor, whose husband, Mobeen Alam, was employed in
the Watch and Ward Department at Dinajpur Railway Station, gave this
narrative of the grisly events of March 1971:
“On March 25, at about 9 p.m., a killer gang of Bengali rebels raided our locality
in Dinajpur. They smashed the locked door of our house and overpowered my
husband. They tied him with ropes, clobbered him with an iron rod and looted
my house. As my children shrieked in terror, I begged the killers to spare my
husband. The attackers laughed and took possession of every article of value in
my house. “This transistor radio is mine “, said one of the raiders after grabbing
it from the wardrobe. Another killer took my husband’s watch. Two of them
frisked me for money and jewellery and stole all my ornaments. Behaving like
thugs and cut throats, they even took away my Saris. After they had
accomplished their errand of burglary, they dragged my husband to the street
and belaboured him so hard that he bled. I again begged his captors to free him
but they struck me with an iron rod and I fell down. They lined him up with
some other non-Bengalis of our locality and marched their captives in the
direction of the river. This was the last I saw of my husband. “Have faith in God
and look after the kids “, he shouted as the killers marched him away to what I
later learnt was the slaughter-house for liquidating the non-Bengalis.
“On April 10, a large mob of armed and yelling Bengalis stormed our locality.
They gathered all the non-Bengali women and children and marched them at
gunpoint to the bank of the river where the butchering of the non-Bengalis was
being done. I cowered in mortal terror when I saw this open-air slaughterhouse
and the faces of my innocent children. The women cried and screamed in terror;
some of them had spotted their men relatives being murdered by the Bengali
executioners. Dead bodies and blood littered the bank and the water of the river.
All of a sudden, the Bengali killers started running in complete disarray. A posse
of six Pakistan Army soldiers rushed towards us like angels on a rescue mission.
We were saved from death. The federal army took us to a Relief Camp in
Saidpur. In February 1974, we were repatriated to Pakistan. “
“The gory scene of the river-side slaughter-house haunts me. I saw the wooden
frames on which the non-Bengalis were beheaded with scythes and large knives;
I saw the boiling cauldrons in which the Bengali executioners dipped their
captives to extract information about their money “. This is how 30-year-old
Khatun Nisa, whose husband was employed in the police force in Dinajpur,
described the implements of torture that were innovated by the Bengali rebels at
the river-side, open-air human abattoir in Dinajpur. Khatun and her children and
hundreds of other hapless non-Bengali women and children (whose husbands
and fathers had been slaughtered in March 1971) were awaiting their turn to be
butchered when the Pakistan Army rescued them from the Bengali hangmen.