Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
25
“On March 17, when I was away from my hut on duty in the factory, a
large killer gang of Awami League thugs attacked the non-Bengali huts in
Nakhalpara, looted them and put them to the torch. They also burnt my
hut and killed my son, who, in spite of his young age, tried to resist the
attackers. When I returned to what once was my home I found the rubble
still smouldering and my wife was lamenting over the dead body of our
dear son “.
“I estimate that some 1,000 non-Bengalis were killed or wounded in barely three
hours in the Adamjee Nagar New Colony in Dacca on March 19, 1971 “, said
Mohammed Farid, 26, who was employed as Assistant Supervisor in the
Spinning section of the Adamjee factory.
Farid, who witnessed the gruesome massacre and escaped it by dint of good luck,
was repatriated to Karachi in January 1974. He said:
“Adamjee Nagar had in the past witnessed tension between the Bengali
and non-Bengali employees and many non-Bengalis had suffered in
clashes. The Awami League had built up a base of influence amongst the
Bengali workers and since the first week of March 1971, party cadres were
inciting the Bengali workers against the non-Bengalis.
“On March 19, a killer gang of Awami League militants, armed with guns,
sickles, daggers and staves came into our factory. The Bengali security
guards joined them and they rampaged through the mill and the houses
of the non-Bengali millhands.
“The killer gang attacked the Weaving section and slayed scores of non-
Bengali employees in barely half an hour of Operation Murder. I saw
many dozens of wounded millhands running towards my Spinning
section. I hid myself behind a big machine at the far end of the Hall. The
killers swarmed into my unit and attacked the non-Bengal employees.
Some of the victims ran out and the killers chased them, shooting with
guns. The killing spree of the rebels continued for nearly three hours. At
night, when I emerged from hiding, hundreds of dead bodies were
littered all over the factory premises. The killer gang looted the houses of
non-Bengalis and burnt many. They slaughtered hundreds of innocent
men, women and children and threw many corpses into flaming houses
“Close to the water tank lay the dead bodies of many non-Bengali girls
who, I learnt, were ravished by the killers and then murdered. It was a
terrible scene. “