Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
78
Shakoor Ahmed thinks that a typhoon of madness had gripped a large segment
of the Bengali population in Khulna in March 1971. “Most Bengalis are a gentle
people; a hardcore minority misled great numbers of Bengalis and incited them
to commit violence on the Biharis “, he said.
Sixty-year-old Nabi Baksh, whose three sons were slaughtered by a killer gang in
the compound of the Platinum Jubilee Jute Mills, Khulna, in the last week of
March 1971, testified:
“I was employed in the Jute Mill for the past ten years. My three grown up sons
wore also employed in it. We lived in a small house on Khan Jahan Ali Road in
Khulna.
“On March 24, a killer gang of Bengali rebels attacked the non-Bengalis
employed in the Jute Mill. I grappled with some of the killers when they started
shooting in the direction of my three sons. The killers overpowered me and
gunned my sons before my helpless eyes. I was hit on the head and I fainted.
After the killers had gone, a Bengali co-worker dragged me to the store room
where my wounds were bandaged and I stayed there until the federal Army
freed Khulna from the terror rule of the Bengali rebels “.
Nabi Baksh was repatriated to Pakistan in the autumn of 1973 and he has settled
in Karachi.
Twenty-eight year-old Rabia Begum, whose husband, Rustam Ali, was a federal
government employee in Khulna, gave this account of the looting of her house
and the killing of her husband in March 1971:
“Since the second week of March 1971, life had become a night mare for the non-
Bengalis. Every day we heard rumours that the Bengali rebels would raid our
colony and kill us.
“The dreaded time arrived on March 23 when a killer gang of armed rebels
raided our locality. My husband was away on a Government errand in Darsana;
my aged mother-in-law and I were the only two adults in my house. When I
heard the echo of gunshots, I decided to leave the house by the backdoor and
seek refuge in the house of a trusted Bengali woman in another locality. I tried to
persuade my mother-in-law to go with me but she refused, saying that the
raiders would spare her because of her old age. I slipped out of my house with
my two children and reached my hideout safely. After the federal troops entered
Khulna, I went back to my house. I was shocked; a part of it was burnt and every
article of value was stolen. My mother-in-law was beaten and injured by the