Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
143
burnt the houses of non-Bengalis and killed them by the thousands. Hundreds of
teenage girls were molested and kidnapped.
“They looted my house; they slaughtered my three grown up sons and they
kidnapped my two young daughters. One of the raiders stabbed me in the
shoulder and I collapsed in a pool of blood. The murderer thought I was dead. A
part of my house was burnt; I hid myself for almost a week in the backyard.
After the Pakistan Army freed Jessore from rebel control, I buried my dead sons.
I scoured every inch of Jessore in search of my young daughters. There was no
trace of them. “
Mohammed Zubair was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in January, 1974.
Twenty-one year-old Tahera Begum who was widowed in Jessore when a posse
of the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles bludgeoned her husband to death on
March 29, 1971, sobbed out her story of woe as follows:
“We lived in the Ramnagar colony of Jessore. We hailed from Calcutta.
Although Urdu was our mother tongue, my husband and I spoke Bengali very
well. Almost all the residents in the Ramnagar colony were non-Bengalis. My
husband, Amjad Ali was a well-to do businessman and an active social worker.
Since the beginning of March, when tension gripped Jessore, my husband used
to appeal to Bengalis and non-Bengalis to live in amity and accord.
“In the evening of March 29, he told me that he was going to attend a meeting of
the Peace Committee wherein representatives of Bengalis and non-Bengalis will
take an oath to protect one another like true Muslim brethren. Although I was
apprehensive, I encouraged him to go to the Union Committee Hall for the Peace
Committee’s meeting. When he arrived there, he found that the Bengali members
of the Committee were absent. He and his non-Bengali associates waited in vain
for an hour and then walked back to our house. He apprehended an attack by the
Bengali insurgents on our locality but we had no weapons. A sincere and kind-
hearted Bengali friend, Mohammed Mahmood, suggested that we shift to his
house for safety but my husband preferred to stay in our own house.
“Late in the night of March 29, about 500 Bengali insurgents and Awami
Leaguers, many blazing their automatic weapons and tossing hand grenades on
houses, raided the Ramnagar Colony on a “loot, kill and burn “ mission. They
encircled our locality and murdered every adult male. My husband appealed to
the killer gang to spare the lives of innocent people; a rebel Bengali soldier
gunned nim to death. His dead body was carted away in a truck by the killer
gang and flung into a ditch which was turned into a mass grave. I lived for some
days with a Bengali family in our neighbourhood; in mid April, I went to live