Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
18
Indian agents infiltrated into East Pakistan for sabotage. Hutments of non-
Bengalis in Dacca’s shanty townships were set ablaze by the hundreds.
The Dacca University Campus served as the operational base of the Awami
League militants and its laboratories were used for manufacturing different
varieties of explosives. A portion of the Jagannath Hall was used for torturing
and murdering kidnapped non-Bengalis. Reports of a forest-fire of loot, arson
and murder in almost every town of East Pakistan worried the federal
government and the Army’s Eastern Command in Dacca. Cyclostyled posters,
issued by the Awami League student and labour groups in Dacca and other
places in the province, seemed like military orders of the day. These posters
incited the people to “resort to a bloody war of resistance“ for the
“national
liberation of East Bengal“.
Some 15,000 fully-loaded Rifles at the Dacca Police headquarters were seized by
the Awami Leaguers and their supporters. More arms shops in Dacca were
looted by the Awami League terrorists. In the morning of March 25, barricades
and road blocks appeared all over Dacca city. Petrol bombs and other hand-
made bombs, manufactured from chemicals stolen from the Science laboratories
of educational institutions in the past few weeks, exploded at some places.
The federal Army’s intelligence service had become privy to the Awami League’s
plan for an armed uprising all over the province in the early hours of March 26,
1971. Late in the night of March 25, hours before the zero hour set by the Awami
League for its armed insurrection, the federal army units fanned out from the
Dacca cantonment and conducted, with lightning speed, a series of pre-emptive
strikes which squelched the Awami League’s uprising, at least in the provincial
capital, in a matter of hours. The federal Army’s crackdown on the Bengali
insurgents in Dacca showed that the Awami Leaguers, while engaged in talks
with General Yahya, were collecting guns and ammunition and making
explosives for the anticipated showdown with the federal army.
In their bargaining with General Yahya Khan, the Awami League leaders wanted
him to agree to a constitutional arrangement that would make East and West
Pakistan two separate sovereign states with a very loose, nebulous confederal
link — a link so weak that Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s virtually independent
Bangladesh could have snapped it any time he wished to do so. A posse of
federal troops arrested him at his residence in Dhanmandi in Dacca at about 1-30
a.m. on March 26. He was lodged for the night in the Dacca Cantonment under
military guard and flown the next day to West Pakistan and interned.
The federal Army’s operations against the rebels in Dacca were so swift and
effective that by the dawn of March 26 it was in full control of the city. The