Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
179
from my mother that the girl had resisted her violaters who had taken turns to
rape her. Before leaving, the killers had strangled her to death.
“Comilla experienced a reign of terror all through March 1971. Non-Bengalis
were liquidated by the thousands; many pro-Pakistan Bengalis, who were
known to have voted against the Awami League in the December 1970 general
election, were singled out for torture by the insurgents. Peace and order returned
to Comilla after the Pakistan Army re-establishcd its audiority early in April. But
in December, after the victory of the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini, many of
the non-Bengali survivors of the March, 1971 slaughter were murdered. Late in
1972, I escaped to Nepal after bribing the Mukti Bahini. In April 1973, I
succeeded in reaching Karachi. “
Equally harrowing was the account which 23-year-old Akhter Rashid gave of the
March 1971 killing of non-Bengalis in Comilla:
“My father, Abdur Rashid, had a contract for the supply of food to the Pakistan
Army garrison in Comilla. We lived in New Market and I was a student. Most of
our neighbours were non-Bengalis. Our relations with the Bengalis were friendly.
Tension in Comilla exploded on March 22 when a blood-thirsty mob of yelling
Awami Leaguers and insurgents of the East Pakistan Rifles went on a killing
spree shortly after sunset. They ransacked all the houses occupied by non-
Bengalis in our locality and killed the menfolk, almost without exception. My
father was out of town on the day of the massacre. I did not go home and hid
myself for the evening in a dilapidated house. Around midnight when I reached
my home, I was shocked to find that my teenage sister, Shirin, had disappeared
and our house had been looted. There was not a soul in the neighbourhood. I
saw dead bodies lying in pools of blood at some places. I was terrified. My father
returned to Comilla after our troops had regained control over it. The
kidnapping of my sister, Shirin, was a severe blow to him. We scoured the whole
of Comilla district in April and May, 1971 in search of Shirin. Late in 1972, I
decided to leave East Pakistan and persuaded my father to accompany me. But
he refused and said that he would continue the search for his missing daughter
until his last breath. I escaped to Nepal, and in June 1973, I came to Karachi. In
Kathmandu, I was told that the Bengali insurgents, who had kidnapped non-
Bengali girls in Comilla district, had taken them to India where most of them
were sold to brothels for prostitution. The fear that this might have been Shirin’s
tragic fate is gnawing my soul. “
The two eye-witnesses from Comilla reported that a sizable element among the
Awami League militants was of Bengali Hindus. As soon as Pakistan Army
reinforcements reached Comilla early in April, the Awami League activists and
the para-military Bengali insurgents fled to neighbouring India. They carried