Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
177
In the first week of March 1971, the Awami League militants terrorised the non-
Bengali populace and ordered them to hand over their firearms. A few affluent
West Pakistani and Bihari traders were kidnapped for ransom. The Awami
League storm troopers stole guns from the police armoury. In the second week of
the month, the Awami League militants became more daring and bellicose, and
committed sporadic acts of violence against the non-Bengalis whose houses and
shops were red-marked in the preceding week. In the third week of March, the
Bengali rebels launched a full-blast campaign of terror and violence against the
small non-Bengali population. In the night of March 23, which was observed by
the Awami League as ‘Resistance Day’ to hurl defiance at the federal
Government, killer mobs, led by the armed Awami League militants, ransacked
non-Bengali houses and indulged in wanton slaughter of the non-Bengali men.
The pogrom continued with savage ferocity all through the last week of March
and right up to April 27, 1971, when the Army recovered Serajganj from the
insurgents.
The most gruesome orgy of violence against the non-Bengalis was the burning of
350 hapless old man, women and children who were herded in a school building
by the rebels late in March 1971. Killer gangs, blazing guns, broke into the houses
of non-Bengalis and gunned all the male inmates to death. The bereaved women
and children were marched at gunpoint to this improvised prison house. Before
the Army re-occupied Serajganj on April 27, the rebels set fire to this building
and all the non-Bengalis trapped in it were burnt to death. No survivors
remained to tell the full story of this beastly act.
The exact death toll of the non-Bengalis in Serajganj in the March-April 1971
massacre will never be known because their dead bodies were tossed by the
hundreds into the Brahmaputra River. Many of the non-Bengali victims were
executed by their captors on the bank of the river and their bodies were thrown
into the water. After the federal troops re captured Serajganj, heaps of mutilated
and burnt dead bodies of the non-Bengali victims of the Awami Leagues terror
were found in houses which had been looted and burnt. Many destitute and
orphaned non-Bengali children and their widowed mothers were taken to Dacca
and lodged in camps. Some were sent to Khulna where the non-Bengalis had
made arrangements to rehabilitate them.