Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
48
“In Chittagong, the colonel commanding the Military Academy was killed while
his wife, eight months’ pregnant, was raped and bayoneted in the abdomen. In
another part of Chittagong, an East Pakistan Rifles Officer was flayed alive. His
two sons were beheaded and his wife was bayoneted in the abdomen and left to
die with her son’s head placed on her naked body. The bodies of many young
girls have been found with Bangladesh flagsticks protruding from their wombs
“The worst-affected towns were Chittagong and Khulna where the West
Pakistanis were concentrated.“
The “Northern Echo“ of Darlington in Durham, in its issue of April 7, 1971, said:
“Leon Lumsden, an American engineer on a U.S. aid project, said that for two
weeks before the Army moved last week, Chittagong’s predominantly Bengali
population had been but cheering West Pakistanis in the port.“
Some 5,000 non-Bengali refugees from the Awami League’s terror in Chittagong,
who arrived in Karachi on board a ship in the third week of March 1971, related
harrowing stories of the genocide launched against the non-Bengalis. The federal
government prohibited their publication in the West Pakistan Press to prevent
reprisals against the local Bengalis.
Mohammed Israil, 40, who lived in Quarter No. 28 in the Ispahani New Colony
in the Pahartali locality in Chittagong, lost his sister, his brother-in-law and his
infant nephew in the massacre of non-Bengalis on March 3, 1971. He thus spoke
of the tragedy which almost wrecked his life:
“We had lived in Chittagong for the past many years and all of us spoke Bengali.
I was engaged in business and I lived with my sister and her husband in their
house in Pahartali.
“In the afternoon of March 3, about five thousand Bengali demonstrators, led by
Awami League militants, attacked the Ispahani Colony where non-Bengalis lived
in large numbers. The raiders bore blazing torches and some had guns. Without
any provocation from our side, the killer mob went on the rampage. They
poured kerosene oil and petrol on houses and set them ablaze. As the inmates
rushed out, the killer gang mowed them with gunfire.
“A gang of ten armed rebels smashed the door of our house and burst in with
blazing guns. They shot my brother-in-law who died on the spot. I was wounded
and I feigned death. My sister, who grappled with the attackers, was bayoneted.
The killers tore her suckling child from her arms and shot him just as she lay in
her death agony. Later on, the killers looted our house and set it ablaze. I
succeeded in crawling into the compound where I stayed in hiding for some