Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
17
work. Armed thugs, claiming links with the Revolutionary Action Groups set up
by the Awami League, extorted money from affluent non-Bengalis.
From March 16 to 23, while General Yahya and Sheikh Mujib engaged in ding-
dong constitutional negotiations, the Awami League continued to operate its
parallel administration and trained its cadres in the use of automatic weapons at
a number of training centres in Dacca and its suburbs. The incidence of raids on
the homes of non-Bengalis mounted sharply. A riotous mob ambushed an Army
jeep in Dacca and hijacked the six soldiers riding in it. Guns were looted from the
Police armoury in the town. Awami League gunmen clamped a ban on the
supply of food grains to the Pakistani military in the Dacca cantonment.
March 23, Pakistan’s national festival day, was designated as
“Resistance
Day“ by the Awami League High Command. Instead of the Pakistan flag, the
Awami League militants hoisted the new Bangladesh flag atop all public and
private buildings in Dacca. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman took the salute at an armed
March Past at his residence on which the Bangladesh flag was ceremoniously
unfurled. The Awami League held displays of its strength, and bellicose mobs,
shouting ‘Joi Bangla’, went on the rampage in localities where non-Bengalis were
concentrated.
More West Pakistani businessmen were kidnapped and their Bengali captors
demanded huge sums of money from their relatives as ransom. Violent mobs,
waving guns and other lethal weapons, brick-batted Karachi-bound passengers
near Dacca Airport. Awami League demonstrators marched past the Presidential
Mansion in Dacca where General Yahya was staying and shouted obscenities
against him and the federal Army. Young thugs, enriched by the ransom money
extorted in the Awami League’s name from non-Bengali businessmen and
showing off the cars they had hijacked from their West Pakistani and other non-
Bengali owners, milled in the evenings outside the Dhanmandi residence of
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and yelled “Shadheen Bangla“ (Independent Bengal).
Awami League cadres tangled with the staff of the Chinese Consulate in Dacca
on March 23 when they insisted on hoisting the Bangladesh flag atop the
Consulate and the Chinese refused to allow them to do so. Awami League
demonstrators, at many places, tore up Pakistan’s national flag and trampled
under their feet photographs of Quaid-i-Azam Mohammed Ali Jinnah, the
founder of Pakistan.
All through this week, the Awami League militants were beefing up their
strength with the defectors from the East Pakistan Rifles and the paramilitary
Ansar force. Gunrunning from India proceeded at a frenzied pace and many