Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
27
a trading firm in Dacca. He escaped the slaughter of non-Bengalis in the
crowded New Market locality of Dacca on March 23, 1971 and was
sheltered by a God-fearing Bengali in his shop. The killers raped their
non-Bengali teenage victim at the back of the shop and later on slayed her.
Repatriated to Karachi in October 1973, Zahid Abdi said:
“On March 23, I took a bus to the New Market shopping locality in Dacca.
As the bus neared my destination, I saw a crowd of Awami League thugs,
armed with guns and daggers, on the rampage. Even before the bus could
come to a halt, I jumped from it and ran towards a side lane. I had heard
that some non-Bengali passengers had been molested or done to death by
the Awami League hoodlums. On the way towards the side lane, I saw a
few wounded men sprawled on the roadside. A Bengali shopkeeper,
whom I had known in the past, took pity on me and hid me in his shop.
When he saw some thugs coming towards it he locked it up, with me in
hiding, and stood guard. When the killers came, he told them that he was
a Bengali and that he had shut his shop for the day.
“Acting on his advice, I decided to spend the night in the shop because
the road back home was unsafe. Late at night, I heard the screams and
shouts for help in Urdu of a girl who was being ravished by her captors in
a dark place close to the shop where I was hiding. Her four captors took
turns to rape her. After they had accomplished their satanic acts, the killer
gang shot the girl and melted away in the void of the night. The shop was
locked, and in the forenoon, when my protector opened it, I told him of
the fiendish happening of the previous night. We looked for the body of
the girl; there was no trace of it but bloodstains and torn pieces of a
woman’s clothing were visible at the spot where I thought that the girl
was raped and murdered. My Bengali saviour, with tears in his eyes, told
me that hundreds of non-Bengali girls had suffered a similar tragic fate
and that the devil’s minions were on the loose all over the city. “
Zahid Abdi’s estimate is that some 2000 innocent, hapless non-Bengalis perished
in the carnage in the New Market shopping locality and its neighbourhood.
“The thugs did not spare a single non-Bengali shop or business premises
in the area and looted every article of value “, said Zahid Abdi.
“I wish the federal Army had crushed the Awami League militants with full
force in Dacca in the very first week of March 1971 when they had defied the
Government’s authority“, said Anisur Rahman, 26, who was employed in a