Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
54
set up by the rebels in the Workers’ Recreation Club in the Mill premises in
March 1971:
“We lived in the staff quarters of the Ispahani Jute Mills. As Stores Officer, my
father was kind to all the Mill employees — non-Bengalis and Bengalis alike. The
number of non-Bengali employees and their families, most of whom lived in the
Mill area, was close to 3,000. Since the middle of March, the Awami League
militants and their supporters amongst the Bengali millhands were belligerently
hostile towards the non-Bengalis. Between March 23 and 28, they raided the
houses of the non-Bengalis, hijacked the men at gunpoint and butchered them in
the slaughter-house set up in the factory’s Recreation Club. Tortures of
unimaginable brutality were inflicted on the victims before they were beheaded.
There were syringes for drawing blood from the veins of the victims and for their
storage in containers. The rebels carried the blood to their hospitals for their
wounded soldiers and other jingoes. The killer gangs, a couple of days before the
Army occupied the area, slaughtered hundreds of women and children in this
human abattoir. “
Shahid Hussain was repatriated to Karachi in the middle of 1973 from Nepal. He
had escaped from Chittagong to Kathmandu in 1972. He thinks that nearly 75
per cent of the non-Bengali male population in the Ispahani Jute Mills perished
in the March 1971 massacre. Many of the non-Bengalis slaughtered in the Mill
area were buried in mass graves hours before the federal army drove out the
rebels.
Mohammed Sharfuddin, 40, who lived in House No. 673 in A Block in
Halishahar, Chittagong, and worked as a motor mechanic, lost his two brothers
in the massacre of non-Bengalis in March 1971. Repatriated to Karachi from
Chittagong in February 1974, he said:
“A little more than half of the population of some 50,000 people in Halishahar
consisted of non-Bengalis. For the past 24 years, they had lived in these
settlements. Their relations with the Bengalis were cordial. All of them spoke
Bengali fluently but in their homes they spoke Urdu. Many of the inhabitants in
this locality originally hailed from the Indian State of Bihar. But there were also
many West Pakistani families, including Punjabis and Pathans. The Bengalis
called them Biharis, too.
“In the night of March 18, a rampaging mob of Awami League militants, rebel
Bengali soldiers and thugs attacked our part of the colony and looted our houses
and slaughtered all the male members of non-Bengali families. In my house, they
gunned my two brothers and kidnapped their young wives. After the federal
army took over Chittagong, I searched every nook and corner of Chittagong to