Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
159
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
Genocide in Mymensingh
Mymensingh witnessed a horrifying massacre of non-Bengalis by the Awami
League militants and the mutineers of the East Bengal Regiment and the East
Pakistan Rifles between the third week of March and the third week of April
1971 when the Pakistan Army freed it from the control of the insurgents.
Evidence now available shows that more than 20,000 non-Bengalis were done to
death. In the Mymensingh Cantonment, Bengali soldiers of the East Bengal
Regiment of the Pakistan Army and the para-military East Pakistan Rifles
revolted on March 26-27, 1971 and slaughtered hundreds of West Pakistani
officers and men in a midnight surprise attack on their Barracks and residential
quarters for married military personnel. They made even women and children
the victims of their bloodlust.
On April 16, a posse of the rebels from the East Bengal Regiment raided the
Mymensingh district jail and gunned to death seventeen prominent non-Bengali
citizens who were detained there by the insurgents. Violent mobs, led by Awami
League storm-troopers and the rebel Bengali soldiers, killed almost all the non-
Bengali
menfolk
in
Shankipara
and
nine
other
residential
localities
of
Mymensingh town. More than 1,500 women and some children, who were
herded like cattle in a mosque and in a school building and were to be butchered
by their Bengali captors, were saved in the nick of time by a column of the
Pakistan Army which re-occupied Mymensingh town on April 31, 1971. The
rebels killed many anti-Awami League Bengalis.
A Correspondent of the Reuters News Agency, Maurice Quaintance, who visited
Mymensingh early in May, said in a despatch published in the Ceylon Daily
News of Colombo of May 15, 1971:
“There is evidence that non-Bengalis, largely immigrants from India who sought
refuge after the 1947 Partition, were attacked, hacked to death and burnt in their
homes by mobs.
“Eye-witnesses told stories of 1,500 widows and orphans fleeing to a mosque at
Mymensingh, in the north, as armed men identified as secessionists slaughtered
their husbands and fathers. “
The New York Times reporting a Mymensingh despatch from its Pakistan
Correspondent, Malcolm Browne, said in its issue of May 7, 1971: