Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
132
The destruction brought by the rebels in Rangpur, added Mohammed Yusuf,
was premeditated and wanton. The scale and ferocity of it was beyond the
wildest imagination of the non-Bengalis.
“I learnt from a few other survivors of the massacre “, continued Mohammed
Yusuf, “that after the killer gang had slaughtered the non-Bengali menfolk and
most of their male children; the women were herded in the building of the Iqbal
High School. The young ones were stripped of their clothes at gunpoint and
marched off to a nearby building where they were assaulted and raped by the
rebels. Before the insurgents retreated from Rangpur, they murdered these
unfortunate girls and scattered their naked bodies either in the river or in the
lush green fields “.
Junaid Ahmed, 21, who was a College student in Rangpur and lived with his
parents and two brothers in a rented house on Satgumbad Road, was injured in
the massacre of non-Bengalis in his locality on March 23, 1971. Junaid, who was
repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in January 1974, had this recollection of that
horrifying scene:
“My father, Aqil Ahmed, was a clerk in the Patna High Court. In August 1947,
after Pakistan was established, my parents migrated to East Pakistan and made
Rangpur their home. I was born in Rangpur. Although we spoke excellent
Bengali, we were considered Biharis. We had no relatives left in Bihar. Rangpur
was our home.
“On March 10, peace in Rangpur was disturbed when a band of Awami
Leaguers, armed with guns, spears and daggers, attacked a cluster of non-
Bengali houses and shops. Some Biharis were killed or maimed. After this event,
the non-Bengalis lived in terror and almost every day one or two incidents of the
manhandling of non-Bengalis by thugs of the Awami League were reported.
There were widespread round-ups of non-Bengalis by the rebels.
“On March 23, about six hundred armed Awami Leaguers and rebel soldiers of
the East Pakistan Rifles stormed our locality and spread fire and death in non-
Bengali homes. We had no weapons to resist these gun-blazing cut-throats. They
machine gunned me and the other members of my family. I miraculously
survived.
“I estimate that the death toll in my locality was in the neighbourhood of 5,000.
The killers murdered 2,000 men, 700 women and 2,300 children. They kidnapped
at least 500 teenage girls; many were raped and killed and some were taken
away by the rebels to India........... “