Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
105
CHAPTER TEN
Slaughter in Laksham, Rajbari,
Goalundo and Faridpur
“I am the lone survivor of a family of nine; all my dear ones were butchered in
Laksham in March 1971 by the Bengali rebels “, said 59- year old Masoom Ali,
who was repatriated to Karachi from Dacca in February 1974.
Masoom Ali’s 26-year-old son was employed as a ticket checker in the East
Pakistan Railway at Laksham. He was killed in the carnage. Masoom Ali had this
painful memory of the murder of his family:
“
“The non-Bengali element in Laksham’s population did not exceed 1,000.
Amongst them were also some families of West Pakistan origin. The Bengalis
referred to all of us by the generic name of Bihari. Since the first week of March
1971, because of the Awami League’s uprising, acute tension existed in Laksham
and the non-Bengalis were apprehensive. The police force was immobilised as far
as the safety of the non-Bengalis was concerned; no policeman was willing to
rescue any non-Bengali from the thugs.
“In the night of March 19, 1971, about 500 Bengali rebels, many armed with guns,
raided the Railway quarters wherein lived the non-Bengali employees and their
families. The raid was conducted with such suddenness and ferocity that we had
no time even to think of escape. A killer gang broke the door of our house and
opened fire on all of us. In a matter of minutes our house was turned into a
slaughter-house; they killed my son, his wife and their four small children and
the teenage sister and brother of my daughter-in-law. One of the killers struck
me on the head and I was unconscious for two days. The federal troops, who
took over control of Laksham on April 16, 1971, arranged the burial of my dear
ones. For months I was mentally disturbed; I had dreadful nightmares. I think
that at least 800 non-Bengalis perished in the March 1971 massacre. I still
remember those lurid bloodstains on the walls and floor of Railway Quarter No.
93/H in Laksham where my kith and kin were done to death before my stunned,
helpless eyes. I wish I hadn’t survived “.
RAJBARI
“These broken glass bangles arc my most cherished possessions; they are the
only mementoes I have of my two pretty daughters who were kidnapped by the