Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
9
Pakistan during the Awami League’s bloody rebellion and the gaping vacuum
this genocide had caused in the non-Bengali population in the country’s eastern
half. Their testimony showed that the Awami Leaguers and the rebels from the
East Pakistan Rifles and the East Bengal Regiment were the first to massacre the
non-Bengali innocents and that the tornado of violence and death which swept
the province in March-April 1971 stemmed from the Awami League’s lust for
power. I thought of writing a book based on their testimony but I did not have
eye-witnesses from all of the many scores of towns in East Pakistan where non-
Bengali communities were wholly or partially exterminated.
In the meantime, I started work on
“Mission to Washington“ which was an
expose
of
India’s
intrigues
in
the
United
States
to
bring
about
the
dismemberment of Pakistan. On the basis of my personal knowledge and
experiences, I detailed in this book the diabolic work of the India Lobby in the
United States and its collaborators to turn American public opinion against
Pakistan and to block American military supplies to Pakistan’s Armed forces
preparatory to India’s armed grab of East Pakistan in December 1971. It was
published in January 1973.
In “The East Pakistan Tragedy “, written by Prof. Rushbrook Williams, a well-
known British journalist and author, and published in 1973, the political aspect of
the East Pakistan crisis was lucidly discussed and Pakistan’s case was cogently
explained.
Major-General Fazal Muqeem’s book,
“Leadership in Crisis“, which also
appeared in 1973, dealt at length with the politico-military aspect of the East
Pakistan crisis, India’s military and financial help to the Bengali secessionist
rebels and the disastrous war with India in December 1971.
Pakistan’s rejoinder to the flood of anti-Pakistan literature which has gushed
from India’s propaganda mills since the Ides of March 1971 has been tragically
weak and inadequate. In the summer and autumn of 1973, when I travelled
extensively in the Middle East, Western Europe and the United States, I saw a
number of books derogatory to Pakistan and its fine army in bookshops,
especially those which sell foreign publications. Two books which I read and
which provoked my ire are Indian Major-General D.K. Palit’s “The Lightning
Campaign “ in which he has heaped invectives and abuses on the Pakistan Army
units stationed in East Pakistan, and Olga Olson’s “Doktor “ in which she has
exaggerated the suffering of the Bengali population during the Army operations
in 1971. I also glanced over two fat volumes of the Bangladesh documents, mass
distributed by the Indian Government in the United States, in which India is
projected as an angel of peace who showed Job-like patience in the face of
Pakistan’s alleged villainy and barbarity in East Pakistan. I did not see in these