Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
110
“We locked the door of our house, shuttered the windows and prayed to God.
We had very little grain left. The grain shops had stopped selling food grains to
the non-Bengalis. ‘Don’t sell food to the Biharis’ read signboards in Bengali
owned shops. My mother and I lived on water for three days; my children—two
small sons and a daughter — ate uncooked rice and stale vegetables. Our effort
was to give the impression that no one lived in our house. We had also explored
an escape route for an emergency.
“Early in April, a killer gang banged on our door. We slipped out of the
backdoor and headed for the fields. In a barn, shielded by a large mound of earth,
we spent many days of fear and terror. The crackle of gunfire echoed all the day
long; the killers were busy killing. At night, I used to crawl to a pond to get water
for my thirsty children and my mother. It was polluted but it slaked our parched
throats. When the Pakistan Army regained control over Kushtia in mid-April
and we heard yells of “Pakistan Zindabad “ (Long Live Pakistan), instead of the
shouts of “Joi Bangla “, we moved out of our hideout. The federal troops were
kind to us and did their best to locate my missing husband. They said the rebels
had killed all the non-Bengalis they had put into the jail “.
Twenty-two-year-old Saida Khatoon, who lived with her husband, Zafar Alam
Malik, in the Thanapara locality of Kushtia and escaped the massacre of non-
Bengalis by seeking refuge in the house of a Bengali family, had this recollection
of the gruesome happenings in March 1971:
“Tortures of unthinkable bestiality were inflicted on the non-Bengalis who were
herded by the Bengali rebels in Kushtia jail in March 1971. I learnt from some
God-fearing Bengalis, after the Pakistan Army had liberated Kushtia that the
Bengali rebels had slaughtered all their non-Bengali captives held in this jail.
They were starved and denied water for days on end; any one who protested
was dragged into a dungeon-like room where he was bludgeoned to death. The
tormentors took delight in stripping their human prey naked and then they
singed their bare bodies with burning cigarettes.
“There was no trace left of almost all the non-Bengali women I knew before tile
March 1971 killing. They were also butchered. Some pregnant women were
killed by the Bengali rebels with indescribable beastliness. Their wombs were
ripped open with bayonets and their unborn babies were also killed.
“Some wounded Bengali rebels were treated in the Kushtia Hospital. The rebels
marched quite a few of their captives to the Hospital where at gunpoint they
were made to “donate “ blood for the wounded Bengalis. The “donors “ were