Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
118
“I had lived in Ishurdi for many years; I had a small shop. I liked Ishurdi; it was
a pleasant and quiet town. Our relations with the Bengalis were friendly. I spoke
Bengali well.
“On March 26, about 3,000 Bengali militants, many armed with rifles and sten
guns, made a pre-dawn attack on our locality. Although there had been some
tension in the town for the past three weeks, we had not expected such a massive
attack. We had no weapons to defend ourselves with. The killers broke into the
homes of non-Bengalis and without uttering a word, sprayed them with bullets.
The front door of my house was locked; they smashed it and entered, blazing
their guns at us. My aged mother, who was saying her morning prayer, was the
first one to be gunned in our house; she collapsed on the prayer rug and gave up
the ghost. Before I could even step out of my room, the killers machine-gunned
me, my wife and my two little children who had just woken up. I groaned in
agony and writhed in a pool of blood. Before I passed out, I saw the killers
shooting my two grown up brothers. “For two days, I lay in a state of coma. In
the morning of the third day, I regained consciousness. It was a ghastly sight; on
the floor were sprawled the blood-bathed dead bodies of all my kith and kin. I
thought I was in a delirium; I had high fever and I was terribly weak. I could
only crawl; I kissed the lifeless, cold faces of my two little children. I wish I was
also dead. The tragedy was insufferable and I again fainted. On April 11, 1971,
troops of the Pakistan Army came to my house, removed the dead bodies for
burial and took me to the Ishurdi hospital where I was treated for weeks for my
wounds. There were a few other wounded survivors of the massacre. Almost 90
per cent of the non-Bengali population in Ishurdi was exterminated by the
Awami League militants and the rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles and the Ansars.
When I went back to my locality, it was a ghost colony. Every non-Bengali house
was looted by the vandals; many were burnt. Almost all my friends were dead.
Re-visiting my ransacked house was a torture; the memory of the slaughter of
my family was unbearable. I moved to Dacca and in January 1974. I was
repatriated to Karachi “.