Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
99
Forty-six-year old Abdur Rashid, a Railway employee at Parbatipur who lived in
Railway Quarter No. 153 (N), had a vivid but benumbing recollection of the
slaughter of non-Bengalis in trains in March 1971:
“On March 12, the train from Ishurdi arrived ten hours late at Parbatipur. The
reason was that a band of armed Awami League volunteers and other miscreants
had stopped it at a wayside station and slaughtered many of the non-Bengali
passengers. I was at the Railway station when the ill-fated train steamed in with
170 dead bodies of non-Bengali men, women and children. Most of the bodies
were horribly mutilated. Also on the train were some 75 wounded non-Bengalis;
many of them were in a critical condition. They were removed to the local
hospital; only a few survived. Amongst the dead bodies on the train were those
of suckling children who had been stabbed brutally along with their mothers. It
was a horrifying scene and the memory of it gives me a shiver even now. After
this episode, it became terribly dangerous for non-Bengalis to travel in trains.
Similar incidents were reported from quite a few other places... “
Abdur Rashid and his wife and children escaped the massacre in Parbatipur.
They suffered excruciating hardships after India’s conquest of East Pakistan.
They came to Karachi via Nepal in April 1973.
Abbas Ali, 45, who worked as a school teacher in Parbatipur and lived in a house
on New Road, testified:
“In the second week of March, 1971, the Awami League militants began
terrorising the non-Bengalis. On March 19, a killer gang attacked a large number
of non-Bengali houses in a locality close to where I lived. They had sten guns and
rifles. They looted the non-Bengali houses and burnt some of them. They killed a
few non Bengalis and kidnapped a number of teenage girls. I am convinced that
most of the killers who raided our locality were Bengali Hindus and some of
them spoke Bengali with an accent which resembled that of the West Bengalis in
India. The Bengali rebels conducted the liquidation of the majority of the non-
Bengali population in Parbatipur in stages. It reached its peak in the first week of
April when wholesale slaughter of the non-Bengalis became the order of the day.
I escaped the massacre with the help of a Bengali family which sheltered me “.
Abbas Ali was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in February 1974. He thinks
that the Awami League militants had drugged a large segment of the Bengali
population in Parbatipur with lies against Pakistan, the people of West Pakistan
and the federal government. “What amazed me was the fact “, he added, “that
the killer gangs even desecrated mosques. This was extraordinary and incredible
because most of the Bengalis I had known were religious and God-fearing people
“.