Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
193
What Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his pro-India caucus in the Awami League
failed to achieve in March because of the daring, pre-emptive strike by the
federal Army was accomplished for them by their Indian benefactors in the third
week of December, 1971. The secession plan was in fact conceived in June, 1964.
when the Sheikh and his associates, according to the prosecution’s charge-sheet
in the secessionist Agartala conspiracy trial of 1968, held their first major
conspiratorial conclave in Dacca in the house of Tajuddin Ahmed — the
hardliner whom India made, in April, 1971, the Prime Minister of the Indian
sponsored
and
Indian-financed
Government
of
Bangladesh
in
Calcutta.
According to the prosecution’s charge-sheet, it was in this meeting of the
conspirators that the name of Bangladesh was coined for the independent
Bengali state that was to be established in East Pakistan with Indian funds and
arms. It was also in this meeting that the design of the flag of Bangladesh, which
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman saw ceremoniously, unfurled at a Dacca rally on March
23, 1971, was presented for approval. The Sheikh was not exonerated of the
charges of secession levelled against him in the Agartala conspiracy case; the trial
was abandoned in February 1969, by the Ayub regime under political pressure
from opposition parties. In the election year of 1970, India’s clandestine financial
support to the Awami League was a major factor in the party’s affluence and its
well-lubricated, highly efficient organizational apparatus.
The Awami League employed fascist techniques in its operations for power grab.
Its leaders and their followers used strong-arm methods to terrorise their rival
parties. All through the election year of 1970, scores of attacks by the Awami
Leaguers on their political adversaries were reported in the press. The Awami
League had won over a section of the Bengali bureaucracy in East Pakistan with
lavish promises of speedy promotions and other fringe benefits once it came to
power. Unlike its political rivals, the Awami League suffered from no shortage of
funds. Money flowed into its coffers from generous India. It also enjoyed a rich
harvest of protection money from the West Pakistani industrialists who owned
factories in East Pakistan and who thought that bribing the Awami League was
an insurance against labour tantrums. An excellent organizer, Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman had no difficulty in recruiting into his militant outfit tough young men
specially trained in breaking up meetings, manhandling opponents and in other
cloak-and-dagger tactics of political combat. The Awami League’s leadership
showed a fascist intolerance for the Opposition and had no qualms of conscience
in ruthlessly liquidating its rivals. The ouster of Mrs. Amena Begum, a one-time
President of the Awami League, from the party at the behest of Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman is one of the many examples of the Nazi-style manner in which he ran
the Awami League. Even the organizational set-up of the Awami League, during
nearly two decades of its operation, did not substantiate the party’s pretensions
to democracy. The Awami League’s public meetings were organized as massive