Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
14
CHAPTER ONE
The Ides of March in Dacca
The Awami League held East Pakistan’s capital city of Dacca in its ruthless grip
from March 1 to 25, 1971. During this dark period of loot, arson and murder,
more than 5,000 non-Bengalis were done to death by the Awami League
militants and their supporters. For months, before the Ides of March 1971, the
hardcore leadership of the Awami League had primed its terror machine for
confrontation with the authority of the federal government. Fire-breathing
demagogues of the Awami League had saturated the consciousness of their
volatile followers with hatred for the West Pakistanis, the Biharis and other non-
Bengalis. They propagated a racist and obscurantist brand of Bengali nationalism.
Secession from the Pakistani nationhood was undoubtedly their camouflaged
goal.
On March 1, 1971, within an hour of General Yahya Khan’s forenoon
announcement of the temporary postponement of the March 3 session of the
Constitution-framing National Assembly, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman fired the first
broadside of revolt against the federal government. At a hurriedly summoned
press conference in Dacca, he ordered a general strike in the provincial capital to
paralyse the administration and to usurp the authority of the lawfully-
established Government in East Pakistan.
As he gave the “Go Ahead “ signal to his party’s storm troopers, the Awami
League militants went on the rampage all over the city, looting, burning and
killing. They looted arms and ammunition from the Rifle Club in the nearby
industrial township of Narayanganj. They turned two dormitory blocks of the
Dacca University, the Iqbal Hall and the Jagannath Hall, into operational bases
for their regime of terror.
On March 2, armed Awami League jingoes looted guns and ammunition from
arms shops in the New Market and Baitul Mukarram localities of central Dacca.
They trucked the looted weapons to the Dacca University Campus where student
storm troopers practised shooting on an improvised firing range.
Frenzied mobs, armed with guns, knives, iron rods and staves, roamed at will
and looted business houses, shops and cinemas owned by non-Bengalis. The
lawlessness and terror which the Awami League had unleashed in Dacca
compelled the provincial administration to summon the help of the Army units
garrisoned in the Dacca cantonment.