Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
90
“We were told that April 10 was the deadline set by the Bengali rebels for the
murder of the surviving women and children in our locality. We cried and
prayed to Allah for succour. We heard the echo of gunfire and thought that the
killer mob was coming in our direction. But our prayers were answered when a
unit of the Pakistan Army entered Dinajpur and re-established its authority. We
were saved from the butchers knives. The army moved us to Dacca where we
lived in a Relief Camp for widowed women and orphaned children. After the
Indian Army seized East Pakistan on December 17, 1971, we underwent more
suffering and many women were kidnapped by the Mukti Bahini. In March 1974,
I was repatriated to Karachi along with my little daughter. “
“I have not been able to comprehend the real reasons for the xenophobia against
the non-Bengalis which gripped a segment of the Bengali populace in Dinajpur
in March 1971 “, said 28-year-old Abdul Khaleque whose family had lived in that
region long before the Partition of the sub-continent in 1947.
Khaleque’s Urdu-speaking grandfather had settled in Dinajpur in the 1920’s. His
mother was a Bengali and he and the other members of his family spoke
excellent Bengali. Yet, in the massacre of the non-Bengalis in March 1971 most of
them were done to death. Khaleque, who lived in his ancestral house on Mission
Road in Dinajpur, luckily escaped the killing by going into hiding in the house of
a Bengali friend in another part of the town. In February 1974, Khaleque was
repatriated to Pakistan. He said:
“There were many other families, such as ours, which had settled in Dinajpur
long before Partition. They were bilingual i.e. they spoke Bengali as well as Urdu.
They had endeavoured for merger with the local Bengali population by inter-
marrying. Every member of my family was a born Bengali and spoke Bengali
with the accent prevalent in Dinajpur. Yet in the madness of March 1971, all of us
were considered Biharis although none of us had seen the face of Bihar after
Partition. It had never occurred to me in my wildest fancy that any Bengali in
Dinajpur would ever think of slaughtering any member of my family for being a
non-Bengali. But after March 21, a fiendish insanity gripped a large portion of the
Bengali population. Instigated by the Awami Leaguers, they exterminated nearly
90 per cent of the non-Bengali population in the towns of Dinajpur district.
“In some villages near Dinajpur, where small groups of non-Bengalis lived, the
slaughter was so brutally complete that not a single non-Bengali survived. I
became a nervous wreck after I saw the heaps of rotting dead bodies of non-
Bengalis in the streets and houses in Dinajpur when I emerged from hiding and
the federal troops had re-established their control. I heard about the infernal
slaughter-houses which the killer gangs had set up on the banks of the Kanchan
River. There the non-Bengalis were slain by the hundreds and their bodies were