Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
12
I must stress, with all the force and sincerity at my command, that this bock is
not intended to be a racist indictment of the Bengalis as a nation. In writing and
publishing this book, I am not motivated by any revanchist obsession or a wish
to condemn my erstwhile Bengali compatriots as a nation. Even today there are
vast numbers of them who are braving the pain and agony of endless
incarceration in hundreds of jails in Bangladesh because of their loyalty to
Pakistan — a country in whose creation their noble forebears played a leading
role. Just as it is stupid to condemn the great German people for the sins of the
Nazis, it would be foolish to blame the Bengali people as a whole for the dark
deeds of the Awami League militants and their accomplices.
As a people, I hold the Bengalis in high esteem. In the winter of 1970-71, I had
dedicatedly laboured for months, as the Secretary of the Sind Government’s
Relief Committee for the Cyclone sufferers of East Pakistan, to rush succour of
more than ten million rupees, in cash and kind, to the victims of this cataclysmic
tragedy.
Time is a great healer of wounds and I hope and pray that God, in his benign
mercy, will reunite the Muslims of Pakistan and Bangladesh, if not physically, at
least in mind and soul. Knowing a little of the Bengali Muslims’ psyche and
social milieu, I devoutly believe that no power on earth can snap permanently
their Islamic moorings and that, in spite of the trauma of 1971 and its painful
aftermath, they remain an inseparable part of the mainstream of the globe-
girdling Muslim fraternity.
“Blood and Tears “ is being published at a time
when all the Bengalis in Pakistan who opted for Bangladesh have been
repatriated to that country and the danger of any reprisal against them has been
totally eliminated.
The succour and rehabilitation of the multitudes of Biharis and other non-
Bengalis, now repatriated to Pakistan, is our moral and social responsibility.
They have suffered because they and their parents or children were devoted to
the ideology of Pakistan and many shed their blood for it. Even as the victims of
a catastrophe, not of their own making, they are entitled to the fullest measure of
our sympathy, empathy and support in restoring the splintered planks of their
tragedy-stricken lives. In projecting their suffering and of those who are sadly no
more and in depicting the poignance and pain of their scarred memories in
“Blood and Tears “, I have been motivated by humane considerations and by a
humanitarian impulse. Theirs is, indeed, a very sad story, largely untold, and
this book mirrors, in part, the agony and trauma they suffered in the not-too-
distant past, and the raw wounds they still carry in their tormented hearts.
“Blood and Tears“ is the story of the rivers of blood that flowed in East Pakistan
in the infernal month of March 1971, when the Awami League’s genocide against
the non-Bengalis was unleashed, and also of the tears that we shall shed for