Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
120
they sighed and sobbed out the details of the slaughter of their menfolk, of their
own kidnapping and of their rape by the Bengali rebels.
“Before being dumped in the mosque “, one of them said, “our clothes were
stripped and we were marched in the nude to a school building where our
captors ravished us. Late at night we were left in this mosque. The dead bodies
of two teenage girls who made a daring escape bid on the way here are lying in
the compound “. In this melee of weeping, ravished women were the innocent
daughters and wives of many of my colleagues in the Railway.
“The next morning, the rebels retreated and a unit of the Pakistan Army
liberated Paksey. They rescued us; I was treated in hospital. All my family
members had perished in the killing. The women and children, who survived the
slaughter of the non-Bengalis, were taken to a Relief Camp in Dacca “.
Subsequently, Abu Mohammad was transferred to Dacca. He was repatriated to
Karachi in February 1974.
Shamsuzzoha, who had witnessed the killings in Ishurdi in March 1971, also
spoke of the massacre of non-Bengalis in Paksey, eight miles from where he lived:
“My first cousin, Jamal Malik, was employed as a Guard in the East Pakistan
Railway at Paksey. His family of 12 lived in a quarter in the Railway colony.
Jamal and all his ralatives were killed in the third week of March, 1971. Some of
the men were gunned to death in the quarter itself; others, including some aged
men, young women and children, were marched to a school building with the
promise that they would be lodged there and their lives spared. On the fateful
day, the rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles riddled them with machine-gunfire in
the compound of the school. An hour before the massacre, the captive young
women were taken at gunpoint to another school building where they were
ravished by the rebels. Before the rebels retreated, they herded many of these
raped women in a mosque. They were freed by the federal Army “.
Fifteen years old, Mohammed Qayum, whose parents and elder sister were
brutally killed in the massacre of non-Bengalis in Paksey on April 9, 1971, thus
related the story of that ghastly episode in these words: “Early in the morning, a
killer mob, yelling ‘Joi Bangla’ attacked the Railway colony where we lived. They
looted our houses and at gunpoint they marched us to an old school building at
some distance from our colony. Herded in this school were hundreds of other
men, women and children from the Railway colony. Our captors had given us
the false promise that our lives would be spared.
“Late in the afternoon, our captors, brandishing guns, daggers and spears, lined
up all their adult male captives. They were driven in two’s to a corner of the