Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
148
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
Suffering in Narail
Narail is a small town in the Jessorc district. All through March 1971 it was
rocked by the tremors of the Awami League’s uprising. Not more than a
thousand non-Bengalis lived in this town. Between March 25 and April 6, some
800 of them were liquidated by the armed Awami leaguers and the Bengali rebel
soldiers. The most gruesome massacre was of nearly seventy Pathans — men,
women and children.
Thirty-five-year-old Ghafoor Ahmed, who was employed in a trading firm in
Narail, and his wife and two children luckily, escaped the slaughter of non-
Bengalis in the town and its neighbourhood. They owed their lives to a
courageous Bengali friend who sheltered them in his house at great risk to
himself and arranged their escape to Dacca. Early in January 1974, the United
Nations airlift brought them to Karachi. Ghafoor Ahmed said:
“I had lived in Narail for 15 years. I had bought a plot of land in Molvipara and
erected a mud house on it. I liked the Bengali Muslims and I had many friends
amongst them. Close to our locality was a Hindu temple. Many Hindus lived in
its vicinity. Our relations with them were not too happy. They disliked the non-
Bengali Muslim immigrants from India.
“In the last week of March 1971, local Awami Leaguers, Hindu militants and
rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles ganged up against the non-Bengalis and
went on a genocidal spree. On March 29-31, a killer gang attacked non-Bengali
houses and killed men, women and children by the hundreds.
“Two days before the massacre started, a religious Bengali Muslim friend
persuaded me to leave my house and stay in his home. He said that the rebels
were planning the slaughter of the non-Bengalis. He hid me and my wife and my
children in his house in the outskirts of Narail. On the day of the carnage—
March 29—in our locality, the Bengali rebels looted and burnt my house. They
also killed a number of Islam-loving Bengalis who had sided with the Muslim
League and the Jamaat-e-Islami in the 1970 general elections. The killer gang
inflicted heinous tortures on a respected local leader, Mohammed Imamuddin
before murdering him and his family of ten. “
After the Pakistan Army recovered Narail from the Bengali insurgents, added
Ghafoor Ahmed, the rebels and many of the local Hindus, who had participated
in the slaughter of non-Bengalis and pro-Pakistan Bengali Muslims, fled to India.