Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
51
“About 4,000 Awami Leaguers, rebel soldiers and other miscreants attacked the
non-Bengali houses in Halishahar in the forenoon of March 23. I was away from
my house on work in another part of the city. The killer gangs looted my house
and killed, with machine gunfire, my wife, my four little children, my teenage
sister-in-law and my 13-year-old brother. The raiders burnt a part of my house.
Not more than 15 per cent of the non-Bengali population in this locality survived
the massacres on March 23, 25 and 27, 1971. The slaughterers used to tell their
victims that they would not leave any Bihari alive. By Bihari, they meant any
non-Bengali Muslim. Amongst the killers were many Hindus. They had plenty of
arms and ammunition.“
After the federal troops secured Chittagong, Sami Ahmed lived for some months
in his partly burnt house in Block No. I-193 in the Halishahar locality in
Chittagong. After India’s seizure of East Pakistan in the third week of December
1971, the Mukti Bahini and the Awami Leaguers slaughtered more non-Bengalis.
He was repatriated to Karachi in November 1973.
Mohammed Nabi Jan, 20, who witnessed the massacre of non-Bengalis in the
populous Wireless Colony in Chittagong on March 26, 1971, and lay wounded
for three days in a mound of dead bodies, narrated his weird, story in these
words:
“Large clusters of non-Bengali houses had existed in the Wireless Colony for
many years past. In the second week of March 1971, armed bands of Awami
leaguers marked every non-Bengali house with a red sign. As they had set up a
Peace Committee, in whose meetings they solemnly pledged that they would not
harm the non-Bengalis, we were not unduly alarmed. From time to time, the
Awami League volunteers extorted money from us. We had learnt of the Awami
Leaguers’ attacks on non-Bengalis in some other parts of the city and we were
getting worried. My father and my elder brother wanted us to leave Chittagong
but all the escape routes were blocked by the rebels, so we were resigned to our
fate. We had no guns with us; we were defenceless
“In the night of March 26, at about 9 o’clock, a huge mob of Bengalis, with
blazing guns, attacked the houses of non-Bengalis in the Wireless Colony. They
had no difficulty in identifying their houses as they were red-marked a few days
earlier. The killer mob divided itself into groups and went on the rampage. Many
of the killers were uniformed Bengali defectors from the East Bengal Regiment
and the rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles. They broke into houses, asked no
questions and sprayed gunfire on the inmates. After they had killed everything
that moved, they looted the houses and stole articles of value from even dead
bodies.