Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
184
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
Turmoil in Bogra, Naogaon
The Awami League militants and the mutineers of the East Pakistan Rifles had
seized control of Bogra town in the second week of March 1971. They looted the
shops owned by non-Bengalis and extorted money from the owners at gunpoint.
One of their many acts of lawlessness and violence was the storming of the jail.
They let loose all the prisoners and inducted many of the notorious jailbirds into
the rebel ranks. The crescendo of the Awami League’s violence and xenophobia
gained in intensity after the freed prisoners swung to their side.
Some non-Bengali yourg men were lynched in the streets. Their parents were
manhandled. On March 26, willer gangs of Awami Leaguers and rebel soldiers,
fired by a gencidal frenzy, exterminated vast multitudes of non-Bengalis — men,
women and children. Their houses were burnt after being looted; teenage girls
were kidnapped by the hundreds; many were savaged and raped. Some 700 non-
Bengali men, women and children, driven out of their homes by Awami League
gunmen, were herded early in April, 1971, in the Bogra Jail. The Bengali rebels
who were routed in battle by the advancing federal Army planned to blow up
the jail with dynamite before abandoning the town. But the timely arrival of the
Pakistan Army saved this tortured mass of humanity from being blown to
smithereens.
Hakim Ashrafullah, 59, who practised the Eastern system of Medicine in Bogra
since 1951 and whose only son was butchered by a killer gang late in March 1971,
said:
“My ancestral home was in Lucknow where my father, Hakim Barkatullah, was
respected for his deep knowledge of Eastern Medicine. I spent a part of my youth
in Calcutta. After Partition in 1947, I migrated to Dacca, and in 1951, Bogra
became my home. I liked the town and its people. I attained considerable success
in my practice of Eastern Medicine. I was popularly known as “Chacha “ (Uncle)
and I had hundreds of Bengali and non-Bengali friends. During the presidency of
Ayub Khan I was elected a Basic Democrat and the Bengali vote for me was
massive.
“In the last week of March, Bogra became a welter of fire and gore for many
thousands of non-Bengalis. The killings continued all through the first half of
April. My son was employed in a local soap factory; he and all the other non-
Bengalis were brutally killed. I never found his dead body; I learnt that it was
flung into a burning house. This was a common practice followed by the killer