Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
146
One of the witnesses recalled the gory murder of a Punjabi lieutenant of the
Pakistan Army on March 14. He had come to town from the cantonment to visit
an ailing friend. On the way back, a group of Awami League thugs ambushed
him and shot him dead. In the last week of March, many West Pakistani soldiers
were shanghaied by the Bengali mutineers near the cantonment. In the first week
of April, scores of Punjabis, who were detained by the insurgents in prisons and
police lockups, were killed by firing squads in paddy fields which were used as
execution grounds.
KOTCHANDPUR
Ghulam Warsi, 35, who lived in the Bara Bazar in Kotchandpur in Jessore district
and whose wife was killed and teenage daughter was kidnapped by a gang of
armed Awami Leaguers in March 1971, said:
“I have become prematurely old because of the woes and misfortunes which
ruined my life in March 1971. I was a cloth merchant and we lived in some
measure of affluence. I had many Bengali friends. We had lived in Kotchandpur
for many years and I spoke Bengali very well. About a thousand non-Bengalis
lived in this small town. Many were immigrants from Bihar and Uttar Pradesh in
India; some hailed from West Pakistan.
“The non-Bengalis were aware of the fact that some ultranationalistic Bengalis
amongst the Awami Leaguers were inciting the local population against the non-
Bengalis. On March 28, when I was in my cloth shop, I got the frightening news
that a large mob of armed Awami Leaguers had attacked the residential locality
where my house and those of hundreds of other non-Bengalis were located. I
closed my shop and I ran towards my house. It was with great difficulty that I
reached it through a back lane to avoid the killer mob. My house was amongst
the score of houses that were set ablaze. Unmindful of the lurid tongues of fire, I
rushed inside and retrieved my three little sons. My wife had been shot and lay
in a pool of blood. There was no trace of my teenage daughter. My children told
me that the killers had shot dead my wife because she courageously resisted
them when they grabbed my daughter. After the Pakistan Army re-established
its control over Kotchandpur, I travelled all over Jessore district in search of my
kidnapped daughter; I could not find her. The killers wiped out a smiling colony
of more than 1,000 non-Bengalis in two days. They kidnapped some 80 teenage
girls. “
Ghulam Warsi moved to Dacca with his three small children in mid-1971 and
was repatriated to Karachi in February 1974. In his prayers, he entreats the
Almighty to reunite him with his missing daughter. “I am sure my prayer will
be answered someday “, he said hopefully.