Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
96
“On March 26, the killers again raided my house in search of my brother. They
caught him while he was trying to escape into the woods. Before my dazed eyes,
one of the killers shot him in the chest at point blank range. As he fell down, he
asked for water. I ran to him with a glass of water; the killers hurled the glass
from my hand and plugged a second bullet into the skull of my brother. He was
dead and a torrent of blood gushed out from his lifeless body. Two old non-
Bengali women, who lived in our neighbourhood, helped me in digging a grave
in which I buried my brother.
“On March 30, the killer gang again came to my house, ransacked it and asked
me at gunpoint where I had hidden my ornaments. When I told them that I had
none left, they forced me to go with a group of non-Bengali women and children
to the bank of the river. One of the hapless women tucked a copy of the Holy
Quran in her arm; a gunman snatched it from her and threw it on the ground.
We reached the execution ground and saw hundreds of other non-Bengalis lined
up for murder. The killings were conducted till late at night; it was like a scene
from hell. It seemed that the river ran red with the blood of the innocents. The
Bengali rebels had beheaded many of their victims; we saw their severed heads
looking up from blood-soaked sods of earth. Hundreds of dead bodies lay on the
bank of the river, awaiting disposal in the water. The next day, when all was set
for the execution of our group, a posse of soldiers of the Pakistan Army suddenly
appeared on the skyline and our executors scattered in fear. God had heard our
prayers; we were saved. The Pakistani soldiers lodged us in a Relief Camp and
we were looked after very well. But after December 16, 1971, when the Mukti
Bahini ruled Dinajpur, we were again the victims of terror. Hundreds of
widowed women, like me, walked to Saidpur where we were told that the Red
Cross would set up a Relief Camp and protect us from the killer gangs. For two
and a quarter years, we lived in abject poverty and many of the hapless women
died. In January 1974, I was repatriated to Pakistan. “
Eye-witnesses of the killings in Dinajpur town reported that non-Bengalis were
almost wiped out in the neighbouring towns of Bochaganj, Pirganj, Chorkoy,
Ranisankail, Fulbaria, Kaharol, Birganj, Ponchagarh and Chirirbandar between
the second week of March and the third week of April 1971. As the federal Army
re-established its control over these towns, the Bengali militant, who conducted
“Operation Loot, Burn and Kill “ against the non-Bengalis, escaped to the
sanctuary of the neighbouring Indian State of West Bengal. There is considerable
evidence to support the view that the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles, who
spear-headed the pogrom against the non-Bengalis, received instructions and
help from India. The Times of London, in its issue of April, 6, 1971, quoted a
young British technician who had crossed the Indo-Pakistan frontier at Hilli: