Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
144
with my parents in Dacca. In January 1974, the United Nations repatriated me to
Pakistan. “
Tahera Begum said that hundreds of teenage girls were kidnapped from non-
Bengali homes by the rebels; many were raped and some were taken away to
India by their retreating Bengali captors.
Twenty-two-year-old Anjuman Begum who, along with her husband, Qaiser
Hussain, miraculously escaped the massacre of non-Bengalis on March 28, 1971,
in the Tafsidanga colony in Jessore, had this bitter memory of that nightmarish
period:
“We lived in a hut in Paikgacha in Tafsidanga. It was nick named as ‘Bihari
Para’. Most of the inhabitants in this shanty township were of the low-income
group. My husband peddled merchandise. Our relations with the Bengalis in our
neighbourhood were friendly. We never had a riot in our colony.
“Late in March 1971, a mob of Awami Leaguers and some hoodlums raided our
locality and set fire to our thatched huts. In a few minutes the entire locality was
aflame. As the inmates rushed out of their burning huts, a barrage of gunfire
mowed hundreds of innocent men, women and children. The killer gang also
burnt the only mosque in our colony.
“My husband and I escaped from our burning hut into a nearby paddy field. We
lay still there all through the night. We heard the crackle of gunfire, the groans of
dying men and the shrieks of women assaulted by their kidnappers. Just before
sunrise we crawled to a hut where an aged Bengali farmer lived. We had known
him as a kind soul. He gave us shelter and we lived with him until the Pakistan
Army freed Jessore.
“When we returned to our old locality, we saw the rubble and the decomposed
bodies of slain non-Bengalis. The Army arranged their mass burial. “
Anjuman Begum and her husband went to Dacca in the autumn of 1971. In
January 1974, they were airlifted to Karachi.
Qurban Ali, 51, who lived in Ramnagar colony of Jessore and owned a provision
store, said:
“Non-Bengalis in Jessore felt insecure after the Awami League’s victory in the
December 1970 elections. Many were subjected to taunts and insults by the
Awami Leaguers. In March 1971, the Awami Leaguers and some Hindu Bengali
infiltrators from India incited the local Bengalis against the non-Bengalis. The