Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
72
CHAPTER FIVE
Fire and Death in Khulna
The Awami League’s rebellion triggered a rash of disturbances and lawlessness
in Khulna, the hub of East Pakistan’s jute trade and industry, in the first week of
March 1971.
On March 4, a riotous crowd, led by armed Awami Leaguers, raided the local
Telephone Exchange, wrecked a part of the equipment and slayed a number of
employees, mostly non-Bengalis. The next day, a large killer gang, brandishing
rifles, sickles, spears and knives, looted four shops and burnt a hotel in the heart
of the city. Another mob, armed with explosives, guns, spears and bamboo poles,
attacked non-Bengali shops and homes in the neighbouring townships of
Daulatpur and Khalispur and murdered 57 persons. Their mutilated dead bodies
were found after some days.
On March 6, Bengali militants took out a big procession to frighten the non-
Bengalis in Khulna. Some of the armed processionists tried to loot arms and
ammunition shops and in the fracas there were quite a few casualties. The civic
administration in the town was paralysed; the police became ineffective and the
Awami League militants whipped up mass hysteria against the non-Bengalis and
the federal government. Federal and provincial officials, who did not side with
the rebels, were terrorised.
In the second week of March, the Awami League’s rebellious movement gained
momentum in Khulna and the non-Bengalis were singled out for terrorisation
and abridgement. In the third week of the month, the Awami League’s regime of
violence and terror held Khulna and its neighbouring towns under its full sway.
The Khulna-Jessore Road was blocked and barricaded by the rebels at various
points. The survivors of the March 5 killing of the non-Bengalis in Khulna were
subjected to fresh attacks and intimidatory pressure by the Awami League
militants and the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles.
On March 23, the Awami League-led rebels in Khulna launched a full-blast
attack on the settlements of the non-Bengalis in the town and its neighbourhood
and butchered at least five thousand innocent people. All through the last week
of March, until the federal army moved in, the Bengali rebels staged the
bloodbath of non-Bengalis. They had set-up ghoulish slaughter-houses where
non-Bengali men women, children were done to death in a gruesome manner.
The rebels flung many of the dead bodies into the rivers in Khulna and its