Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
189
prayers were answered by the Almighty and the Pakistan Army entered
Santahar. The federal troops rescued us. They took us to Naogaon where my
wounds were treated and, later on, I was taken to Dacca and lodged in a Relief
Camp “.
Qamrunnissa was shifted to Chittagong in mid-1971 and lived with her parents.
In February 1974, she was repatriated to Karachi. “Even now I am harried by
dreadful dreams; I see those thugs killing my dear husband; I see them chasing
me with their blazing guns “, she moaned.
Amanullah Khan, 26, who lived in Quarter No. 195 in the Railway (Loco) Colony
in Santahar, had this harrowing recollection of the massacre of non-Bengalis in
March, 1971:
“In the evening of March 26, a large gang of armed Awami Leaguers attacked
our residential colony in which non-Bengalis were in the majority. Some of the
non-Bengalis had weapons, and we exchanged gunfire with the attackers all
through the night. Early the next morning, the non-Bengalis moved to the
Railway Station, and some old men, women and children sought refuge in the
Mosque which was only 200 yard away. Those of us who had weapons had no
ammunition left. So we were defenceless. In the forenoon, a hundred Bengali
rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles came to the Railway station and forcibly took
away whatever weapons we had. At noon, we learnt that the rebels had looted
the Ranipur Police Station and had killed all the non-Bengalis there. We were
panicky. In the afternoon of March 27, about seven hundred armed Awami
Leaguers and rebel soldiers stormed the Mosque near the Railway Station and
gunned to death all the non-Bengalis sheltered in it. After the Pakistan Army re-
occupied Santhar, 53 dead bodies of non-Bengali men, women and children were
found strewn all over the Mosque. The houses of non-Bengalis had been looted
and burnt; there were very few survivors. I had witnessed the gruesome
massacre of the non-Bengalis in the Mosque from the window of a store room in
the Railway Station. I escaped to Nepal after India’s seizure of East Pakistan. In
September 1973, I came to Karachi. I am convinced that many of the rebel
soldiers, who mowed down the non-Bengalis in the Mosque, were, in reality,
armed infiltrators from India. “
“Six Bengali hoodlums, claiming to be soldiers of the Mukti Bahini, grabbed me
when I was giving a woollen sweater to an ill-clad Pakistani prisoner-of-war in
Santahar in the third week of December 1971 “, said 55- year-old Ghulam Rasool,
a Railway employee based at Parbatipur, who was on duty on that day in
Santahar. Ghulam Rasool had escaped the March 1971 massacre of non-Bengalis
at Parbatipur but suffering was in store for him late in December 1971 at the