Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
94
children to the far end of the bank; there is too much of stink and bloody muck
here “. The ogres, who were engaged in the butchery, responded with
“Yes,
Major “ and motioned us, with their knives, to run down the bank of the river.
We had hardly any strength left in us and we dragged ourselves with difficulty
towards the water. We had become so resigned to fate and we were so terribly
weak that we had lost the zest for life and we begged our killers to finish us off
quickly. Escape was impossible; there were at least 500 hatchet-men on the spot;
many were armed with guns. Suddenly, pandemonium broke loose and our
tormentors started running for their lives. On the far end of a ridge, silhouetted
against the twilight sky, were a dozen Pakistani soldiers who were racing
towards us like angels sent for our deliverance. Their yells of “Allah is Great
“ rent the skies, and in a matter of minutes our beastly captors melted away in a
nearby forest. The Pakistani troops took us to a Relief Camp; those who were
injured were hospitalised and the dead were given a solemn burial. From the
third week of December, 1971, after India’s occupation of East Pakistan, the
Mukti Bahini and its supporters unleashed an avalanche of suffering on us. Now
that we have come to Pakistan, we feel we have been given a fresh lease of life. “
Fifty-year-old Hasina Begum lived with her husband, Kabir Ahmed Khan, an
affluent businessman, on the outskirts of Dinajpur town. She lost her husband in
the March 1971 massacre but she saved the lives of two teenage daughters of
their best friend, a lawyer. Her two sons had gone into hiding in a nearby forest.
After the federal army re-established its authority over Dinajpur, Hasina
encouraged her sons to join the Pakistan Army. In December 1971, they were
taken prisoner in an encounter with the enemy on the border. In December 1973,
Hasina was repatriated to Karachi from Dacca. “I am confident that Allah will
bring my sons to Pakistan sooner than I expect “, she said hopefully. Hasina
testified:
“Since the first week of March 1971, the Awami League militants had started
terrorising the non-Bengalis. In the middle of the month, their animus for the
non-Bengalis assumed a new dimension of cold-blooded violence, kidnapping
and murder. We started experiencing the sharp edge of terror when a few non-
Bengali men of our locality were shanghaied by killer gangs of Bengali rebels
around March 17. I sent my two teenage sons to live in hiding with a trusted
Bengali family in a nearby village. A lawyer friend of my husband, his two
daughters and his brother came to stay with us. Their house was located in the
main part of the town where violence against the non-Bengalis had mushroomed.
We heard a rumour that on March 24 the Bengali rebels would attack the non-
Bengalis in our locality. I was worried because of the reports that the Bengali
rebels were kidnapping and molesting non-Bengali young women also. With the
consent of my husband and his lawyer friend, I spread a mat on the floor of a dry,
derelict water tank in the compound of my house, made the two girls lie on it