Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
58
“On March 20, 1971, he was on his way to the main Community Centre of our
area in connection with a meeting of prominent citizens which had been called to
devise ways of maintaining peace in the town. On the way, a rampaging mob of
rebels overpowered him and slaughtered him. Shortly afterwards, the killer mob
went berserk and looted and burnt hundreds of non-Bengali homes. “
Nasim Ahmed and his widowed mother were sheltered by a Godfearing Bengali
family and they survived the carnage. In September, 1973. they were repatriated
to Pakistan. Nasim Ahmed thinks that more than 75,000 non-Bengalis were
butchered in the March-April, 1971 carnage in Chittagong and its neighbourhood.
Another 10,000 non-Bengalis, in his view, perished in the wake of India’s seizure
of East Pakistan on December 17, 1971. The most savage killings, he said, were
done by the Bengali rebel soldiers who had automatic weapons and the local
Hindus who hated the non-Bengalis.
Jamdad Khan, 42, who worked as a Security Guard, in the Gul Ahmed Jute Mills
in Agrabad in Chittagong, testified:
“I had joined the Gul Ahmed Jute Mills as a Security Guard in July 1971. Before
that I lived in the N.W.F.P. In Chittagong, I lived in a quarter in the Nasirabad
Housing area. I had heard from non-Bengalis about the mass slaughter which the
Bengali rebels had conducted in March 1971 in Chittagong. One day, on my way
to the Jute Mill, I spotted a small human skull lying outside a deserted house.
Through a crack in a window, I looked inside. To my horror, the skulls and
bones of many children lay in heaps inside the locked room. Some clothes were
strewn on the floor and they looked to be the ones usually worn by non-Bengali
children. With the help of some friends, I dug a grave and interred the remains of
the innocents in it. Subsequently, I learnt that in March 1971, this house was used
as a slaughter-house by the rebels and they had killed many women and children
in it.
“After India’s seizure of East Pakistan on December 17, 1971, the Mukti Bahini
and Awami League storm troopers again went on the rampage against non-
Bengalis. Amongst those killed were many hundreds of Punjabis and Pathans
who were doing business in Chittagong or were employed in the administration
and firms. The non-Bengalis were sheltered in camps put up by the Red Cross
but it was the daily practice of the Mukti Bahini and Awami league militants to
kidnap non-Bengalis by the scores. They were tortured in jails and killed. Their
dead bodies were thrown into the sea. To win the sympathy of the Indian
military officers stationed in Chittagong, the local Awami Leaguers dug up the
dead bodies of hundreds of non-Bengalis from shallow mass graves and showed
them as the skeletons of Bengalis murdered by the Pakistan Army. The Awami