6 
Why Nixon Opposed India:
The Indo-U.S.-Sino-Soviet Equation
hile Washington decided to keep its hands off the East Pakistan situation after the dark night of March 1971, things started heating up
elsewhere. India reacted sharply within a few days, with some 400 parliament members signing a petition demanding New Delhi
recognize an independent East Pakistan.
On 31 March 1971, Gandhi introduced a strongly worded resolution in parliament. Adopted by both houses – the Lok Sabha and the Rajya
Sabha – the resolution expressed a “deep anguish and grave concern at recent developments in East Bengal.” It alleged that “a massive attack by
the armed forces – dispatched from West Pakistan – had been unleashed against the entire people of East Bengal to suppress their urges and
aspirations for freedom and prosperity.”
On 3 April, Soviet President Nikolai Podgorny sent a letter to Yahya Khan appealing for a political settlement of East Pakistan’s problem.
Russia publicly appealed to Yahya to quickly end the repression in East Pakistan. On 20 April, Podgorny wrote to Yahya Khan again, criticizing
the military crackdown and supporting India’s demand for a political settlement in East Pakistan.
Islamabad replied to Moscow that the situation was under control and normal routines were being restored. Yahya Khan, in a terse message on
6 April, told Podgorny that supporting interference in internal affairs of a country negates the U.N. Charter. He asked the Soviet Union to use its
influence to stop New Delhi from “meddling in Pakistan’s internal affairs.”
The United States voiced its concern on 2 April for the human suffering in East Pakistan and stressed the need for multinational assistance, but
refrained from putting pressure on Yahya. Nixon was worried that Asia’s power balance would be upset if Pakistan were weakened. To some
extent, he was also anxious not to hurt his efforts to develop closer relations with China. Yahya, after all, was Nixon’s China link. America wanted
a stable Asia, and China’s support, for its planned withdrawal from Vietnam.
U.N. Secretary General U Thant asked Pakistan to allow relief agencies to act in East Pakistan while recognizing that the situation was
Pakistan’s internal matter. In a statement to the press on 19 May by Department of State spokesperson Charles Bray, the United States
welcomed the appeal issued by U Thant for assistance to help support East Pakistani refugees in India. Yahya firmly refused any outside
intervention because he mistakenly believed that his counter-insurgency move was sufficient to re-establish control over the rebels.
Going against existing global current, China put itself squarely behind Yahya, the communist giant’s strong ally. On 13 April, Beijing expressed
support for Yahya’s move to regain stability in East Pakistan. Chinese Premier Chou En-lai assured Yahya that should India attack Pakistan,
taking advantage of its domestic woes, China stood ready to help its ally safeguard its “state sovereignty” and national independence. From April
onwards, China gave Pakistan economic and military aid in line with its statement of support. China, however, quietly pressed Pakistan to settle the
dispute before India’s military intervention.
Chou En-lai wrote to Yahya on 12 April, “Your Excellency and leaders of various quarters in Pakistan have done lot of useful work to uphold
unification of Pakistan and to prevent it from moving towards split. We believe that through wise consultations and efforts of Your Excellency and
leaders of various quarters in Pakistan, situation in Pakistan will certainly be restored to normal. In our opinion, unification of Pakistan and unity of
people of East and West Pakistan are basic guarantees for Pakistan to attain prosperity and strength. Here, it is most important to differentiate
broad masses of the people from a handful of persons who want to sabotage unification of Pakistan. As genuine friend[s] of Pakistan, we would
like to present these views for Your Excellency’s reference. At the same time, we have noted that of late the Indian government has been carrying
out gross interference in internal affairs of Pakistan by exploiting internal problems of your country. And the Soviet Union and [the] United States
are doing the same one after other. The Chinese press is carrying reports to expose such unreasonable interference and has published Your
Excellency’s letter of reply to Podgorny. The Chinese government holds that what is happening in Pakistan at present is purely an internal affair of
Pakistan, which can only be settled by Pakistan people themselves and which brooks no foreign interference whatsoever. Your Excellency may
rest assured that should Indian expansionists dare to launch aggression against Pakistan, the Chinese government and people, will, as always, firmly
support Pakistan government and people in their just struggle to safeguard state sovereignty and national independence.”
Nehru Wants Great Indian Empire
China’s opposition to Bangladesh stemmed from its strategic thinking and disdain for what it perceived was New Delhi’s ambition to create a
“Mother India”. China, which has nearly intractable border disputes with its neighbor, believed that J.N. Nehru, India’s towering independence
leader and first prime minister, envisioned a greater India, encompassing the entire South and Southeast Asia. His daughter – Indira Gandhi, India’s
prime minister during the Bangladesh Liberation War – was made of the same mould.
“It is also a great pity that the daughter has also taken as her legacy the philosophy of her father embodied in his book, Discovery of India,”
China’s premier told Nixon and Kissinger in March 1972 in Beijing.
Chou said Nehru “was thinking of a great Indian empire – Malaysia, Ceylon, etc. It would probably also include our Tibet. When he was writing
that book he was in a British prison, but one reserved for gentlemen in Darjeeling. Nehru told me himself that the prison was in Sikkim, facing the
Himalayan mountains. At the time, I hadn’t read the book, but my colleague Chen Yi had, and called it to my attention . He said it was precisely
the spirit of India which was embodied.” Marshall Chen Yi, vice premier, had died of cancer before this Nixon-Chou meeting took place.
Indeed, China’s hostility towards India ranked only a little lower than that for the Soviet Union. The Chinese did not fear India per se; they
worried, however, that Moscow could use India to encircle China, a fear that provoked Beijing to consistently support Pakistan’s conservative
military regimes and its opposition to Bangladesh, where one would rather expect an ideological affinity.