Pakistan. Yahya felt that the appointment would meet the need for civilian control in East Pakistan in that Malik would outrank the governor and
could issue orders to the governor in the president’s name.
Despite appointing the relief coordinator, Yahya refused to admit that the refugee problem was serious enough to deserve his special attention.
Francis L. Kellogg, secretary of state’s special assistant for Refugee and Migration Affairs, met with Yahya in Islamabad after visiting refugee
camps in India in June. When Kellogg noted that he had seen streams of refugees on the Jessore-Kolkata Road, apparently coming out of East
Pakistan, Yahya was skeptical. He said some people seem to be moving back and forth. Yahya thought that large numbers of people could not still
be coming from East Pakistan to India.
Kellogg commented he had spoken to many individual refugees, selected randomly by him, with the help of interpreters. They were ordinary
farmers and could not merely have been repeating a story they were told to relate. Moreover, most stated they had been trekking for ten days.
Yahya suggested that Kellogg go to East Pakistan and see for himself. There was no slaughter going on, the general insisted. Some armed
opposition to the government was continuing, and it was meeting with armed response, Yahya said.
When Kellogg mentioned that India’s foreign secretary had told the United States that “if the refugees can’t move back, something must be
done,” Yahya set off an outburst against the Indians. He said Prime Minister Indira Gandhi must have instigated the current problems through a
clandestine plotting with Mujib. Her people plotted against Pakistan. The Indians had armed the opposition. They had imposed a ban on
overflights. Now India hoped to get large amounts of additional foreign aid on the pretext of providing for refugees to help it cope with its own
existing problems.
Yahya said the impression might have been gained from the foreign press reports that East Pakistan was burning. “That is not so; it is not an
inferno. East Pakistan is now open territory,” Yahya asserted. The vast majority of the area was quiet, although border areas remained unstable.
Yahya referred to the action of the Indian Border Security Force and the Indian army in the border regions. The main support to the resistance
thus far had come from the Border Security Force, India’s frontier guards. But if the Indian army moved against East Pakistan, Yahya said matter-
of-factly, “of course, fighting can’t be limited to East Pakistan.” He threatened a general war against India. He said the Indians were maintaining
thirty to thirty-five training camps and arming East Pakistani civilians in them.
Responding to Kellogg’s comment that the Indian foreign secretary had said it was not in India’s interest to have an independent East Pakistan,
Yahya said vehemently, “Kaul is a damned liar. His actions don’t tally with what he says.” Yahya said it was important to see what was actually
happening. Pakistan’s borders were being kept boiling. He asked Kellogg to visit the border areas and see from which direction the firing was
coming. Then he could ask Kaul how the thousands of captured arms came to East Pakistan.
Kellogg repeated that none of the Indian officials with whom he had spoken had said they wanted the refugees to remain; nor had any one
referred to a desire to see an independent East Pakistan. Bangladesh was never once mentioned to him, he told Yahya.
Yahya Faces Pressure From World Leaders
By the time Yahya met Kellogg, he had started feeling increasing international pressure to reach a political solution. The latest pressure came from
British Foreign Secretary Alec Douglas-Home, who linked Pakistan’s foreign aid to reaching a political settlement. Yahya had already received a
report from Hilaly about Blood’s testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in Washington the previous week.
Feeling the pinch, Yahya wrote to Nixon on 28 June to express his disappointment over the donors’ decision to withhold aid until Islamabad
disclosed steps toward a political solution. The New York Times and the BBC had carried stories revealing the decision. Their veracity had been
enhanced by the British foreign secretary’s statement that “there can be no question of new British aid to Pakistan until we have firm evidence that
real progress is being made towards a political settlement.”
All these developments, Yahya told Nixon, had led to a strong and widespread public reaction in Pakistan. “In response to these developments,
I had no choice but to declare in unequivocal terms in my broadcast of today that external assistance with political strings will be unacceptable to
Pakistan.”
One day later, Kissinger and Sisco talked on the phone in the light of the national security adviser’s impending visit to South Asia. Kissinger
remarked, “India wants to attack Pakistan.” Sisco replied that the Indians wanted to keep the pot boiling. At the same time, Sisco noted, Yahya’s
proposed solution excluding the Awami League would not work, either. “It’s like telling Ted Kennedy not to be a Democrat,” Sisco commented.
Kennedy, a U.S. senator and brother of President John F. Kennedy, visited the refugee camps in Kolkata and supported the Bengalis in 1971.
Sisco elaborated his point in a note to his boss, Rogers, which he sent on the same day: “It is doubtful that promises of maximum provincial
autonomy will be enough to satisfy the Bengalis, who have in effect again been reminded that their earlier electoral decisions are not acceptable to
the West Pakistani establishment. Thus, a genuine political accommodation remains the crux of Pakistan’s internal crisis and Yahya’s speech offers
little basis for optimism over his chances of early success under the terms and conditions he has prescribed.” Sisco added in a handwritten
comment that “banning the Awami League makes a political accommodation almost impossible.”
On 17 August, the National Security Council staff produced a study that showed South Asia was headed for a new war unless West and East
Pakistan struck an accord and the refugees began returning from India by September or October. It predicted several scenarios that could develop
over the following few months, and U.S. actions would partly depend on how the situation developed. The most likely scenarios included the
following:
1. The Indian military forces will attack East Pakistan in an effort to seize and hold part of the area and drive out the West Pakistani forces.
2. India will step up direct support to enable the insurgents to seize and hold a portion of East Pakistan.
3. There will be a gradual process of escalation involving incidents along the East Pakistan-India border, with confusion as to who is most at
fault.
4. West Pakistanis will initiate hostilities by attacking guerrilla sanctuaries in eastern India and/or Indian military support bases.
5. West Pakistanis, either to divert Indian attention or to show India’s vulnerability, will try to stir up trouble in Kashmir along the ceasefire line,
leading to the situation rapidly escalating to full-scale hostilities as in 1965.