“What I have in mind is fairly limited. It is still true that these negotiations are so intricate and involve such passions on each side that we are ill-
equipped to involve ourselves. However, the very problems we face lay the groundwork for an approach to Yahya which should be the product of
the present policy review. However gentle our tactics, I believe our objective should be to encourage movement toward the greatest possible
degree of East Pakistani autonomy.”
The day he received Saunders’ memo, Kissinger held a Senior Review Group session to gather an assessment of the East Pakistan situation.
Cushman, CIA’s deputy director, painted a picture that showed the Pakistanis were, to an extent, succeeding in quelling the Bengali revolt.
“After three weeks of fighting in East Pakistan, the West Pakistanis hold the cities and are moving along the roads west of the big river. They
can apparently move throughout the countryside as they wish, and it is only the fact that they do not have enough men that is limiting their
movement,” Cushman reported.
He also said that the Pakistanis were taking the Bengali villages without any real resistance. “It was only a matter of time before they controlled
all the population centers. The Bengali forces were not resisting; they were just melting away.”
Kissinger sought a clarification: “Are they melting away or disintegrating?”
Cushman replied: “They’re disintegrating. They are not in communication with each other and are not an effective force. Their morale is low and
they are disorganized and fatalistic. They could, however, be a long-term problem if the Indians keep supplying them and they turn to terrorism or
acts of sabotage. There is no doubt that the Indians are involved in clandestine support activities; they’re supplying them with arms, ammunition,
food and medical supplies, and have sent in advisers and sabotage teams.”
He told Kissinger that India apparently wanted to recognize Bangladesh but decided to hold off because the Bengali leadership “did not control
anything.” The Russians advised against the recognition because of their doubts about its viability.
China’s public statements, Cushman reported, remained favorable to Pakistan and accused India of intervening, “but we doubt that they will go
beyond verbal support.” The Soviets, for their part, were opposed to the bloodshed and specifically did not support the insurgents.
By late April, Washington had moved beyond discussing the East Pakistan situation as an internal matter of Pakistan and whether Bangladesh
would eventually become a reality. Now Americans saw a real possibility of an Indo-Pak conflict.
On 24 April Rogers sent a cable to the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad, saying the State Department had advised that Pakistan “exercise maximum
restraint despite what it might consider provocations from the other side.”
Washington sent the same message to New Delhi, saying India, too, “should act with restraint.” Sisco told Jha, India’s ambassador in
Washington, “India was now strong and stable as [a] result of the election and, consequently, could be expected to act responsibly.” (It was a
reference to Gandhi’s landslide victory in March 1971.)
Kissinger Offers Three Options On Pakistan Crisis
Four days later, Kissinger decided to give Nixon the developments in South Asia. He told the president: “I do not normally bother you with tactical
judgments. But in the case of the present situation in Pakistan, policy depends on the posture adopted toward several major problems. The
purpose of this memo is to seek your guidance on the general direction we should be following.”
He then outlined three options for Nixon to consider: first, to support whatever political and military program Yahya chose to pursue in the East;
second, maintain a posture of genuine neutrality; and third, make a serious effort to help Yahya end the war and establish an arrangement that
could be transitional to the East Pakistani autonomy.
Kissinger personally favored the third option. The first option, he elaborated, “would have the advantage of preserving our relationship with
West Pakistan. It would have the disadvantage of encouraging the West Pakistanis in actions that would drag out the present situation and increase
the political and economic costs to them and to us.”
The second option, meanwhile, “would have the advantage of creating a posture that would be publicly defensible. The disadvantage would be
that the necessary cutback in military and economic assistance would tend to favor East Pakistan. We would be doing enough to disrupt our
relationship with West Pakistan, but not enough to help the East or promote a political settlement.”
The third option “would have the advantage of making the most of the relationship with Yahya, while engaging in a serious effort to move the
situation toward conditions less damaging to U.S. and Pakistani interests. Its disadvantage is that it might lead to a situation in which progress
toward a political settlement had broken down, the United States had alienated itself from the 600 million people in India and East Pakistan and the
United States was unable to influence the West Pakistani government to make the concessions necessary for a political settlement.”
Nixon approved the third option and added a handwritten note: “To all hands. Don’t squeeze Yahya at this time.” He underlined “Don’t” three
times. Nixon did that because of a memo General Alexander Haig, deputy national security adviser, had sent to him on 28 April. Kissinger had told
Haig that it would help if Nixon included a note, saying he wanted no action that would squeeze West Pakistan.
On 29 April, just a day after Nixon directed Kissinger to pursue a policy that would help Yahya to bring about a settlement in East Pakistan, the
president telephoned Haig. Nixon wanted to know whether the United States was helping to end the fighting in Pakistan as the Russians were.
Haig prematurely declared: “The fighting is about over – there is considerable stability now.”
Over the next months, reports kept pouring in that the East Pakistan situation had turned worse. America then realized that the military solution
would yield no positive outcome. So, it wanted to see Yahya move toward involving more civilians in East Pakistan. As the food situation
worsened in East Pakistan, the Americans felt a famine could soon break out. To handle the situation urgently, Farland told Yahya to appoint a
food czar. The general appointed the former head of the Chittagong Port Authority, retired Commodore Rehmatullah Bajwa, as his personal
representative. Yahya also decided to go to Dhaka in July to examine the situation himself.
The Americans were not entirely happy with Yahya’s token move to give the East Pakistan government a civilian character. In July, Farland
urged Yahya to replace General Tikka Khan, the governor of East Pakistan, with a civilian governor, preferably a Bengali. Yahya replied it would
be difficult to appoint a civilian governor in East Pakistan and not in West Pakistan, where Bhutto was standing in the wings, urging a transfer of
power.
Yahya had just appointed Dr. A.M. Malik as his special assistant for Displaced Persons and Relief and Rehabilitation Operations in East