India.
Lieutenant General Robert Cushman, deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency, said Pakistan’s situation posed a problem for India and
raised a question whether or not New Delhi should support the Bengalis.
Kissinger responded by saying that India would suffer from an independent state in East Pakistan. It could create problems in West Bengal,
where a communist insurgency had by then caused a big headache for New Delhi. He then asked how the Pakistani soldiers would fare in the
countryside in East Pakistan; could 30,000 troops control the 75 million Bengalis?
Cushman made a dire prediction: The situation “could be very bloody.”
Kissinger then asked whether the Bengalis in the countryside were politically conscious and whether they would fight against the Pakistani
soldiers.
David Blee, head of CIA’s Soviet division, replied: “The Bengalis are extremely politically conscious, but they are not fighters.”
Johnson argued that, ultimately, 30,000 troops would be unable to control 75 million Bengalis.
Blee added the Bengalis would seek help from India.
When Kissinger asked if India would help, Blee pointed out that a huge 400 out of 525 members of the Lok Sabha [the lower house of India’s
parliament] had signed a petition demanding recognition for East Pakistan as an independent nation.
Cushman observed: If India did not, the Chinese would aid the Bengalis.
Blee agreed. China right now supported West Pakistan, but Beijing could change its policy.
Kissinger asked whether Pakistan would execute Mujib.
Pakistan might do so, Blee said.
Kissinger asked Blee if professor Abdur Razzak of Dhaka University had been killed. “He was one of my students” at Harvard, Kissinger
recalled.
Blee said: “I think so. They killed a lot of people at the university.”
Seven days after the Dhaka massacre, on 3 April the secretary of state told Nixon that East Pakistan’s situation had seriously deteriorated over
the last ten days. What exactly happened on the night of 25-26 March after the military crackdown in Dhaka might never be known because
reports were conflicting and first-hand evidence was scarce, Rogers said, adding that the U.S. consul general in Dhaka estimated that between
4000 and 6000 people were killed in the city over the next several days.
Extensive damage was done to Dhaka University, pro-Awami League newspaper offices and to Hindu settlements in Dhaka. Chittagong also
suffered considerable damage and fatalities. A semblance of normality had returned to Dhaka, but small-arms firing could still be heard at night in
residential areas where the Americans lived. Some foreigners had already narrowly escaped with their lives. Most shops remained closed. A very
small portion of the civil servants were at work in government offices. It was impossible for foreigners to leave the vicinity of Dhaka or Chittagong,
where most of the nearly 750 Americans in East Pakistan lived.
East Pakistan’s future would depend upon the Pakistan armed forces” ability to maintain an effective military control. Thus far, the Awami
League resistance groups had gained little momentum. However, the memo warned, over time these resistance elements might be able to mount a
large-scale rebellion with possible covert support from the Bengali elements in India. The key question, Rogers wondered, was whether the events
had made it unlikely – or impossible – for Pakistan ever again to assert effective political influence over the East.
“During the period immediately ahead we may be faced with a number of difficult policy decisions. These include our political reaction to the
events in East Pakistan and various aspects of our economic assistance and military supply programs for Pakistan,” the secretary told Nixon.
“Blood Telegram” Criticizes Nixon Policy
Soon afterward, on 6 April, the U.S. mission in Dhaka sent a telegram to the State Department in which twenty diplomats voiced their concern
over Washington’s position on East Pakistan. The message was later dubbed as the “Blood telegram” after Archer Blood, then the U.S. consul
general in Dhaka.
“Our government has failed to denounce the suppression of democracy. Our government has failed to denounce atrocities. Our government has
failed to take forceful measures to protect its citizens while at the same time bending over backwards to placate the West Pak dominated
government and to lessen likely and deservedly negative international public relations impact against them. Our government has evidenced what
many will consider moral bankruptcy, ironically at a time when the U.S.S.R. sent President Yahya a message defending democracy, condemning
arrest of the leader of the democratically elected majority party [incidentally pro-West] and calling for an end to repressive measures and
bloodshed,” the telegram said.
“In our most recent policy paper for Pakistan, our interests in Pakistan were defined as primarily humanitarian, rather than strategic. But we have
chosen not to intervene, even morally, on the grounds that the Awami League conflict, in which unfortunately the overworked term genocide is
applicable, is purely internal matter of a sovereign state. Private Americans have expressed disgust. We, as professional public servants, express
our dissent with the current policy and fervently hope that our true and lasting interests here can be defined and our policies redirected in order to
salvage our nation’s position as a moral leader of the free world.”
Blood, who himself had expressed grave concerns in his previous memo, endorsed the message, but did not sign it.
“I believe the views of these officers, who are among the finest U.S. officials in East Pakistan, are echoed by the vast majority of the American
community, both official and unofficial. I also subscribe to these views but I do not think it appropriate for me to sign their statement as long as I
am principal officer at this post. My support of their stand takes on another dimension.”
“As I hope to develop in further reporting, I believe the most likely eventual outcome of the struggle underway in East Pakistan is a Bengali
victory and the consequent establishment of an independent Bangladesh. At the moment, we possess the good will of the Awami League. We
would be foolish to forfeit this asset by pursuing a rigid policy of one-sided support to the likely loser,” he ended.
Blood gave the telegram low classification. In his 1979 book, White House Years , Kissinger said the consulate general deliberately gave the