Chashi’s different proposals. Qaiyum’s wishes were “along the lines of a settlement on the basis of something less than independence,” but
Chashi’s approach “was based on the opposite outcome of total independence.”
Saunders did not question why there were two approaches. He merely instructed the U.S. missions to make no commitments for future meetings
with the Bangladesh representatives, without first checking with the State Department. He advised to limit the scheduled meeting on 14 August
largely to another low-key listening exercise. He, however, authorized to probe the question of the Awami League’s willingness to negotiate for
less than independence.
“We must not get into a position where our contact with the Bangladesh representatives will be misunderstood or misread by them or
Islamabad,” the cable advised. Yet Saunders saw “some value in at least keeping our option open of informally talking with the Bangladesh types,
but we need control and we will need to square ourselves with Yahya before this goes further.”
The cable indicated the State Department would next consider informing Yahya of the contacts and passing along whatever seemed worthwhile.
On 14 August, Nixon wrote to Yahya to advise him to enlist the support of East Pakistan’s elected lawmakers for a national reconciliation – a
step he said “will be important in countering the corrosive threat of insurgency and restoring peace to your part of the world.” In addition, Nixon
said, continued progress on the political front would “mean that our own counsels of restraint in New Delhi will have a greater chance of success.”
He also disclosed that Farland and Williams would “share with you some additional thoughts on these subjects.”
Qaiyum met again with the consular officer on 14 August. He “reaffirmed that he was acting under instructions from his foreign minister who was
prepared to accept a negotiated settlement that provided for less than complete independence. Qaiyum emphasized that only Mujibur Rahman
could negotiate on behalf of the people of East Bengal, and only he could get them to accept a political settlement.”
The next meeting between the political officer and Qaiyum took place on 19 August. Qaiyum had sought an urgent meeting with the officer. He
told the diplomat he had briefed the Bangladesh cabinet on his contact with the United States. The cabinet had instructed him to convey the
message that it appreciated the U.S. efforts and was willing to accept any settlement negotiated by Sheikh Mujib. The cabinet requested advice
from U.S. experts on dealing with the problem.
“Although we have discouraged Awami League MNA [member of the National Assembly – Pakistan’s parliament] Qaiyum from initiating
contact with the consulate general, he sent a message to the political officer on
19 August urgently requesting a meeting the same night. He explained that he was leaving the next day for Agartala and had important information
to convey prior to his departure. As there was inadequate time to check with the department, the political officer agreed to see him to continue the
“listening session,” the consulate reported to the State Department on 20 August.
The cabinet met in the evening of 16 August. Present were Nazrul Islam, Tajuddin Ahmed, Moshtaque Ahmed, Finance Minister M. Mansoor
Ali, and Home Minister A.H.M. Kamaruzzaman. Qaiyum, the only other person present, was asked to describe his contact with the consulate
general. He was excused after being told the cabinet would consider what he said and later give further instructions.
On 17 August, Qaiyum met with Moshtaque who said the cabinet had several points it wished to convey to the Americans. Qaiyum had taken
notes during his conversation with Moshtaque, which he referred to while talking with the political officer. He told the officer about two hopeful
signs: the report that Mujib’s wife was taken to West Pakistan, and Hilaly’s public comment that Mujib would not be summarily shot.
Qaiyum explained Mujib’s wife had been a moderating influence on him. She was instrumental in persuading Mujib to remain in Dhaka on 25
March in the hope that he would be able to reach a compromise with Yahya, even at that late date. The cabinet suspected that the U.S.
government was somehow responsible for these encouraging events, Qaiyum explained, and thus wished to voice appreciation.
The cabinet decided that any agreement reached between Mujib and Yahya would be acceptable to it, provided it was arranged through the
“proper channels.” By the proper channels, Qaiyum meant the U.S. government’s participation in arrangements leading to a formal pact. The
cabinet opposed any deal negotiated via the Soviets such as the Tashkent Declaration.
The cabinet discussed the Indo-Soviet treaty and felt that it could lead to East Bengal being “swallowed by the Indo-Soviet combination.” It
asked for U.S. expert advice for the Bangladesh government to cope with this problem, in particular, as well as the overall East Bengal situation.
Qaiyum elaborated, saying Bangladesh had no experts and lacked adequate funds; he said it was not in a position to figure out how to tackle its
problems and was therefore soliciting America’s advice.
The cabinet wanted Moshtaque to visit the United States with a delegation of three or four other Bangladesh representatives to discuss ways of
solving their problems with U.S. officials. The Bangladesh leaders sought Washington’s cooperation in facilitating this trip. Qaiyum said the foreign
minister understood that he could not be received officially in America because of its potential to create diplomatic issues with Islamabad.
Qaiyum said there were both hardliners and softliners in West Pakistan. Both the groups wanted to keep Pakistan intact. Hardliners, such as
General Tikka Khan, thought that this could be done through a harsh but brief military repression. Softliners, represented by Admiral S.M. Ahsan
and General Yakub Khan, believed that Pakistan could remain together by making an honorable settlement with the Awami League. Now that the
hardliners had failed, there might be a scope for the softliners.
Qaiyum personally favored complete independence for East Bengal, but he and most other Bangladesh representatives would willingly accept
some sort of a confederation for East and West Pakistan. Explaining the cabinet position on this, he said the cabinet members “believe that Mujib’s
life is more valuable than independence.”
On the question of recognition, Qaiyum said, “Everyone understands that if India recognizes Bangladesh, everything is finished.” By this he
meant the recognition would permanently close the door on the possibility of a compromise solution. He also believed that if Mujib was executed,
the Bangladesh government as currently constituted would collapse. The cabinet had resisted efforts from the left-wing extremists to form a united
front. If Mujib died, it no longer would be able to resist this pressure, and the united front would be formed, which would be quickly dominated by
the leftists.
Qaiyum said he and the majority of his colleagues were anticommunists and rightists. They wanted to save themselves. The only way they could
envision doing this was to work out a compromise in the near future. Qaiyum said some day there must be a settlement. From the personal
standpoint of the Awami Leaguers, they hoped it would be the one in which the United States, rather than the Soviets, was involved.
The political officer told Qaiyum that he would report this conversation to Washington but the consulate general was not “authorized to enter
into any sort of ‘negotiations’ with him.” Qaiyum said he understood, but nevertheless said the cabinet appointed him on 16 August as the point of