firmly opposed the military crackdown; its choice was undoubtedly heavily influenced by India. It wanted a political settlement and probably
doubted that a prolonged conflict would serve Soviet interests. Moscow, which welcomed partition of British India because it created more
opportunities for communist infiltration in South Asia, had concluded the odds favored a separatist solution; Islamabad had little chance of imposing
its will on East Bengal in any lasting and effective way.
China’s policy was mainly guided by its adversarial relations with India. Beijing accused India of interfering in Pakistan’s affairs, but its unspoken
concern was New Delhi’s geopolitical strategy, which China considered hegemonistic. A Chinese military intervention in support of West Pakistan
was unlikely, because Beijing abhorred risking a major war to bail out a beleaguered friend. China was cowered by the Soviet threat. It, however,
would have faced a dilemma if a communist group took control of East Bengal and sought Beijing’s help, a scenario that, fortunately, the Chinese
leadership never had to confront.
China, however, created trouble for Bangladesh through proxies, Swaran Singh told Kissinger in 1974. “You are aware that the Naxalites”
headquarters are not very far from Bangladesh. There is contact between them and extremist elements in Bangladesh. I am sorry to say that there
have been some political killings in Bangladesh, which are traceable to them,” India’s foreign minister said.
As for India, Singh said, New Delhi’s relations with Dhaka were just right. “We have a correct relationship with Bangladesh. India had 300,000
soldiers in Bangladesh when the ceasefire took place. By 15 March 1972, all Indian soldiers had been withdrawn. Bangladesh was pleading with
us to leave them there. We said that we did not want an Indian army involved in maintaining law and order in Bangladesh. We told them that we
didn’t want influence there. Even in these recent talks in New Delhi, we played a friendly, sober, cooperative, mature role. The talks went best
when the three foreign ministers were alone. We did not try to influence the Bangladesh foreign minister at all.”