Moorer, Joint Chiefs chairman, revealed that India had already started activating some airfields near West Pakistan.
Helms reported that China was not reinforcing its troops and that it would be difficult for Beijing to do so, because the terrain was bad and
China lacked the necessary equipment. He also noted that China did reinforce its troops in 1962 when it fought India, and the United States knew
about it ahead of time. This time around, Washington would also know about China’s reinforcement in advance.
Irwin predicted three things that could prompt India to move militarily against Pakistan: some military incident; a famine in East Pakistan,
resulting in a wave of new refugees crossing in to India; or Mujib’s execution.
Despite America’s grim assessment, Yahya remained defiant. On
18 August Kissinger told Nixon that the Pakistani president was “committed to preventing the Bengali independence,” but things had shifted in East
Pakistan as well as in India.
“In East Pakistan, a serious insurgency movement is now under way in the countryside and is beginning to penetrate the major cities. This has
been fed by the Indians in terms of logistics, training and some arms, but basically reflects a strong Bengali will to resist the West Pakistanis. This,
in turn, provokes an army response, which stimulates further the refugee flow.”
India’s position had changed since the military crackdown in March of the same year. “The Indians before March preferred a united Pakistan
when they thought the Bengalis might play a dominant role, but now that they judge this is no longer possible they would like to see an independent
Bangladesh as soon as possible. The problem with their policy is that they may be able through their support for the guerrillas to do enough to
stalemate a political settlement in East Pakistan but not enough to produce independence.”
Kissinger advised Nixon that the only strategy for the U.S. to follow in this situation was to concentrate the world’s attention on averting a
famine as an umbrella under which enough might be done to deprive India of an excuse for intervention. Such a measure would give Yahya a face-
saving way of taking some of the political steps that might be necessary, if he had to rely on political initiatives to restore normalcy, rather than on
military control.
Kissinger told Nixon that a U.S. effort to break Pakistan in the name of self-determination would also have implications for Taiwan and Tibet in
Beijing’s eyes, implying these territories could press on with their right to self-determination. It was important, Kissinger said, that China not feel
that Washington was lining up with India and the Soviet Union against Beijing. He added that for the moment, it was important that America “stay
one step behind the Soviets in India, although over the longer run, we have no interest in writing off 600 million Indians and Bengalis.”
On 19 August, Kissinger wrote to Nixon to comment on Gandhi’s recent letter to the president. In that letter, Gandhi had rejected the idea of
having U.N. observers stationed on both sides of the India-East Pakistan border. She also complained about continued U.S. arms supplies to
Pakistan. Kissinger, in his review, noted with interest the prime minister’s moderate tone in the letter and the timing of its dispatch to Washington.
He said the fact that she dispatched it two days before India signed the friendship pact with the Soviet Union – the day she also accepted an
invitation to visit Washington – was an indication that New Delhi still wanted a balanced relationship, despite its then newly formed special
relationship with Moscow. Gandhi, by no means, was “prepared to write off” the United States.
Kissinger again sent a note to Nixon on 24 August along with a memo he had received from the State Department and a CIA analysis of the
Indo-Soviet treaty. The national security adviser compared the treaty with the one the Soviet Union earlier had signed with Egypt and found that
the Indian pact was weaker on the military aspect. The Indo-Soviet agreement provided for “consultations” in the event of an attack by a third
country, but the Egyptian deal called for the two sides to “concert” their positions.
“This does not add up to the language of a traditional mutual defense or security pact, since there is no specific obligation to assist militarily in
case of a conflict with a third party,” Kissinger explained. “Nevertheless, the impression is left that the Soviets would, if necessary, join in on
India’s side in a conflict involving Pakistan or China.”
By concluding the treaty, the Indians probably felt that they had bought both time and insurance as they confronted the problem of war with
Pakistan. Pressure had been mounting rapidly on Gandhi to “do something” positive about the East Pakistan and the refugee situation. The treaty,
which had met with almost universal acclaim in India, had relieved this pressure to some extent. Moreover, the Indians seemed to feel that the
treaty put both the Pakistanis and the Chinese on notice that India did not stand alone. If Indo-Pak hostilities did break out, the Indians were
probably hoping that the treaty would at least serve to limit the Chinese intervention and perhaps even bring the Soviets indirectly on their side.
Finally, the Indians might hope that the treaty would instill in the West Pakistanis a greater sense of urgency to halt the refugee flow and reach a
political accommodation in East Pakistan.
Kissinger further explained that such consolidation of Indo-Soviet relationship, at the expense of India’s cherished non-alignment position,
indicated that the Indians thought their vital interests were at stake in the present situation. On the other hand, the treaty should have given the
Pakistanis a pause for reflection if they had, for instance, been thinking of punitive raids against the guerrillas in India. Previously, they might have
hoped that China would fully support Pakistan in a war against India, but they must have lost much of that confidence that Beijing would attack
India now that it would mean risking hostilities with the Soviets on their behalf.
China would not miss the point that its growing role in South Asia had been, at least for the moment, countered by the Soviets. At stake would
not only be the Chinese and Soviet positions in South Asia, but in all of Asia. Neither the Soviets nor the Chinese were easily bluffed and they
could rapidly move towards a confrontation, should India and Pakistan go to war, Kissinger warned.
On 25 August, when Kissinger met with the Indian ambassador to Washington, he sounded out a harsher tone over India’s new pact with
Moscow. He told Jha that if India wanted to become an extension of the Soviet foreign policy, then inevitably the American interest in India was
bound to decline and India would have to look to Moscow for the greater part of its economic aid. He could not understand why India would
want to be drawn into the Sino-Soviet rivalry or why it would deliberately antagonize the one country (namely, the U.S.) that had no national
interests in the subcontinent except an independent and healthy India and an independent subcontinent.
Jha, who was governor of the Reserve Bank of India until May 1970, sought to allay Kissinger’s concerns, saying Gandhi was not at all pro-
Soviet. Dinesh Singh, who was India’s foreign minister from February 1969 until June 1970, thought about the pact first. In fact, Jha said privately,
he would not be a bit surprised if Dinesh Singh actually received a payment from the communists for pushing the treaty. At the same time, Jha said
Kaul and Haksar were very much under Soviet influence. In short, Gandhi was under great pressure for both these reasons. The project had been
going along for about a year, and recently Gandhi felt she needed some dramatic foreign policy, so she picked it up. He gave the assurance that
Kissinger could be certain that she did not have her heart in it.