Helms said, yes.
In East Pakistan, Moorer added, the Indians were trying to keep the Pakistan troops occupied to give the guerrillas more latitude. “It’s just a
matter of time until the Indians believe the guerrillas are strong enough, at which point they will recognize a Bangladesh government.”
Kissinger: “You think it’s just a question of time until the Pakistanis are exhausted?”
Moorer: “Yes.”
Kissinger: “How about in the West? Whoever attacked, there will be a full-scale fighting.”
Moorer: “I’m surprised that the Pakistanis attacked at such a low level. In 1965, they moved much more strongly. One of the airfields was a
little army field and the other two had practically no aircraft on them. The major fields are farther south.”
Helms predicted on 3 December that Gandhi in “her speech at 1:30 today will recognize Bangladesh”.
On 4 December, Kissinger asked the CIA director whether India had declared an all-out war on Pakistan.
Helms: “They’ve said they have launched a ‘no-holds-barred’ offensive on East Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “Has Yahya said anything of a comparable nature?” Helms: “He has said his army would push the invader back into his own territory
and destroy him.”
Kissinger: “Is that objectionable? Can the United Nations object to someone driving an enemy back? The Pakistan ambassador called me the
other day to say he had been told by someone in the State Department to exercise restraint and wanted to know how he should do it. I told him to
go back and ask the person who told him.”
By then, Kissinger and other members of the group had no doubt India would win the war. “Everyone knows we will end up with Indian
occupation of East Pakistan. It will be interesting to see how all those people who were so horrified at what the Pakistanis were doing in East
Pakistan react when the Indians take over there,” Kissinger told the group, while debating how the United States should present a Security Council
resolution to end the war.
He suggested that Washington press hard at the United Nations on a ceasefire and withdrawal of forces before a political settlement. “And, we
understand that we will not go along with any specifics on political accommodation. We will accept a general political settlement language, but not
specifically related to Mujib’s release,” he said.
When Kissinger asked how long India could delay the proceedings before accepting ceasefire, Van Hollen said, “They will spin it out as long as
possible, while they are moving militarily.”
Helms replied, “Just about long enough to occupy East Pakistan.”
On 6 December, the day India recognized Bangladesh, Gandhi wrote to Nixon informing him that India was at war with Pakistan. “I should
stress to Your Excellency that the people and the government of India are determined that this wanton and unprovoked aggression should be
decisively and finally repelled once and for all,” she declared.
To Nixon, India’s action was an attempt by Moscow and New Delhi to humiliate China and America. “Now, what the Russians this morning
have launched is a blistering attack on Pakistan in TASS and, in effect, have warned the Chinese against getting involved. What we are seeing here
is a Soviet-Indian power play to humiliate the Chinese and also somewhat us.” Nixon told Kissinger when the two discussed the Soviet veto of the
Security Council resolution of 5 December, calling for a ceasefire.
To convey Nixon’s dismay to the Soviet leaders, Kissinger met on the same day with Yuli M. Vorontsov, minister counselor at the Soviet
Embassy in Washington. He told the Soviet envoy that Nixon “did not understand how the Soviet Union could believe that it was possible to work
on the broad amelioration of our relationships while at the same time encouraging the Indian military aggression against Pakistan. We did not take a
position on the merits of the developments inside Pakistan that triggered this sequence of events. We have, indeed, always taken the position that
we would encourage a political solution.”
Vorontsov asked whether he could convey something about a political solution, since this was featured so prominently in Kosygin’s letter.
Kissinger said, “Our attitude towards a political solution was as follows: if there were a ceasefire and a withdrawal, the United States would be
prepared to work immediately with the Soviet Union on ideas of a political solution. We recognized that substantial political autonomy for East
Pakistan was the probable outcome of a political evolution, and we were willing to work in that direction.”
Vorontsov later described the meeting in a telegram to the Soviet foreign minister.
“I asked Kissinger whether the U.S. government is taking any steps in its relations with Pakistan toward finding a political solution to the root
cause of the present crisis – the situation in East Pakistan, which the Soviet government had called for in its 3 December letter to President Nixon.”
Kissinger said the U.S. side “had almost completed arrangements for talks between Yahya Khan and Bangladeshi representatives acceptable to
Mujibur Rahman when India ruined everything by its invasion of Pakistan.”
“But what kind of political talks could there be right now with regard to East Pakistan when foreign troops had invaded all of Pakistan?”
Kissinger exclaimed in a somewhat excited tone. Then, in a calmer tone, he said that in any case matters had been moving and clearly continue to
move towards granting political autonomy to East Pakistan.
If the war was stopped now and Pakistan was given “two months of peace and quiet,” then as a result of political talks, such autonomy would
become a reality. In proposing a halt to hostilities, the United States was not at all suggesting that the “period of peace and quiet” be used and then
once again resume hostilities or “to restore the status quo in East Pakistan”. America favored positive results from political talks, Vorontsov
reported to Moscow, quoting Kissinger.
Then speaking on the “absolute necessity” of having the quickest possible ceasefire, he again said the Soviet support of India “is bringing Soviet-
U.S. relations to a critical juncture.” He expressed surprise on a purely personal level and questioned why the events between India and Pakistan
were so insistently and obviously being extended to relations between Moscow and Washington.
“Soon after I returned from the White House, Kissinger called me at the embassy and said that he had just spoken with President Nixon by
phone at his Florida home. Kissinger said that the president asked him to say in connection with our conversation that ‘even if the conflict does end
in the next few days, it will leave its mark on our relations’ if it ends in the same vein in which it is developing right now. These events may turn out
to be ‘a watershed for our relations,’ ” the Soviet envoy conveyed to Moscow.