his talks with Yahya, according to the report.
Another account of Mujib’s pledge to Pakistan’s unity came from Iqbal F. Quadir, a retired vice admiral who was Pakistan’s naval attache in
Paris in 1971. A West European diplomat told Quadir that Mujib sent a message to Yahya on 11 March, saying he opposed Pakistan’s partition
and wanted to discuss possible solutions with the president.
Mujib passed the message through the unnamed diplomat, who was then consul general in Dhaka.. He passed it on to Yahya in the manner
Mujib requested. Quadir learned about this in 1978 in Karachi, where the diplomat was then consul general, Quadir wrote in an article in February
2003 in the Pakistan Defence Journal.
Vice Admiral S.M. Ahsan, who was East Pakistan’s governor until relieved at the end of February 1971, told U.S. envoy Sidney Sober on 16
August during an hour-long talk in Karachi that “prior to March at least, separation from Pakistan was not Mujib’s intention”. Ahsan earned the
respect and confidence of the Awami League and other Bengalis during his tenure, and maintained active dialogue with Mujib while in Dhaka.
He also told the envoy that the “only practical solution to the East Pakistan problem in the long run is political. The alternative is separation of
East from West Pakistan and the establishment of an independent state.” And, a political solution was “possible only through the rehabilitation and
use of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.”
Ahsan believed that Yahya sincerely wanted to restore civilian rule in Pakistan. During Yahya’s January visit to East Pakistan, the admiral was
convinced that the president fully intended to turn over power to the Awami League, but by February end he had changed his mind. Ahsan
speculated that Bhutto was the chief cause of the change in the president’s attitude. Awami League leaders were on the whole sincere, relatively
conservative middle-class who simply wanted a firm assurance of redress for East Pakistan through maximum autonomy. Ahsan said he had made
it quite clear to the president that a delay in calling the assembly would lead to a disaster and even Mujib would find it difficult, if not impossible, to
control events. The admiral said there was evidence that by late February the military build-up was beginning and steps were being taken for a
forceful imposition of the martial law authority.
He dismissed the pervasive notion that the top military brass pushed Yahya into adopting the hard line.”The source of power and voice of
authority in Pakistan is President Yahya. He is the first and last authority. Rumors of dynamic generals vying for power beneath him are simply
rumors. The mentality of the army in Pakistan is such that subordinates obey and rarely if ever question policy decisions,” according to a cable
message sent by the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad to the State Department on 17 August 1971.
Ahsan had predicted on 13 February 1970, that “Sheikh Mujibur Rahman seems sure bet to win coming elections in East Pakistan.” He made
the prediction during a meeting with three U.S. diplomats, including the deputy chief of mission, Sober, and Andrew Kilgore, political officer. They
met with the governor in Dhaka in light of allegations that Washington was meddling in East Bengal to separate it from West Pakistan.
Ahsan assured the Americans that “no Pakistan official of authority believed the charges.” He advised them against issuing any public denials,
which could only draw unnecessary attention to the allegations, raised by Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani, president of the pro-Chinese
National Awami Party, and Mohammad Toaha, general secretary.
During the meeting, the governor told the Americans that the government “was not overly concerned about Sheikh Mujib’s six points”.
According to a cable sent to the State Department by the U.S. Consulate General in Dhaka on 16 February 1970, “After the elections power
balances and relations among various regions would have to be worked out by usual political horse trading. If Mujib were to become prime
minster, and that seemed pretty good bet, presumably he would not wish to see a center too weak to maintain control over the country.”
Air Marshal Asghar Khan, former chief of Pakistan’s air force, painted another picture. He asserted that Mujib had anticipated the crackdown,
an assertion corroborated by another West Pakistani politician, Ghaus Baksh Bizenjo, who was present in East Pakistan during the Mujib-Yahya
talks and was advised by Mujib on 24 March to leave Dhaka, after the Bengali leader learned about the impending military action.
“I asked Mujib what scenario he visualized and how the stalemate could be broken. He replied that the situation was very clear. Yahya Khan
would come to Dhaka first, followed by . . . Bhutto. Yahya would then order military action and that would be the end of Pakistan. About himself,
he said, he [Mujib] hoped that he would be taken prisoner, for if he was not, he would be killed either by the Pakistan army or by his own
people,” Khan wrote in his book, We’ve Learnt Nothing from History: Pakistan-Politics and Military Power, narrating a conversation
with Mujib in Dhaka in early March.
Asghar Khan’s statements only reinforced the view that Mujib had expected his arrest to be only a passing phase as it had been previously and
that he would be even more popular with the Bengalis once he got out the prison. Victory would be ultimately his – and his people’s – as the
outcome of the election showed. Mujib might have been misled by Yahya’s disinformation campaign, too. In the morning of 25 March, when the
preparations for the crackdown were in progress, Radio Pakistan reported that Yahya Khan had agreed “in principle” to hand over power to the
elected representatives in East Pakistan and had conceded the Awami League’s three other demands. Mujib was to meet again with Yahya in the
afternoon, but that meeting was canceled.
The final account of Mujib’s unwillingness to break Pakistan came from Prince Sadruddin Agha Khan, the U.N. high commissioner for refugees.
On 29 November 1971, he told a State Department official that Mujib might not want an independent Bangladesh. “Even today, he wanted a
unified Pakistan,” Sadruddin told Sisco, adding that his view was based on his long meetings with A.K. Brohi, Mujib’s defense counsel in the
sedition trial in 1971. Mujib, true to his pledge to the Bengalis, wanted their emancipation based on his six-point program, which envisaged East
Pakistan’s maximum autonomy in a confederal Pakistan, but not an independent Bangladesh.
The events in Dhaka during the fateful days of March 1971 surprised not only Mujib, but also many Americans, including Kissinger, who were
unclear why the talks had collapsed. The Americans thought Mujib and Yahya had reached a tentative deal, providing for an immediate
establishment of provincial governments, temporary continuation of the central government under Yahya and the drafting of a constitution. The new
constitution would outline the division of power between the central government and the provinces, with the central government keeping control
only of defense, foreign affairs, and currency.
“I have no idea what caused the breakdown in talks. I was as much surprised as anyone else,” Kissinger told the Washington Special Action
Group, a panel that implemented the Nixon administration’s foreign policy. The group met on 26 March to discuss the East Pakistan situation.
Kissinger said he thought an agreement between Mujib and Yahya was in sight.
CIA chief Helms said an agreement appeared imminent on 24 March, but the talks eventually fell apart possibly because Mujib had demanded
an immediate lifting of martial law – a step that would have ended Yahya’s grip on power.