“I have so many reasons to thank you that it is difficult to know where to begin,” Kissinger wrote. “First of all, there is the vital role that you
played in establishing communications between us and the People’s Republic of China. Your initiative and discretion made possible the reliable and
secure contacts that led to my visit and the president’s forthcoming trip.”
Giving the message a personal touch, he added: “Then, the skill, tact, and efficiency with which your officials carried out my secret mission were
nothing short of brilliant. I hope you will pass on my deep appreciation, and that of the president, to all those who realized this venture, including
some of your closest advisers, the military personnel who paved our way to and from the airport, and the captain and crew of your airplane. My
colleagues and I were greatly moved by the historic nature of our flight and the care and warmth with which we were treated as we crossed some
of the world’s highest mountains.” Again “Mr President, the deepest thanks go to you who led and orchestrated the entire enterprise. I shall always
remember your generosity in our talks on July 8 when you insisted on setting aside the massive problems that your country faces and concentrating
instead on my visit to Peking. In addition, I enjoyed, and profited from, my too brief stay in Pakistan itself, the conversations we had, and the
gracious Pakistani hospitality.”
Nixon himself lauded Yahya’s contribution in a hand-written personal letter on 7 August 1971, in which he said: “I have already expressed my
official appreciation for your assistance in arranging our contacts with the People’s Republic of China. Through this personal note I want you to
know that without your personal assistance this profound breakthrough in relations between the United States of America and the People’s
Republic of China would never have been accomplished.”
In general, America’s policy towards South Asia, at least since the pre-Kennedy era, followed a standard pattern. Since the 1950s, American
policy had been shaped by its perception that economic and social progress would produce stable democracies in recently de-colonized countries
and help check communism in the third world. According to this theory, it is only the military – because of its disciplined organization – could offer
the best chances at maintaining stability in newly independent countries, which often lacked strong political institutions.
“The United States objectives, especially with respect to India and Pakistan and generally with respect to other countries of South Asia, is to
enhance the security of the United States,” concluded a report by James S. Lay Jr, executive secretary at the State Department, to the National
Security Council. The report, issued on 5 January 1951 and titled, “The Position of the United States with Respect to South Asia” , also said: “The
loss of India to the communist orbit would mean that for all practical purposes all of Asia will have been lost; this would constitute a most serious
and threatening blow to the security of the United States . . .”
As part of this strategy to check communism, since the 1950s the United States had pursued essentially three policy objectives in South Asia:
stable, strong governments friendly towards the United States in its fight against communism; greater cooperation among South Asian countries to
wage a common front against communism; and the improvement of the region’s basic economies.
Said a National Security Council report issued on 10 January 1957: “The political stake of the United States in the independence and integrity of
the countries of South Asia, as well as in their stability and peaceful progress, is very large. If India or Pakistan came under communist influence,
chain-reaction effects, going as far as Western Europe, would result. Serious political instability in either or both of these large nations would
significantly increase communist influence in the area or, alternatively, might lead to hostilities in South Asia. Either turn of events could engage great
power interests to the point of threatening world peace.
It continued: “It remains necessary, therefore, to employ the limited means at our disposal as effectively as possible in South Asia. This will
require policies developed country by country, but it will also continue to involve us in intraregional issues and we shall probably find it increasingly
necessary that we seek to resolve, or at least to keep under control, the local controversies that bulk so importantly in the political life of the
subcontinent.”
This document followed an intelligence analysis released on 15 March 1955, which predicted probable developments in Pakistan over the next
several years, with an emphasis on its economic prospects and likely political stability. It followed more than two years of recurrent political crises
and takeover of political power in Pakistan by a small group of British-trained administrators and military leaders centering around Governor
General Ghulam Mohammed and his two principal associates, General Iskander Mirza and General Ayub Khan. The Pakistani regime favored a
strong central government, economic development through austerity measures and foreign aid, and close alignment with the United States.
The intelligence report said: “We believe that the present regime will remain in power at least through 1955 and probably considerably longer.
Its firm control of the armed forces will almost certainly enable it to discourage, or if need be defeat, any attempt to challenge it, and it is unlikely to
allow itself to be ousted by political maneuvering or legal challenges to its authority. Although East Pakistani provincialism will continue to pose
serious problems, we do not believe that separatism will become a major threat.”
At least for several years, however, the regime would probably be handicapped by a lack of organized political and popular support and, even
more importantly, by the thinness of its top leadership. Moreover, within the ruling group there were differences of view which could become
serious. Ghulam Mohammed was seriously ill at that time and his death, while not expected to automatically lead to the regime’s fall, was expected
to severely test Mirza and Ayub’s ability to keep their associates in line and their opponents under control. The eventuality was seen as a probable
compulsion for them to rely more openly on the armed forces.
The report concluded: “Should Mirza and Ayub, in turn, be removed from the scene, a many-sided struggle would probably follow. This might
give rise to another, basically similar, authoritarian regime or it might result in serious internal disorganization and perhaps a weakening of Pakistan’s
present alignment with the United States.
“Under the present or any similar regime, Pakistan will almost certainly continue to cultivate close ties with the United States, if only because of
Pakistan’s urgent need for U.S. economic assistance and its desire for U.S. military and diplomatic support to strengthen its position against India.
Pakistan’s present regime will probably cooperate with U.S. efforts in the further development of anti-communist defense arrangements in both the
Middle East and Southeast Asia. It is not likely, however, to commit any more than token forces outside the Pakistan territory unless its armed
forces are considerably strengthened, its economy improved and its fear of India greatly reduced. In the event of a general war, Pakistan would
recognize that its interest and obligations lay with the West, but unless directly threatened, it would probably seek specific Western protection
before overtly departing from nonbelligerence.”
Pakistan’s strong military was among the reasons why American policymakers sought an alliance with Islamabad. Admiral Arthur Radford,
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, revealed his preference during a Joint Chiefs discussion in 14 January 1955, after a trip to Pakistan. He had
stayed with Governor General Mohammed Ali in Karachi, but hardly saw him, because the Pakistani leader was ill. Mirza, the admiral understood,