by his administration, but India must recognize that it was unpopular in America. It must, therefore, affect the U.S. government’s general attitude.
Should the situation deteriorate to war, it could extend beyond India and Pakistan. The Americans would not understand if India were to attack
Pakistan. While Washington could not expect India to determine its own policies based solely on U.S. attitudes, these attitudes should be taken
into consideration, Nixon suggested.
Nixon then asked Gandhi if Yahya could really survive if Mujib were released at that point in time. Gandhi avoided an answer to this question.
She stated that India was not being driven by anti-Pakistan motives. India had never wished to destroy Pakistan nor cause it to be permanently
crippled. Rather, India sought to restore stability in the region. Recalling the genesis of the subcontinent’s Partition, she noted that the solution,
largely dictated from abroad, had left the peoples restive and dissatisfied.
Nixon agreed that the Partitioning had contributed to a permanent instability.
Gandhi observed that many harbor the feeling that her father had let the country down by accepting the Partition along the lines ultimately
reached. Nevertheless, once the decision had been taken, it was accepted. But the Partitioning generated a persistent “hate India” campaign,
resulting in successive conflicts in 1947 and 1965.
Following India’s Independence, the freedom movement leaders formed the country’s government. At the same time, the loyalist or pro-British
factions formed Pakistan’s government. Pakistan proceeded to imprison or exile the Independence movement leaders. Baluchistan and Northwest
Frontier provinces had a strong desire for greater autonomy. There had been a long history of separatist politics in Pakistan, which had not
necessarily been supported in India. Yahya was mistaken in trying to suppress Mujib. India had always reflected a degree of forbearance towards
its own separatist elements. The pattern had been clear. West Pakistan had dealt with the Bengalis in a treacherous and deceitful way and had
always relegated them to an inferior role. As the situation worsened, India attempted to alleviate it by maintaining communication with all the
parties.
Nixon noted that many of the tactics being employed by the Bengalis were worsening the dilemma. For example, it was difficult to understand
their motives in harassing and sabotaging the flow of humanitarian aid being carried in ships to Chittagong Harbor. Also, there was a perception
that because guerrilla activity of that type must involve sophisticated training and equipment, India must be training and arming these guerrillas.
Gandhi Tells Nixon Pakistan Unity “Unrealistic”
Gandhi took issue with Nixon’s comment. She said there were, of course, continuing accusations that India had instigated the guerrilla movement
and continued to support it. However, the realities were that it was no longer realistic to expect East and West Pakistan to remain together, as the
pressures for autonomy were overwhelming.
She said Yahya continued to speak of a “Holy War”. It might well be that the presence of Indian forces along Pakistan’s frontier had deterred
the initiation of military action by Pakistan thus far. This tense situation had influenced India towards entering into a treaty with the Soviet Union as
a means of creating an additional deterrent. Stability in India was an important objective to the Soviet Union and, therefore, Moscow had long
pressed for a political solution. Many in India had opposed the Soviet treaty and a majority of the parliament was concerned about it, too.
Nixon asked Gandhi for her views on how a solution could be achieved. Gandhi again avoided an answer, instead reiterating that her major
concern was how the situation affected India itself. The crucial issue remained the future of Mujib, who was the symbol of the imperative for
autonomy.
Nixon expressed his understanding for India’s problem in undertaking the displacement of forces and noted that Yahya had indicated his
willingness to undertake some pullback. If India now believed that such a step would not contribute to the lessening of tensions, it would be
necessary for the United States to reconsider its efforts to effect such a pullback by Pakistani forces.
Gandhi did not address Nixon’s proposal to consider withdrawing forces.
However, India’s external affairs secretary responded to the proposal during the Gandhi-Rogers meeting on 5 November. In that meeting, Kaul
said a withdrawal without political settlement would incorrectly suggest that the crisis was coming under control. Rogers responded that the
political settlement would be difficult under the threat of an imminent war. If war started, there could not be a political solution. On the other hand,
without a political solution, war was likely to start, the secretary of state added.
Gandhi replied that India doubted whether Yahya actually desired a political solution. But both Rogers and Sisco disagreed, saying they
believed that the military ruler of Pakistan sincerely sought a solution; that he, in fact, felt that he had to have one.
To counter that view, and prove Yahya’s lack of sincerity, the Indians presented a detailed recent history of East Pakistan’s events. When
asked what evidence America had that Yahya, in fact, sought a political solution, Rogers presented none. He only said he wanted to make it clear
that the United States had done all it could in this regard. Haksar intervened to say this was not a matter in dispute between America and India.
When the Indians questioned Yahya’s motives, they did not mean to castigate the United States. It was just an attempt to reach an understanding
with Washington about East Pakistan.
After the Rogers-Gandhi meeting, Kaul told Sisco that if India “could be assured that there had been contact with Mujib and that Mujib, free of
coercion, had designated an individual to negotiate with Yahya, India could give this proposal its cautious support.”
On 5 November, Nixon discussed with Kissinger his conversation with Gandhi. Kissinger’s overall assessment was that “the Indians are
bastards anyway. They are starting a war there . . . To them East Pakistan is no longer the issue. Now, I found it very interesting how she carried
on to you yesterday about West Pakistan.”
Kissinger felt, however, that Nixon had achieved his objective in his talks with the Indian premier: “While she was a bitch, we got what we
wanted too . . . She will not be able to go home and say that the United States didn’t give her a warm reception and, therefore, in despair she’s got
to go to war.” Kissinger judged that Gandhi’s objective had been thwarted: “She would rather have had you give her a cool reception so that she
could say that she was really put upon.” Nixon agreed: “We really slobbered over the old witch.”
Kissinger felt that nothing of importance had been conceded on matters of substance: “You slobbered over her in things that did not matter, but
in things that did matter, you didn’t give her an inch.” Nixon and Kissinger agreed that during the conversation the next day with Gandhi the
approach the president would take was to be “a shade cooler”, allowing her to do more to carry the conversation than had been the case in the