11 
U.S. Fiasco in East Pakistan:
Right Diagnosis, Wrong Medicine
n 13 April 1971, Kissinger forwarded a memo from the secretary of state to Nixon, suggesting that the time had come “to reexamine our
basic stance toward Pakistan”. In the memo, Rogers stressed “the need to keep our options open in case East Pakistan becomes
independent and to examine our relative priorities between India and Pakistan and the interplay of U.S. interests with those of communist
China and the Soviets in South Asia.”
“The situation in Pakistan is changing,” Kissinger told Nixon in his forwarding letter, adding, “You will soon be called upon to make some
decisions on our economic aid and military supply programs for Pakistan on which it will be difficult, if not impossible, to find a neutral ground.”
Three days later, on 16 April, a Special National Intelligence Estimate on “Prospects for Pakistan,” produced at the State Department’s
request, sounded an alarm bell in Washington. “The current review of our posture toward Pakistan painted a bleak picture for Islamabad,” the
study said.
In addition, the estimate said, the prospects were “poor” that the army could substantially improve its position, much less reassert control over
the Bengalis. Whether the army was to face widespread non-cooperation or continued active resistance, would depend in part on how much help
India gave the Bengalis. India “will continue and increase” its arms aid to the Bengalis; this would enable them to develop at a minimum the kind of
insurgency capability that the army could not entirely suppress. Furthermore, whatever the extent of Indian support to the Bengalis, Yahya would
face “increasingly serious difficulties” in East Pakistan.
Assessing the prospect of foreign involvement in the conflict, especially by the Soviet Union and China, the document said the Russians firmly
opposed the military suppression of East Pakistan. India influenced the Soviet decision. China had come down heavily on West Pakistan’s side,
but a Chinese military intervention in support of West Pakistan “did not now seem likely,” although they might increase arms deliveries. China,
however, might in time face a dilemma should an extremist group came to the fore in the Bengali resistance movement and sought Beijing’s help.
If Bangladesh became independent “rather soon” it would possibly have a moderate leadership, the intelligence report predicted. A prolonged
war, on the other hand, could lead to a takeover by an extremist and radical leadership. Over a longer term, even if the moderates initially took
over, their inability to solve Bangladesh’s serious problems would lead to increased susceptibility to radical and extremist ideas and groups.
“Bangladesh would remain an object of continuing concern to India and, in the name of national security, would be an object of manipulation
and even of open interference on New Delhi’s part. Indeed, an independent Bangladesh is likely to remain very much in India’s orbit so long as
that New Delhi has a government strong and decisive enough to seek to exercise its influence,” the CIA concluded.
When Kissinger reviewed the National Intelligence Estimate on 16 April, he received a memo from Saunders and Hoskinson, who had
prepared an assessment of Farland’s recommendations about Pakistan. Farland, the U.S. ambassador to Pakistan, advocated “maintaining options
in both East and West Pakistan.”
What the Farland plan meant, they explained, was “in our public stance we would take a somewhat firmer line than we have so far. This would
include expressing concern for loss of human life, underscoring our desire to see an early end to the fighting and return to civilian government, and
making clear our continuing concern about the use of U.S. arms to suppress the East Pakistanis. Privately, we would inform the Pakistanis, without
threatening or lecturing, that we do not believe force will provide a solution.” This dialogue could begin with the president’s answer to Yahya, a
reference to the Pakistani president’s letter to Nixon on 30 March.
By 19 April, two days after the Awami League formally announced the formation of the government-in-exile in Mujibnagar, the Americans
started getting a clearer picture of the East Pakistan situation. A personal note that accompanied a memorandum by Saunders to Kissinger
captured the new reality.
“It appears that the situation is settling down to one of prolonged conflict. We must guard against moving too quickly to a view that the West
Pakistanis are regaining control, but it does seem increasingly clear that we are not going to be dealing with a situation in which the resistance
movement is so dramatically successful as to make it immediately apparent to the West Pakistanis that they cannot win.”
Fresh information emanating from Pakistan only reinforced America’s previous assessment that the Islamic nation could soon be history.
“Nothing has happened to alter our basic judgment that the breakup of Pakistan is inevitable, but events of recent days suggest that we may have
been overemphasizing its imminence. What this suggests to me is that time may have been bought for a second chance to try mitigating some of the
worst consequences of a split.”
Saunders advocated an even-handed policy in dealing with West and East Pakistan. “If we are to preserve some position in both East and West
Pakistan, we have to consider the interests of both sides,” he argued.
He noted the two sides represented conflicting interests, with the West Pakistani military seeking to preserve the country’s unity and the Bengalis
fighting to gain substantial autonomy. “We cannot assume that the problem is solved; it is only deferred.”
Going into details, he said the present situation in Pakistan “gives us an opportunity to reassess one of the options which we discarded before 25
March. We decided then not to inject ourselves into the negotiations between East and West. This was probably wise in that we really did not
know what was going on and we would have appeared to be meddling in a situation over our depth.”
“Now, however, we have seen the potential consequences – economic problems in West Pakistan beyond our capacity, the possibility of an
Indian-Pakistani war and the difficult choices which East Pakistani independence would thrust upon us,” he went on.
“The most important issue before us, therefore, may be whether we wish now to involve ourselves more actively in it attempting to help work
out a negotiated settlement between East and West Pakistan.”