Johnson: “What can we do in the East?”
Helms: “There is nothing to do. There is no way of getting them out.”
Johnson: “India can afford to withdraw their troops from East Pakistan, once the Mukti Bahini are in the saddle.”
James H. Noyes, assistant secretary of Defence for International Security Affairs, interjected: “The more territory Pakistan takes in the West,
the more provocation this is to India – the more justification India has to continue.”
Moorer: “India doesn’t need any provocation or justification. They have a plan and they are carrying it out.”
Johnson: “And, the Paks can’t prevent it.”
Helms: “What leverage do we have on India?”
Johnson: “None. I’m talking about our objectives.” He then asked whether the United States should ask Yahya about arranging a ceasefire to
restore “the status quo ante in the West”.
Kissinger: “Wouldn’t he say ‘they have taken half my country, and I can’t talk about it’?”
Johnson: “What is the alternative – continued fighting in the West until his forces are destroyed?”
Williams: “But Yahya doesn’t expect this to happen. He expects the fighting will be stopped by the great powers. He expects them to bring it to
a halt and then to go to some form of a negotiating table.”
Moorer: “Is there any way to get NATO into the act?”
Helms: “The British and French don’t go along with us.”
Williams: “If we approach the Indians, their response will probably be that they will stop the war in the West in return for Pakistan’s recognition
of Bangladesh.”
Johnson: “But with the destruction of the Pak forces in the East, they can’t do anything anyway.”
Williams: “But the Indians have already said this is what they want, and we would get this response to any approach to them. Once they achieve
their objective in the East, there is the possibility that they may stop.”
Irwin: “But they have said they intend to destroy the Pak army and air force and straighten out the line on Kashmir.”
Kissinger: “If they destroy the army and the air force, Pakistan will be in their paws. The result would be a nation of 100 million people
dismembered, their political structure changed by military attack, despite a treaty of alliance with and private assurances by the United States. And,
all the other countries, on whom we have considered we could rely, such as Iran, would know that this has been done by the weight of Soviet arms
and with Soviet diplomatic support. What will be the effect in the Middle East, for example – could we tell Israel that she should give up something
along a line from A to B, in return for something else, with any plausibility?”
Sisco: “I don’t accept that view. We do have a kind of alliance with Pakistan in both the CENTO and the bilateral context, but that alliance was
against communist aggression. I grant that the Russians are behind India in this, but our commitment was not in the India-Pakistan context. I don’t
believe Iran or Israel or any other Middle Eastern country expect direct U.S. involvement in South Asia.”
Sisco dismissed a far-reaching impact as Kissinger painted: “I don’t see the implication for the rest of the world that you draw. I have the
impression from what Yahya told Farland that he has ‘accepted’ the inevitable result in East Pakistan. We can’t do anything about that. East
Pakistan is gone and we both have to face that fact. The thing that confronts Yahya and us in relation to the balance on the subcontinent is what
happens in West Pakistan. It is not in our interest to have India destroy the Pak army in West Pakistan or otherwise effect a further radical change
in the status quo, possibly resulting in the fractionalization of Pakistan. I think we have three options: (1) we can do nothing – complete non-
involvement – in which case East Pakistan would be lost, India would destroy the Pak army and would take at least Azad Kashmir. This is clearly
unacceptable. (2) That we not accept this situation, but see what we can do diplomatically or otherwise to deter the Indians from their present
course. We should recognize that we are limited in the ways in which we can deter the Indians. Even if we should move rapidly on arms supply to
the Paks, this would have only a marginal effect.”
Kissinger asked Sisco whether his suggestions were based on the assumption that “the Indians were willing to press the fighting to a conclusion.”
Sisco responded: “Yes. We should ask ourselves how we could deter the Indians so as to end with a West Pakistan based on the status quo
ante, including no alteration of the boundaries of Kashmir.”
Kissinger: “Would you accept Bangladesh?”
Sisco avoided a direct answer: “I have no problem with going to the Indians alone, as you suggest. We should also go to the Russians. I think
we should also have a serious talk with Yahya.”
Kissinger: “What would be the point of a serious talk with Yahya?”
Sisco: “To see how he reads his position. I realize this is an oversimplification, but Yahya is faced with a situation involving the sure destruction
of elements of his government in East Pakistan. How does he read his capability in the West? Probably not as we do. Given the disproportionate
military capability between India and Pakistan, we see the likelihood of a Pak defeat. But if Yahya doesn’t read it that way, he may want to
continue the military struggle. If he wants to do this, we’re not in a position to second-guess him. The fundamental question is whether we should
try to have some exchange along the line that the East is pretty well lost, and how do we save the rest of Pakistan?”
Kissinger: “So we would go to Yahya and say he should settle now?” Sisco: “Yahya is faced with the necessity of cutting his losses and saving
West Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “Suppose Yahya says yes, and the Indians say he has to recognize Bangladesh?”
Sisco: “We shouldn’t press him to do that. I’m stating the situation in bold terms.”
Johnson: “India doesn’t need Yahya’s recognition of Bangladesh. Neither Yahya nor the United States can restore the status quo ante in
Bangladesh. There is nothing Yahya can do, even if he doesn’t accept the loss.”
Williams: “We have only a limited leverage on India. In the absence of any assurance that a military supply effort would be effective and would
make any difference in the military balance, we’re in a terribly weak position. I think we need something additional if we are to extract Yahya with
some shred of honor. I think we should go back to a sharpened Security Council resolution – a steadfast of some sort which would save the army