Should war break out, it would be in the U.S. interest to keep third parties, particularly China and the Soviets, out of it. America would reap
benefits by bringing a quick end to it, because a prolonged war could cause profound damage to the political, economic and social fabric of the
South Asian nations.
Kissinger discussed the ideas with Nixon’s foreign policy team the same day. The following exchange transpired, as recorded in the minutes of
the Washington Special Action Group meeting on 17 August 1971 ( Document 126, volume XI, South Asia crisis 1971, Department of State)
.
Kissinger: “Do you think the Indians will attack?”
Helms: “My personal feeling is that they will not do so.”
Kissinger asked Sisco: “What do you think?”
Sisco: “I don’t think they will launch an attack across the border. However, I believe they will feel free to support the liberation movement in
East Pakistan now that they have the treaty with the Soviets. This will be more likely to happen if the liberation movement picks up steam, the relief
problem continues and there is no political accommodation. My reaction is that in no circumstances will the Pakistanis initiate hostilities in the West.
If the Indian objective is to achieve a Bangla Desh that they can work with, they will continue to support the liberation movement.”
Kissinger: “Are the Chinese reinforcing?”
Helms: “No.”
Moorer: “There are no indications yet that they are. We do know that the Indians have activated some airfields near West Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “How quickly would the Chinese be able to reinforce?”
Moorer: “It would be very difficult for them.”
Helms: “The terrain is bad, and they don’t have the necessary equipment. We would know ahead of time.”
Kissinger: “Did they reinforce in 1962?”
Helms: “Yes.”
Kissinger: “Did we know?”
Helms: “Yes.”
Kissinger: “What did the Indians think was going to happen?”
Helms: “As I recall, the Indians had sort of decided to take on the Chinese before the attack took place.”
Kissinger: “Thus, their surprise was the result of a judgmental factor.”
Helms: “In that part of the world one still has the problem of passions outrunning good judgment.”
Kissinger: “Passions don’t have to run very far to do that in India.”
Irwin: “If Joe’s scenario is correct, what steps could be taken to reduce that possibility?”
Moorer: “Doesn’t it all boil down to whether the Indians take overt action? The Pakistanis are outnumbered four to one. They certainly are not
going to attack.”
Irwin: “What would cause the Indians to take action?”
Moorer: “The emotion you were talking about. Also the refugee problem.”
Irwin: “There are several possible contingencies that could cause the Indians to act. There could be a famine in East Pakistan, which would
stimulate a large wave of refugees. Failure to reach a political accommodation would be another factor. The execution of Mujibur Rahman might
touch off something.”
Kissinger: “Do we know what is going on at the trial?”
Moorer: “It is expected to last two months.”
Helms: “Until October.”
Irwin: “All we can do with India is to urge restraint and threaten.”
Helms: “I think the U.S. policy has been just right on this occasion. We are urging the Indians not to attack, we are taking action to prevent
famine, and we are getting the United Nations engaged. It doesn’t look like we are doing a lot, but what else is there to do? The only other thing
we should do is get Ted Kennedy home.”
Kennedy, chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Refugees, was in India at that time on an eight-day fact-finding mission.
Kissinger: “I’m not sure they would agree about that [Kennedy’s return] upstairs.”
Sisco: “In this contingency paper, there are a lot of unilateral steps indicated. I think we ought to realize that in case of war there is really very
little that we can do unilaterally. We will have to rely on what parallel interests the United States, the U.S.S.R. and China may have in localizing the
war. What bothers me is that we have channels to the Soviets, but we have to find ways to talk to the Chinese.”
Kissinger: “We can figure that out.”
Sisco: “By ourselves we have a limited capacity to influence the situation.”
Kissinger: “What should we tell the Soviets and Chinese that we want them to do?”
Sisco: “Before or after hostilities?”
Kissinger: “Before and after. Has anyone talked to the Soviet Union?”
Sisco: “It is difficult to say exactly what we would tell them at the present juncture.”
Kissinger: “Couldn’t we say, cool your new friends? Am I missing something here? Why not say that to them?”
Helms: “Sure. Why not? Conversation is cheap.”
Irwin: “I see no problem. At some point, we might move to that. The secretary [Rogers] was planning on seeing the Soviets, but the Soviet
treaty with India intervened.”
Kissinger: “You shake your head. Why?”