neighborhood. In any case, American and Indian interests and objectives are the same.”
Kissinger: “Yes. They are parallel. We want a stable, progressive and democratic Bangladesh. There is no need for us to fight again the
problems of two years ago. They had nothing to do with Bangladesh.”
Nixon and Kissinger obviously also believed that the Soviet Union, with its then newly signed friendship treaty with India, was well entrenched in
New Delhi; an even-handed policy not tilted towards Pakistan would not have changed the basic fact of the Soviet arms aid to India. On the
contrary, a pro-Indian policy would have antagonized both Islamabad and Beijing. Thus, apparently afraid that the president’s Beijing mission
might be jeopardized, the administration favored Pakistan over India.
However, Nixon’s desire to forge a relationship with China – an apparent objective Kissinger had outlined to the president’s foreign policy team
before the war – possibly had little direct impact on America’s support for Pakistan in 1971. Kissinger himself dismissed the notion that Pakistan
received continued U.S. military aid because it helped Washington build ties with China. When Saunders asked on 17 July whether Kissinger
agreed the State Department should not link military assistance with the China policy, the national security adviser replied in the affirmative.
An opportunity for America to warm up to China had existed at least since General Ayub Khan became Pakistan’s president and his foreign
minister, Z.A. Bhutto, wooed Beijing to play the China card to extract more concessions from Washington.
During a conversation on 18 September 1964, with Walter P. McConaughy, then the U.S. ambassador to Pakistan, Ayub suggested that “some
U.S.-Chinese communist relations would have to be established.” When the envoy replied that there would first have to be some changes made in
China, Ayub “heartily concurred, but noted there would need to be some adjustments of view in Washington, also.”
From the Chinese side, Beijing had extended an olive branch to Washington as far back as in 1965. Chou En-lai had asked Ayub Khan, when
he visited Beijing in March of that year, to give a message to Washington that the communist nation would not “provoke war with the United
States” unless America bombed China first. But because Ayub’s visit to the United States had been postponed, China worried its message was
probably not delivered. Foreign Minister Ch’en Yi thus asked the British Embassy in Beijing if it would pass on the message.
The British Embassy sent two messages to London on 31 May and 1 June 1965. Copies of the telegrams were sent to William P. Bundy,
assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs in the Johnson administration, with a 2 June cover note by Michael N.F. Stewart, a minister at
the British Embassy in China. Stewart asked London whether the United States would object if the British charge told the Chinese that the British
had delivered the message to Washington. No reply to this note had ever been found.
Ayub told the U.S. ambassador during a meeting on 18 September 1965, that “some useful information and some Pak leverage on Chinese
communists might be developed out of Pak associations with Chinese communists.” He made the remark when McConaughy chided Pakistan for
warming up to China.
America, then, not only opposed direct contacts with Beijing, but also put pressure on Pakistan not to forge strong ties with China because the
communist giant supported Vietnam. Not only that, America pressed Ayub to remove his Yankee-baiting foreign minister, Bhutto, the architect of
Sino-Pak amity, from his cabinet. Ironically, it was Bhutto whom Nixon later courted to make America’s opening to China. Soon after Nixon was
elected president in November 1968, Dr. Glenn Olds, who became the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations Economic and Social Council
under Nixon, traveled to Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia, to meet with Bhutto, who was cordial with Chou En-lai. Olds traveled on Nixon’s behalf to ask
Bhutto to intercede with China. The meeting marked America’s first step in the normalization of relations with China. Olds’ strategy proposed that
Bhutto be the intermediary to Mao through Chou En-lai, wrote Jeff Gates, author of the 2008 book, Guilt By Association , in an article in Salem-
News.com on 18 December 2009.
Yahya’s role as an intermediary between America and China was merely an extension of the trend going back to the Ayub era. The secret
diplomacy, however, assumed greater importance because Nixon was eager to break the barriers of China’s Great Wall.
During the 1971 crisis, Kissinger did emphasize the Nixon administration’s aim to stop war in South Asia, because “we do not want to be
forced to choose between 800 million Chinese and 600 million Indians and Bengalis. We don’t want India in the Soviet camp, even though the
Indians may be driving themselves there deliberately through the creation of a phony crisis.”
However, putting the blame squarely on Nixon’s China overture for the anti-India posture was perhaps an attempt by Kissinger to absolve
himself as well as the administration of the responsibility for pursuing a discredited policy. Kissinger claimed, “Pakistan was our sole channel to
China; once it was closed off it would take months to make alternative arrangements.” But America had already established an alternate channel
via Eastern Europe. The more serious charge against Nixon’s actions was that his pro-Pakistan policy possibly encouraged the war. For instance,
the Indians were infuriated because America failed to protest Mujib’s imprisonment and never openly rebuked Pakistan’s repression in East
Pakistan. A neutral stance by Nixon – rather than branding India as the aggressor – would not necessarily have doomed his China initiative.
Perhaps, it could have reduced Soviet influence in India, which had been America’s principal goal in South Asia since the 1950s. But Nixon’s
policy did just the opposite. Gandhi, who had been lukewarm to the idea of a pact with Moscow, rushed to sign the Indo-Soviet Friendship Treaty
as soon as she learned of Nixon’s secret China plan.