“Since the ceasefire has gone into effect between India and Pakistan, we have carefully assessed subsequent Soviet actions and we are
convinced that they intend to continue their efforts to encircle the People’s Republic,” Chou En-lai told Kissinger, after Pakistan lost the 1971 war,
according to a memorandum of the Kissinger-Chou talks in the Chinese capital on 3 January 1972. “We say this based on a number of factors.
Included among those factors are their repeatedly announced support for Bangladesh and their offer to move advisers and assistance into East
Pakistan.”
Because both New Delhi and Moscow had long-standing disputes with Beijing, China figured its interests would be better served by continuing
to have Pakistan interposed between the Soviet Union and India. Should West Pakistan cease to exist, China would be surrounded by unfriendly
neighbors. On the other hand, continuing rivalry between Pakistan and India over East Pakistan would divert New Delhi’s attention away from her
border with China. Thus, West Pakistan’s survival was important to the communist giant.
But China’s performance during the war dealt a crushing blow to its prestige in South Asia, especially amongst the pro-Chinese elements in the
subcontinent. According to a CIA report, some unnamed leftist members of the Pakistan People’s Party admitted the day Bhutto assumed
presidency that “their image has been damaged by China’s failure to come to the aid of Pakistan.” Bhutto himself told the U.S. ambassador in
Pakistan that unlike the United States, “China had not fulfilled its obligation to Pakistan, and he saw no need to visit Peking in the near future to
discuss Pakistan’s new situation.”
China’s opposition to Bangladesh continued even after Dhaka fell. China, which itself was kept out of the United Nations by the United States
for more than two decades, blocked Bangladesh’s entry into the world forum in an attempt to nudge Sheikh Mujib to free the Pakistani war
prisoners. It was not until Mujib’s fall in 1975 that China recognized Bangladesh. China’s ambassador to Pakistan, Chang Tong, told Sidney
Sober, deputy chief of the U.S. mission in Islamabad, on 6 November 1973, that Bangladesh “had no legal basis for trying those prisoners, and,
indeed, their return was called for by ‘justice and principle.’ ”
Such a step would help improve relations among the South Asian countries, pave the way for Bangladesh’s entry into the world organization and
China’s recognition of Bangladesh, the Chinese said. He urged America to push the Bengalis to stop the war crimes trials. In short, China walked
the standard Pakistani line that the POWs had been fighting on their territory under orders of their own government, so another country could not
legally try them. If they had acted improperly, they would face justice in Pakistan when they returned home.
When Chang sought Sober’s view, the American said the South Asians would benefit more if they looked ahead to “their future relations and
needs rather than continue to look backward to the tragic events of 1971; but apparently there were deep feelings and domestic compulsions,
which had been impelling the Bangladesh government to insist on the trials.” Chang dismissed the theory of popular pressure on Mujib for the trials.
Bangladesh, he argued, stood only to gain by giving up the trials, because not only would such a step lead to better relations with Pakistan but also
would loosen the Indian and Soviet grip on Dhaka.
Only after Bangladesh signed the Simla agreement and agreed to release the POWs did China soften its position. On 14 April 1974, China’s
Vice Foreign Minister Ch’iao Kuan-hua told Kissinger that the tripartite pact among India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, was “a good thing”.
Kissinger did not entirely agree with China about how it saw Bangladesh. “We think Bangladesh is not an Indian satellite. When relations are
normal between India and Bangladesh, contradictions between them will emerge. I have also always believed that India will live to regret what it
did in 1971.”
When he then asked whether China intended to establish relations with Bangladesh, Vice Premier Deng Xiao Peng replied during a meeting in
Beijing that “there is no obstacle to that now,” adding “there have always been good relations between the peoples of Bangladesh and China.”
China used pro-Chinese elements to further its interests in the absence of a diplomatic mission during Mujib’s rule. Several fringe Maoist political
groups, which opposed Bangladesh’s liberation with India’s help, conducted armed operations in the country until Mujib was overthrown.
Kissinger had cautioned Nixon about China’s hostile attitude towards the Mujib government after a visit to Beijing. China would “go very slowly
on Bangladesh recognition, but saw advantages in our diplomatic relations so as not to leave the field free to Moscow and New Delhi,” Kissinger
told Nixon, quoting Chou. “In sum, I see no early change in the People’s Republic of China’s policy toward South Asia. The one place that will
bear watching, however, is Bangladesh, where the Chinese might ferment trouble against the present rulers.” China quickly moved to recognize the
regime that came to power after Mujib’s violent overthrow three years later.
China’s support for West Pakistan continued even after the Pakistani troops capitulated in Dhaka in 1971, essentially because of Beijing’s
hostility towards India. When Nixon told Chou En-lai during his trip to China that America would recognize Bangladesh soon, the Chinese premier
said: “We will probably recognize Bangladesh later on. Perhaps, we will be the last one.” He linked China’s recognition to India’s withdrawal of
troops stationed in Bangladesh and the resolution of the Kashmir issue. China also linked the recognition with the war prisoners” release.
Kissinger told Nixon after a visit to China that “Chou agreed with our view that an independent Pakistan should be supported against Indian
pressures, absorbing New Delhi’s energy in the subcontinent so it couldn’t expand into Southeast Asia.” He quoted Chou as saying that New
Delhi was meddling in such areas as Nepal and Sri Lanka. China’s premier also told Kissinger the Indians were putting out feelers for better
relations, which China would ignore.
China’s disdain of Nehru coincided with Nixon’s own. Nixon’s visceral and personal dislike of Nehru dated at least to their first meeting in
1953, when he made a twenty-minute courtesy call on the prime minister. In RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon, published in 1978 , Nixon
wrote: “The least friendly leaders I met on this trip was Nehru,” referring to the visit he undertook as Eisenhower’s vice president. Nixon, however,
consistently protested branding him as anti-Indian.
To be sure, Nixon was not the only one holding an unfavorable view of Nehru. Eisenhower, too, considered India’s long-term leader illogical in
his views. He expressed this opinion on 23 March 1955, in a letter to Secretary of State John Foster Dulles while instructing the American
ambassador to India on how to deal with Nehru.
“In the Indian situation,” Eisenhower wrote, “I am struck by the amount of evidence we have that Nehru seems to be often more swayed by
personality than by logical argument. He seems to be intensely personal in his whole approach, and I have no doubt that the recent meeting in my
office was arranged by Mr. Nehru in order that his trusted lieutenant could give him a personal appraisal of my general attitude toward the world,
India and Nehru himself.”
Eisenhower’s comment followed his 15 March meeting with V.K. Krishna Menon, Nehru’s close friend who later became defense minister.
During this meeting, which Dulles attended, Menon covered various unspecified topics.