Haksar then turned philosophical All human affairs were transitory and he was not so much concerned about the present, as it would pass, as he
was about the future. He expressed concern about the relations our children would have and what we owed to them.
“Haksar became quite emotional, his eyes watering, and asked what we could do,” Keating cabled the State Department, summarizing his
conversation. He suggested that Gandhi send a letter to Nixon, and Haksar promised to draft one that afternoon.
At 6.p.m., Haksar called in the deputy chief of the U.S. mission and handed him the text of Makenshaw’s message to Niazi. India “was
conveying a response to Niazi through the United States since we had been good enough to pass on the original Niazi proposal,” the embassy
reported to Washington.
Haksar described the reply as a “carefully considered and sincere response,” especially noting that the Indian military had already announced the
cessation of air attacks on Dhaka effective 5 p.m. of 15 December.
In his message, Manekshaw reiterated his guarantees previously given to Rao Farman Ali, promising to ensure “safety of all your military and
paramilitary forces who surrender to me in Bangladesh.” He promised to give “complete protection to foreign nationals, ethnic minorities and
personnel of West Pakistan, no matter who they may be.”
The Indian military chief also pledged to treat the Pakistani forces according to the Geneva Convention. As soon as he received a positive
response from Niazi, he assured, “I shall direct General Aurora, the commander of Indian and Bangladesh forces in the Eastern theater, to refrain
from all air and ground action against your forces. As a token of my good faith, I have ordered that no air action shall take place over Dacca from
1700 hours today.”
Along with the guarantees came Manekshaw’s warning: “I assure you I have no desire to inflict unnecessary casualties on your troops as I abhor
loss of human lives. Should, however, you do not comply with what I have stated, you will leave me with no other alternative but to resume my
offensive with the utmost vigor at 0900 hours Indian standard time on 16 December,” India’s army chief cautioned.
In Washington, Jha delivered Gandhi’s letter to Nixon on 15 December, as Haksar had promised to Keating. Gandhi’s letter echoed the
sentiment her father expressed in his address when India awoke at midnight in 1947 while the rest of the world was fast asleep.
“I am writing at a moment of deep anguish at the unhappy turn which the relations between our two countries have taken,” Gandhi wrote. “I am
setting aside all pride, prejudice and passion and trying, as calmly as I can, to analyze once again the origins of the tragedy which is being enacted.
“There are moments in history when brooding tragedy and its dark shadows can be lightened by recalling great moments of the past. One such
great moment, which has inspired millions of people to die for liberty, was the Declaration of Independence by the United States of America. That
declaration stated that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of man’s inalienable rights to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness, it
was the right of the people to alter or abolish it.
“All unprejudiced persons objectively surveying the grim events in Bangladesh since March 25 have recognized the revolt of 75 million people, a
people who were forced to the conclusion that neither their life, nor their liberty, to say nothing of the possibility of the pursuit of happiness, was
available to them. The world press, radio and television have faithfully recorded the story. The most perceptive of American scholars who are
knowledgeable about the affairs of this subcontinent revealed the anatomy of East Bengal’s frustrations.
“The tragic war, which is continuing, could have been averted if during the nine months prior to Pakistan’s attack on us on 3 December, the
great leaders of the world had paid some attention to the fact of the revolt, tried to see the reality of the situation and searched for a genuine basis
for reconciliation. I wrote letters along these lines. I undertook a tour in quest of peace at a time when it was extremely difficult to leave, in the
hope of presenting to some of the leaders of the world the situation as I saw it. It was heartbreaking to find that while there was sympathy for the
poor refugees, the disease itself was ignored.
“War could also have been avoided if the power, influence and authority of all the states and above all the United States, had got Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman released. Instead, we were told that a civilian administration was being installed. Everyone knows that this civilian administration
was a farce; today the farce has turned into a tragedy.
“Lip service was paid to the need for a political solution, but not a single worthwhile step was taken to bring this about. Instead, the rulers of
West Pakistan went ahead holding farcical elections to seats which had been arbitrarily declared vacant.
“There was not even a whisper that anyone from the outside world, had tried to have contact with Mujibur Rahman. Our earnest plea that
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman should be released, or that, even if he were to be kept under detention, contact with him might be established, was not
considered practical on the ground that the United States could not urge policies which might lead to the overthrow of President Yahya Khan.
While the United States recognized that Mujib was a core factor in the situation and that unquestionably in the long run Pakistan must acquiesce in
the direction of greater autonomy for East Pakistan, arguments were advanced to demonstrate the fragility of the situation and of Yahya Khan’s
difficulty.
“Mr. President, may I ask you in all sincerity: Was the release or even secret negotiations with a single human being, namely, Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, more disastrous than the waging of a war?
“The fact of the matter is that the rulers of West Pakistan got away with the impression that they could do what they liked because no one, not
even the United States, would choose to take a public position that while Pakistan’s integrity was certainly sacrosanct, human rights, liberty were
no less so and that there was a necessary inter-connection between the inviolability of states and the contentment of their people.
“Mr. President, despite the continued defiance by the rulers of Pakistan of the most elementary facts of life, we would still have tried our hardest
to restrain the mounting pressure as we had for nine long months, and war could have been prevented had the rulers of Pakistan not launched a
massive attack on us by bombing our airfields in Amritsar, Pathogen, Srinagar, Avantipur, Utterlai, Jodhpur, Ambala and Agra in the broad day
light on 3 December 1971, at a time when I was away in Calcutta, my colleague, the defense minister, was in Patna and was due to leave further
for Bangalore in the South and another senior colleague of mine, the foreign minister, was in Bombay. The fact that this initiative was taken at this
particular time of our absence from the capital showed perfidious intentions. In the face of this, could we simply sit back trusting that the rulers of
Pakistan or those who were advising them, had peaceful, constructive and reasonable intent?
“We are asked what we want. We seek nothing for ourselves. We do not want any territory of what was East Pakistan and now constitutes
Bangladesh. We do not want any territory of West Pakistan. We do want lasting peace with Pakistan. But will Pakistan give up its ceaseless and
yet pointless agitation of the past 24 years over Kashmir? Are they willing to give up their hate campaign posture of perpetual hostility towards