9 
Did Yahya Want to Hang Mujib?
n 13 May 1971, Gandhi sent a letter to U.S. President Nixon, which was delivered on 19 May by India’s ambassador to Washington,
L.K. Jha. Gandhi requested that the United States “impress upon the rulers of Pakistan that they owe a duty towards their own citizens
whom they have treated so callously and forced to seek refuge in a foreign country.”
Gandhi wanted America to persuade Pakistan’s military rulers to recognize that the solution they had chosen for East Pakistan was unwise. In
her letter, Gandhi voiced concern over Mujib’s arrest. “India, including all the political parties, is deeply concerned with the personal safety of
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman,” she wrote. “If you consider sending any message to the president of Pakistan, we would appreciate your taking up this
matter with him.” Gandhi ended her letter with a personal note, wishing “the very best” for Nixon’s daughter, Tricia, and her fiancé, Edward Cox,
who had just been engaged.
Gandhi sent a message to Nixon again, on 11 August, saying India was “greatly perturbed by the reported statement of President Yahya Khan
that he is going to start a secret military trial of Mujibur Rahman without affording him any foreign legal assistance.
“We apprehend that this so-called trial will be used only as a publicity to execute Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. This will aggravate the situation in
East Bengal and will create a serious situation in India because of the strong feelings of our people and all political parties. Hence our grave anxiety.
We appeal to you to exercise your influence with President Yahya Khan to take a realistic view in the larger interest of the peace and stability of
this region.” Simultaneously, Gandhi issued an appeal to twenty-three other heads of states to use their influence to save Mujib’s life.
Gandhi’s plea to Nixon fell on deaf ears. Washington decided against responding to Gandhi’s letter in writing lest India exploited it to its
diplomatic advantage.
“Because of the possibility that the Indians might attempt to exploit any written reply to Mrs. Gandhi’s August 11 message on the trial of
Mujibur Rahman, we have decided that it would be preferable for the ambassador to make an oral response on behalf of the president to Foreign
Secretary Kaul,” Johnson explained in a telegram to the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi.
He instructed the ambassador to tell the Indians that Rogers had conveyed America’s concern to Pakistan about Mujib’s summary treatment.
“We intend to continue to indicate our concern on appropriate future occasions, not only for humanitarian reasons, but also because we recognize
the importance which the trial and the possible execution of Mujib would have in the broader context of search for peace and stability in South
Asia.”
Yahya had told Hobart Luppi, the U.S. consul general in Karachi, in May that Mujib “had committed a capital crime and would be tried in a
duly constitutional court, and he would be given a fair and impartial trial.”
Luppi told Yahya that Mujib had already been prejudged, based on Yahya’s last address to the nation. He suggested that Pakistan might well
weigh world opinion vis-à-vis the severity of the sentence, since Mujib enjoyed a great deal of international sympathy. Yahya’s reply was
noncommittal, but not necessarily negative. Yahya indicated he would think about it, according to a telegram Luppi sent to the State Department
on 22 May 1971.
The American intelligence and diplomatic sources held that Yahya personally opposed executing Mujib. His senior military advisers and high
court justices warned against hanging the Bengali leader. They feared Mujib’s execution would seriously damage Pakistan’s image abroad.
America’s pressure influenced Yahya’s decision, too. Yahya also worried that if he executed Mujib, New Delhi would attack Pakistan. Irwin, the
under secretary of state, told Nixon’s foreign policy team in July that three things would prompt India to attack Pakistan: Some military incident; a
famine, which would result in a wave of new refugees; or Mujib’s execution.
On 22 July Syed Nazrul Islam, then acting Bangladesh president, sent a plea to Nixon to save Mujib’s life.
Following Irwin’s prediction and appeals from Gandhi and Nazrul Islam, Joseph Sisco, the assistant secretary of state, asked Nixon during a
White House meeting on 11 August if it would be all right to ask Yahya not to execute Mujib.
Nixon’s reply was couched in his typical convoluted language: “In view of the fact that we have not cut off aid and have a good personal
relationship with Yahya, it is possible that unless he is ‘totally trapped’ he might be responsive. Yahya considers Ambassador Farland his friend.
Any suggestions that we might have – such as ‘not shooting Mujib’ – Farland might point out to him.” Keeping with his stated policy not to do
anything that could embarrass Yahya, Nixon decided to ask Farland instead to privately raise the issue with the general.
Meanwhile, Rogers phoned Hilaly to express the widespread concern felt in the United States over Mujib’s trial. Rogers made the call after
Yahya had announced that Mujib’s secret trial had begun on 6 August. Hilaly promised to pass on the secretary’s message to Islamabad. But
Rogers was less than satisfied with Hilaly’s response, and told the U.S. ambassador in Pakistan to meet with the general.
On 19 August, Farland met with Yahya, along with Maurice Williams, the USAID deputy administrator. After Williams had left the meeting,
Farland met Yahya alone to find out what the general had on his mind about Mujib. Farland sent a telegram to Rogers the next day that he had met
alone with Yahya, based on his assumption that the president would speak more freely with him in private.
“I told Yahya that most, if not all, nations of the world were watching with intense interest and anxiety how the in-camera trial of Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman was proceeding, and most, if not all, were seized with concern as to its outcome. I concluded by stating that I, as a friend, felt strongly
obligated to suggest that Sheikh Mujibur Rahman not be executed. Such an action, I said, would be in my belief contrary to the best interests of his
government as well as to his own best personal interests,” Farland wrote.
Yahya told Farland that his concerns were unfounded. He said he had gotten the most qualified Pakistani attorney, A.K. Brohi, to defend
Mujib. He also said the military tribunal had been advised the trial must be conducted with the greatest care, without bias or prejudgment. Yahya
further stated that because the charge carried a possible death sentence, it was his plan that if such be verdict, a request for mercy would be made
in the Sheikh’s behalf, and he would accept the petition.