The next day, the U.S. charge met with India’s foreign secretary and made a presentation based on Rogers” instructions. Kaul responded by
reiterating Singh’s pledge that India would not wage war with Pakistan. He, however, said India viewed Pakistan’s recent military moves as a
threat to attack India, despite Yahya’s promise to the contrary. So, India could not accept America’s proposal for a mutual withdrawal of forces
until such a threat had been removed.
In Moscow, meanwhile, the U.S. ambassador met with Gromyko on 18 October to urge the Soviet Union to support the U.S. withdrawal
proposal. Ambassador Jacob Beam told the Soviet foreign minister that Yahya had accepted the proposal, but Singh had gone no further than to
state that if Pakistan withdrew then India would reconsider the situation. Beam asked Gromyko to encourage India to accept the plan.
Gromyko said India and Pakistan had both indicated they would not initiate hostilities, but the conclusion drawn in Moscow was that while
India’s assurance could be trusted, Yahya’s could not. Gromyko did not agree to support the withdrawal proposal. He argued that separating the
troops was a good idea but not a solution, and urged America to join the Russians in finding a political settlement.

Yahya Begins Worrying About War
In Pakistan, Yahya started worrying about facing war. On 19 October, the deputy chief of Pakistan’s embassy in Washington, delivered a letter to
the White House from Yahya to brief Nixon about the latest situation in the subcontinent. “In an already tense situation, India’s land, sea and air
forces have been brought to a state of confrontation against Pakistan’s frontiers in both the wings,” the general wrote. He said India had amassed
seven divisions against West Pakistan and put additional forces in a state of readiness to move to forward positions at a short notice. Nearly eight
divisions had encircled East Pakistan. Substantial forward moves had taken place from the rear to the forward positions. In addition, the
deployment of Indian forces on the Sino-Indian borders had been rearranged so that they could be simultaneously used in an offensive against
Pakistan.
“Our concern is all the more grave since India has shown no inclination to give up its policy of instigating and assisting armed infiltration into East
Pakistan. It continues to support, train and launch rebels and insurgents who seek the dismemberment and destruction of Pakistan. I am
constrained to say that if this state of affairs continues it may lead to dangerous consequences: a situation which we in Pakistan – and I am sure all
the friends of Pakistan and India, particularly, the United States – would wish to avoid,” Yahya wrote. He urged Nixon to take up this matter in his
talks with Gandhi during her forthcoming visit to Washington in November.
Yahya’s assessment was confirmed by the U.S. intelligence. The CIA told the White House on 19 October that all Indian armed forces had
been placed on full alert. Nearly twenty-six squadrons, including supersonic airplanes, were positioned against Pakistan. There was a virtual
combat air ring around East Pakistan for offensive purposes. The Indian navy had been put to a state of war-preparedness with sixty percent of its
forces deployed against the coasts of West Pakistan. The remaining strength of the Indian navy was positioned to move against the East Pakistan
shores. The inevitable conclusion that one could draw from this offensive posture was that it was pointed in the direction of conflict – and not of
peace.
On 20 October, the consulate general in Dhaka sent a dispatch to Washington, assessing the guerrilla war in East Pakistan, showing a
widespread escalation. The “insurgency has increased in tempo and geographic scope in last three months,” the consulate said. Still the liberation
fighters were unable to challenge the Pakistan army in urban areas, but showing increasing capability to carry out ambushes and hit-and-run attacks
in certain areas, while limited-to-minor sabotage elsewhere.
The American diplomats in Dhaka also noted that Islamabad’s efforts to reduce popular support by “civilization” and the general amnesty had
been unsuccessful, except for possibly among the middle class in cities. The insurgency’s future course would depend heavily on the Indian
support, the tenacity of Islamabad, and the quality of the Bengali leadership, whether Mujib or the other emerging leader.
The consulate general felt that the Mukti Bahini was now sufficiently established in many areas and had enough cohesion to sustain itself even if
India cut down its support. Continued Indian support would inevitably further extend the Mukti Bahini operational range. Still, in the foreseeable
future, the freedom fighters were “not likely to present a dangerous threat to the Pakistani army, despite probable increases in numbers and scope
of activity.” In contrast with the situation in Vietnam, the telegram added, the insurgency did “not possess redoubt in which it can concentrate
masses of supplies and weapons, nor are there protected trails through which large quantities of heavy equipment can reach them from an easily
accessible seaport.”
For many months to come, the consulate incorrectly predicted that the Pakistani army would certainly retain an advantage in equipment and
training. On the other hand, even at the present activity level, the Mukti Bahini was a serious thorn in the army’s side.
“We have no means of an accurate assessment of army casualties, but indications are that figure may run as high as 10 to 12 killed daily, with a
corresponding number of wounded.” While not in itself crippling to the Pakistani army contingent in East Pakistan, these figures over an extended
period could create serious morale problem among the troops far from home, living among unfriendly people and in difficult and wearing climate,
the consulate observed.
The Dhaka mission also sensed that the military authorities in East Pakistan were obviously concerned. Precautions were being taken to protect
vulnerable points in the city. Brick walls with rifle or machine-gun ports were being constructed around the airport, electric power stations and
other strategic points, while sandbagged strong points were set up at many places along principal streets. Security checkpoints were being
maintained along main roads, and occasionally set up unexpectedly at other places. Several pillboxes and fortifications had been installed along the
northern rim of the Gulshan residential area in Dhaka.
Giving his take on the political dynamic, the consul general told Washington that “while we still believe that Sheikh Mujib, released and allowed
freedom of action, could assert control over the Mukti Bahini and use it as a disciplined instrument of his policy, longer he is restrained more likely
we consider it that a new leadership will emerge from among the Mukti Bahini, which, tempered by fighting and action-orientation, might one day
challenge both Mujib and the old Awami League leadership for the primacy in the independent or largely autonomous East Bengal.”
Whether such an eventual leadership would be oriented towards the right or left was impossible to predict, Consul General Herbert D. Spivack
concluded.
On 22 October, the State Department cautioned Nixon of a strong possibility of war. “We have no information that either side intends to take