put faith in the Bengalis. “Mujibur Rahman never wanted secession. He was a moderating influence,” Ram stressed.
He said India’s problem was the nearly seven million refugees on its soil.
Kissinger asked how Ram felt a solution could come about.
Ram replied that America could tell Yahya that he would have to find a solution that catered to the Bengalis’ will.
Kissinger said U.S. actions were not directed towards finding the balance between India and Pakistan. Of India, America’s interest was to keep
it strong and stable; with Pakistan, it desired to preserve its influence on it.
“Our hope is to use that influence to encourage a settlement that will permit the refugees to return. If this policy is not successful, then we shall
re-examine it,” Kissinger said.
When Kissinger asked how many Pakistani forces there were in East Pakistan. Ram said there were about 70,000; Lall added that there were
more than four divisions.
Kissinger asked how long they could fight in a major military confrontation.
“Not very long,” Lall replied.
Ram added that for the Pakistani military forces, the logistics problem was real. “It would be difficult for them to continue fighting over a
prolonged period.”
Kissinger concluded that the U.S. interest was to help bring about a solution to permit the refugees to return. America had no intention of
creating a balance of power situation between India and Pakistan.
Ram said he was glad that this was the understanding. “If India is weakened, it would affect the stability of the entire world.” Kissinger simply
replied, “That is our profound conviction.”
The only balance of power the United States was concerned with was of the global kind – and the problem of preventing an outside power from
dominating South Asia. The local balance within South Asia was not an American concern. “The difficult problem we now have between us as
nations is to maintain that long-term perspective,” the secretary said.
By 12 July when Ram told parliament that a new nation of Bangladesh would be established replacing East Pakistan, New Delhi had started
seeing the conflict as a clear opportunity to weaken its major rival in South Asia. Pakistan had humiliated India in the war over Kashmir in 1965.
India then had to divide its forces between East and West, while keeping considerable forces on its northern border with China. This time, New
Delhi was determined not to be defeated again by Pakistan.
India figured that breaking East Pakistan from West Pakistan would greatly simplify its defense problem. India, therefore, decided to support the
Bangladesh movement, while preparing its own armed forces for war with Pakistan, should intervention become necessary. Throughout the period,
East Pakistan’s independence was pursued consistently and skillfully.
Another ingredient favoring India was the overwhelming public support for its policy. The burden of ten million refugees in India’s most populous
and impoverished region was costly and caused social unrest. Furthermore, most Indians saw Pakistan as a threat, which would, in any case, lead
to war eventually.
India started feeling more confident about clinching a military victory against Pakistan after it signed the treaty with the Soviet Union. Until the
end of July, the Soviet Union had maintained a balanced approach to India and Pakistan in an effort to increase its overall influence on the
subcontinent. However, after the United States and China moved towards closer bilateral relations and both supported Pakistan, Moscow and
New Delhi cemented their ties with the Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation signed on 9 August.
The treaty had little effect on India in military terms, but it gave the much-needed support for India’s position at the U.N. Security Council. The
Soviet Union opposed every proposal for any kind of intervention that could allow Pakistan to get a political settlement unacceptable to India, i.e.,
denial of self-determination for the people of East Pakistan.
For the Soviet Union, the treaty showed to the world its increasing influence in South Asia. It was in part a Soviet response to the Sino-U.S.
rapprochement – a policy aimed at encircling China and strengthening Moscow’s position on the Chinese flanks .
For India, it gave what it needed most: an ally with a veto power in the Security Council and the might to counter a Chinese threat. When the
pact was signed, it relieved internal pressures on Gandhi. Subsequent events suggested that this treaty virtually guaranteed Soviet support in
whatever action India took against Pakistan; in fact, Soviet support for Indian military action was reported by sources after Gandhi’s visit to
Moscow in late September. One report also indicated that the Soviets promised a diversionary action in Sinkiang if China threatened to intervene
against India.
By skillfully managing its diplomatic affairs, India won enough time to prepare for military intervention while preventing wider international
intervention that was potentially damaging to its aims. China considered Pakistan – in particular West Pakistan – vital to restricting Soviet influence
on the subcontinent. Should both India and Pakistan be drawn into the Soviet sphere, China’s borders would be threatened on all sides. With India
having to deal with its rivalry with Pakistan, its threat to China would be much reduced.
For similar reasons, the Soviet Union was initially trying to steer an even course in the India-Pakistan dispute. However, when rebuffed by
Yahya in July 1971, Moscow quickly saw the chance to increase its influence with India. Moreover, when India discovered America’s secret
overtures to China, it quickly cemented its ties with Russia and thus further strengthened its military might vis-a-vis Pakistan, an edge that boosted
Gandhi’s confidence that the chances of China’s possible movement against India had been diminished. Armed with the Soviet pact and enormous
international support, India embarked upon harnessing its unexpected opportunity against Pakistan.
Yet the Indian foreign ministry officials were less committed to resorting to war to solve the crisis than their counterparts in the rest of the Gandhi
government. Leonid Shebarshin, an intelligence officer at the Soviet embassy in New Delhi, was among those who noticed this trend. “The Centre
– unlike many in the Foreign Ministry – concluded that war was inevitable,” Shebarshin commented in a secret KGB report, which was published
in 2005 as part of The Mitrokhin Archive , a collection of Russian intelligence documents.
The KGB agents, despite their widest possible contacts in India, appeared unaware of New Delhi’s precise war plans until the very last
moment. Shebarshin, a ranking KGB operative in New Delhi in 1971, realized that the war had begun through an expected signal – when the lights
went out in the middle of a diplomatic reception at the Soviet Embassy on 2 December. Leaving the embassy hurriedly, he met a senior Indian
military commander, a KGB source whom he found to be in an optimistic mood. The general knew precisely when and how the war would end –