Based on his personal assessment of Nehru, Eisenhower advised Dulles to “urge our new ambassador there to do everything possible to win the
personal confidence and friendship of Nehru. I think he should study thoroughly any methods and practices that have apparently been successful in
the past, and we, on our part, should avoid putting chores on our ambassador that would almost compel him to show an unsympathetic attitude
toward the premier. It seems to me that Cooper should be particularly fitted to do this. He has a charming wife and between them we might build
up a very much better position.” John Cooper was then America’s ambassador to India.
Overall, India and the United States have had strained relations since the British era. The Indians had been suspicious of America’s motives at
least since the 1940s – when Britain ruled the subcontinent. Sir Girja Shankar Bajpai, India’s agent general in Washington, explained the reason to
Wallace Murray, Roosevelt’s political affairs adviser, on 24 April 1942. Bajpai made the comment while discussing why the Indian press was
hostile to a U.S. technical mission, headed by Colonel Louis Johnson, sent to explore India’s industrial resources, to recommend the production of
essential war materials.
He said India’s “extremely reactionary and self-seeking” industrialists had first spread rumors to discredit the mission before its arrival, saying
“that American imperialism was endeavoring to replace British imperialism in India.” While they realized the Congress Party’s economic policies
would hurt their interests, these industrialists still supported Congress, hoping to be able to influence its leaders after it came to power to increase
tariff barriers in an independent India. An open-door policy giving the Americans an easy entry to India would be contrary to their interests.
Following the cue of the business leaders, the Indian media jumped on the bandwagon and launched an anti-American campaign, accusing the
United States of intervening in the Cripps negotiations on India’s self-rule. Bajpai said that although Nehru and other Congress leaders welcomed
Roosevelt’s personal envoy Johnson’s assistance during their talks with Cripps, they were careful enough to “avoid any charge by the opposition
that the course of the negotiations was being dictated by” the Yankees.
Giving an insight into how Congress worked, Bajpai then explained why the Cripps mission had failed. “To my question as to whether he
believed the full reason that had been set forth by the various Indian groups for the rejection of the British offer, Sir Girja replied almost
emphatically in the negative,” Murray recorded in a memorandum. “Girja said he felt the reasons were ‘complete window-dressing’ and that the
real reasons were unstated.”
Although Nehru and Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, a Congress Working Committee member in 1942, personally sought a successful settlement
with Cripps, the committee itself “had other ideas and successfully blocked the negotiations. Once the Congress Party was unwilling to fall in line, it
was a foregone conclusion that the proposals would be turned down by the other parties.”
Apparently, the talks collapsed because Britain refused to grant India self-rule as demanded by Congress. But Congress might not have
accepted the plan even if London had granted self-rule. Bajpai said that some Congress members reasoned that if Britain lost the war and Japan
occupied India, the Indians could negotiate a much better deal with the Japanese. Why then accept the Cripps proposals?
The Americans, however, blamed the British for the failure, saying the refusal indicated that His Majesty’s government was insincere in its
promise to grant independence to India after the war. America wanted to be friendly with the Indians to neutralize their sympathy for Japan.
Washington was worried that a chaotic India, with its vast population and natural resources essential to the successful operation of the war, would
fall prey to Japan. This fear prompted Roosevelt in March 1942 to give a detailed outline of how the Americans developed their form of
government and to propose that Britain arrange an orderly and peaceful transfer of power and let the Indians build their political system as the
United States did. Both the Cripps and the Cabinet Mission proposals incorporated elements of Roosevelt’s ideas.
KGB Spoils Gandhi With Lavish Vacation
In subsequent years, America saw many reasons to go against India, especially against Nehru. First, as the Americans saw it, Nehru put India right
within Soviet orbit after Washington had bonded with Pakistan to fight communism. As a result, while Nehru condemned the Anglo-French
invasion of Egypt, he kept silent when the Soviet Union crushed the Hungarian uprising. On top of this, India had opposed a U.N. resolution calling
for free elections in Hungary and the withdrawal of Russian troops.
Indira Gandhi, who held fond memories of her first visit to Moscow in 1953 when she was lavishly treated by her hosts in an apparent bid to
please her father, adopted a similar foreign policy line and criticized America’s Vietnam policy. That only served to infuriate Nixon.
Gandhi was overwhelmed by the attention lavished on her by the Soviet spy agency. ”Everybody – the Russians – have been so sweet to me . .
. I am being treated like everybody’s only daughter. I shall be horribly spoilt by the time I leave. Nobody has ever been so nice to me,” she wrote
to Nehru, unaware that the entire extravaganza was arranged by the KGB, which also surrounded her with handsome, attentive male admirers, a
fact she excluded from her letter, according to The Mitrokhin Archive II: The KGB and the World, a collection of notes made secretly by KGB
archivist, Major Vasili Mitrokhin, over thirty years.
Two years later, she accompanied her father on his first official visit to the Soviet Union. Like Nehru, she was visibly impressed by the apparent
successes of Soviet planning and economic modernization, exhibited to them in carefully stage-managed visits of Russian factories. During the trip,
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev presented her with a mink coat, which would become one of the favorite items in her wardrobe. Only a few
years earlier, she herself had criticized the female Indian ambassador in Moscow for accepting a similar gift, according to an account by
Christopher Andrew, a British historian who compiled The Mitrokhin Archive.
To be sure, America’s opposition to India was not monolithic. An examination of its diplomatic history indicates that a succession of U.S.
administrations have had a long tradition of pursuing policies that often went against the advice of their own diplomats in the field. America’s
domestic politics – and an incumbent president’s personal agenda – often fed into such contradictions. Frequently, America willingly supported
repressive regimes in a clandestine manner, to avoid charges of interference in the domestic and sovereign affairs of those countries. In many cases,
America also shied away from getting involved to avoid risking failures for itself.
Washington, for example, balked when Johnson urged Roosevelt to help the Cripps mission and thus strengthen India’s defense against the
Japanese in the Second World War. “The hour has arrived when we should consider a replotting of our policy in this section of the world,”
Johnson had suggested, advocating the United States distance itself from Britain on Indian issues. “Association with the British is found to
adversely affect the morale of our own officers.”
But Secretary of State Cordell Hull saw it in an entirely different manner. “An unsuccessful attempt to solve the problem along the lines you