Nixon: “What are we going to ask the Russians to do?”
Kissinger: “Ceasefire, negotiation, and subsequent withdrawal.”
“But,” he added, “we’d have to clear it with Yahya first.”
Nixon: “Ceasefire and negotiation on what basis?”
Kissinger: “Between the Awami League and Islamabad on the basis of the December 1970 election,” and “within the framework of a united
Pakistan.” Withdrawal, he said, would occur after the negotiations.
To Nixon’s question about what the United States could do to influence the outcome, Kissinger replied: “I would keep open the possibility that
we’ll pour arms into Pakistan.” If the Soviet Union could ship arms to India, Kissinger did not see why the United States could not supply arms to
Pakistan. “I don’t understand the theory of non-involvement. I don’t see where we will be as a country. I have to tell you honestly I consider this
our Rhineland.”
He warned: “If the Russians come out of it totally cocky, we may have a Middle East war in the spring.”
Nixon expressed concerns about adopting a hard line. “We have to know what we are jeopardizing,” he said.
Kissinger: “You are jeopardizing your relationship with the Soviets, but that is also your card, your willingness to jeopardize it.” Not to play that
card, would be to concede the Soviet Union a dangerous victory, he added.
Nixon observed that opponents of his policy towards South Asia were also concerned about jeopardizing United States relations with India.
Kissinger said: “You could argue that it will help us in the long-term with the Indians.”
Nixon replied: “I don’t give a damn about the Indians.”
Nixon then asked how the transfer of planes from Jordan to Pakistan could be facilitated.
Kissinger: The United States could tell “the King to move his planes and inform us that he has done it.” Then the White House would instruct the
State Department “to shut up”. He said America would tell Jordan that it was illegal, but if he did it “we’ll keep things under control.”
Nixon: “All right, that’s the way we play that.”
India’s ambassador met with Irwin on 14 December to express concern about reports that the United States sent a nuclear-powered aircraft
carrier, equipped with “all kinds of devices and gadgets” to evacuate the Americans. New Delhi instructed him to seek assurance from Washington
that there would be no evacuation operation without prior agreement with India or by force. Sisco said he would report what Jha had said.
Jha said he had also seen a report from New Delhi that America had some plan or intention to establish a beachhead in Bangladesh to evacuate
the Americans or help transfer the Pakistanis to West Pakistan. Any such attempt would endanger long-term Indo-U.S. relations, he cautioned.
Sisco said he had seen the report, but was personally unaware of any such plan. He said that if he had anything further, he would be back in
touch. Sisco said that although he did not wish to go into past history, the Americans did see in Indian actions things that “not only reflect the
present strains in our relations but also which obviously could have implications for our long-term relations, which both sides will be looking at in
the future.”
On 9 December, Soviet Agriculture Minister Vladimir Matskevich came to Washington. Nixon met with him and Vorontsov at Kissinger’s
recommendation. Kissinger saw Matskevich’s presence as an opportunity to send a high-level message to the Soviet leadership that if India turned
its military on West Pakistan after defeating the forces in East Pakistan, it would create a crisis of the utmost gravity.
Nixon told the Soviet leader that while India’s victory over Pakistan might provide short-term gain for Moscow and New Delhi against
Islamabad and Beijing, it would poison the whole new relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union. The question remained: “Are
short-term gains for India worth jeopardizing Soviet relations with the United States?”
“This is not conveyed in a threatening way,” the president stressed. “It would be difficult, however, for the United States to stand by if the
Indians moved forces into West Pakistan. The key to a settlement was in the hands of the Soviet Union. If the Soviets did not restrain the Indians,
it would be difficult for Washington to deal with Yahya.”
“If the Indians continue military operations, we must inevitably look toward a confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States.
The Soviet Union has a treaty with India, but the United States has obligations to Pakistan,” Nixon told Matskevich.
He proposed that there be a ceasefire first, followed by political negotiations “within a Pakistan framework.”
After the president’s meeting with the Soviet leader, Nixon and Kissinger assessed the conversation. Nixon was pleased with the exchange. “I
really stuck it to him,” the president said.
Kissinger predicted: “It will end now. It will end. We will lose 70 percent but that’s a hell of a lot better. We were losing 110 percent
yesterday.” Nixon felt that, at a minimum, his initiative with Matskevich would have the effect of stopping “the goddamn Indians from going to the
West”.
The Soviet Union responded to Nixon’s message on 12 December saying Gandhi personally assured Moscow that “India has no intention to
take any military actions against West Pakistan. The Soviet leaders believe that this makes the situation easier and hope that the government of
Pakistan will draw from this appropriate conclusions.”
On 12 December, Nixon met again with Kissinger in the White House to discuss a message just received from Moscow, which was conveyed
by Vorontsov to Haig. Kissinger told Nixon the Russians had an assurance from Gandhi that she would not attack West Pakistan and that they
were then working with her to arrange a ceasefire.
Nixon commented: “We must not be in a position where the Russians and we settle the son-of-a-bitch and leave the Chinese out.”
Turning to the decision made in the morning to confront the Soviet Union militarily if necessary in support of China, Kissinger said: “What you
did this morning Mr. President was a heroic act.”
Nixon responded: “I had to do it.” He said the prevailing instinct in the government was to avoid difficult choices: “It’s the whole attitude, the
whole government, the whole American establishment would say, well don’t borrow trouble. It’s all going to work out. Nothing ever works out
unless you do something about it. That’s the trouble with the world.”