18 
Agha Khan Formula:
Unique Solution Missed?
ill November end, America had expected to resolve East Pakistan’s crisis through dialogue. The Americans kept nurturing this idea based
on assessments from several sources, including top U.N. officials.
One such official was Prince Sadruddin Agha Khan, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. Upon his return from a trip to New
Delhi and Islamabad, he offered what was termed as a realistic and practical solution to the impasse. On 23 November, he told Sisco the only way
out was a Mujib-Yahya talk. Sadruddin said India wanted to avoid war and would accept whatever solution the Awami League accepted. If
Gandhi returned from the foreign tour with some kind of assurance that other governments would put pressure on Pakistan, she could use this
argument to counter hawks who demanded recognition of Bangladesh and all-out war. From his conversation with Dhar, Sadruddin had sensed
the Bangladesh leaders were splitting into factions and getting out of India’s control. Dhar could no longer guarantee to Gandhi that the Bengalis
would follow the Indian line.
The U.N. official reported that India’s leaders pressed him to work for a political solution in Islamabad. India had taken great pains to make
sure his visit was not exploited in the Indian press and to ensure that he would go to Islamabad with a clean slate. Sadruddin noted that in his field
trips to Assam and Meghalaya, he was very much aware of the rising communal and tribal tensions. He thought the recent Jessore operation was
to test India’s ability to use the Mukti Bahini with India’s support to put pressure on Yahya.
Sadruddin had told Rogers and Sisco on 24 June that unless a quick political solution was found, South Asia could be the new Vietnam. The
Bengalis and the Punjabis were polarized, with no sympathy between them. Extremists in East Pakistan – the Naxalites – were using fear against a
“foreign army” to strengthen themselves, which could result in an extended guerrilla warfare. India was quite worried about this. Gandhi’s inner
cabinet had decided not to recognize Bangladesh, not to go to war with Pakistan but to support the “Mukhti Fauj”. Thus India opposed the
proposal for U.N. presence on the East Pakistan border. India sought international relief but did not wish to have foreigners wandering about the
border areas. Sadruddin said some East Pakistanis would return if they had an element of guarantee. The others would return with simply a return
to peace in East Pakistan, if only because of the “continuous squalor” of the Indian refugee camps.
He faulted India for the “inconsistency” of its policy. On the one hand, India complained about the presence of six million refugees and insisted
they must return; on the other hand, it imposed conditions for their return, such as negotiations with Mujib. He said India was not following a logical
and pragmatic path. He said India seemed uninterested in repatriation. It was important that India not insist upon political solution as a prior
condition for the return of the refugees. By political solution, India apparently meant Mujib’s return.
Quoting Yahya, Sadruddin said that those elected members of Awami League who were not “criminals” should come forward and lead the
people of East Pakistan so that he could hand over power to them. He intended to announce a Turkish-type of constitution providing for
substantial army control. But Sadruddin feared that it would not be enough; he should withdraw the army. Yet he could not do so in the border
areas so long as India supported infiltration. He favored keeping up the pressure on India to moderate its position on refugee return; control
Bangladesh elements and stop infiltration.
Sadruddin said that when he met with Gandhi, she was very “hawkish.” She sought to impress him with the seriousness of the situation, saying
“we may have to resort to other means.”
Rogers said Swaran Singh had also used the terms “special measures” or “another option” when he was in Washington. Rogers had replied that
if he meant military means, “we thought this would be a very great mistake. Swaran Singh then backed away from this implication.”
Sisco told Sadruddin the United States had indicated its willingness to continue to support the refugees financially and conveyed a new proposal
to India for the withdrawal of forces that would allow Yahya to take the first step if India would reciprocate. He also mentioned that Washington
had told Gandhi that Yahya was willing to talk to the cleared Awami Leaguers and Bangladesh representatives based in Kolkata.
“We stressed the importance of starting the process of dialogue. We recognized that a political accommodation could not take place without
Mujib. We also recognized that the crucial proposal was in the area of political accommodation and that it fell short of the Indian position. We
think Mrs Gandhi felt we gave her something which enabled her to adopt a restrained position on her return,” Sisco said, giving an incorrect
reading of the Indian prime minister’s mind.
Commenting on the military situation, Sisco said information was hard to come by, but substantial fighting was involved at the division and
brigade level. Activity was a mixture of the Mukti Bahini and Indian forces, including tanks, artillery and airplanes. It put the Pakistanis in a difficult
position, since they were weaker than the Indians. If they reacted in the West, it would enable India to place the onus for starting the war on
Pakistan’s head.
Sisco asked for Sadruddin’s view of the Security Council action. Sadruddin said it might be a good idea since it would open up the East
Pakistan problem for international discussion. The debate would go into the Indo-Pak problem as well as the root cause. He said he thought it was
a great shame that the United Nations had to wait until war broke out before tackling problems in the Security Council.
Sisco noted the Security Council meeting might lead to a restraining order, which could be a form of pressure for a political change in Pakistan
as well. Sadruddin said India might welcome the Security Council action, particularly if it felt that an all-out war with Pakistan would not pay.
Sisco wondered whether the Mukti Bahini victory, in which an East Pakistan regime friendly to India came to power, would not be in India’s
interest. Sadruddin said the situation would get out of hand and the Indians would be unable to the control the situation – a statement that mimicked
the line profoundly believed in Washington.
Sadruddin said it was his assessment that Mujib might not want an independent Bangladesh. His assessment was based on long meetings he has
had with A.K. Brohi, Mujib’s defense counsel. Although Yahya claimed he could not deal with Mujib because the Bengali leader would be killed