must be solved by political solution, it must not be solved by force. We simply want to play a role that will be helpful. We will try to restrain to the
extent that we have any influence with the Indians. We will do everything we can to try to help you in your cause. That’s where we stand here.
How, what we can do – what we can do, of course, is limited by the circumstances. We don’t control the Indians. That’s accurate. The fact that, if
you, if there’s any more – I would I’d like [sic] to give you more encouragement than this, but I’d like to be totally honest.”
India To Start War If Mujib Hanged
When Kissinger asked Cushman at the Washington Special Action Group meeting the next day about the South Asian situation, the CIA man said
India and Pakistan had fought many clashes along their borders. Major hostilities could occur at any time with little warning. The guerrillas were
increasingly effective in East Pakistan, controlling about thirty percent of the rural areas. Tensions had increased as the Indian border guards and
army troops joined in the fighting between the Pakistan forces and the guerrillas. On the western front, both sides had made preparations in
anticipation of war. The Soviet Union had done little to moderate India. China was unlikely to help Pakistan to a significant degree.
Speculating on what India’s plan could be going forward, Sisco said Gandhi’s speech in parliament on 15 November would give a clear sign if
New Delhi intended to start war.
Kissinger: “Is it your judgment that war could come very quickly if she strikes the wrong note on Monday [15 November] with the parliament?”
Sisco: “If she decides to continue the pressure on Yahya, I think there is likely to be an intensification of the present situation. The Indian
strategy has been to continue the pressure on Yahya and to suck Pakistan in militarily so that the principal onus for starting a war would fall on
Pakistan. Any one incident where the Pakistanis retaliate can provide a casus belli .”
Kissinger replied, “We will encourage a political evolution. But we will not support the Indian strategy to force the pace of such evolution so that
West Pakistan can’t survive.” He then turned to Sisco and said, “When you started your movement toward Bangladesh, India immediately
escalated their demands so that they were not possibly fulfillable in the existing framework.”
Sisco: “India has had one demand – which they have made consistently and unchangingly – release Mujib, since he is the only man Yahya can
negotiate with.”
Kissinger disagreed: “No, they started by saying Yahya must talk to the Awami League leaders and he must not kill Mujib. Then when they got
an agreement to that, they escalated to the position that Yahya must talk to Mujib.”
Sisco said Gandhi seemed most interested in Yahya’s possible willingness to consider meeting with a representative designated by Mujib.
Kissinger asked, “Do you think that is a real proposition? What is it that will deter India? I suppose we will know on Monday.” He then added,
“I could be wrong, but my instinct tells me that Yahya didn’t consider this as a serious proposal but more as a last resort.”
Sisco suggested reporting the results of Nixon’s talks with Gandhi directly to Yahya. “We should tell him India seemed interested in the third
alternative and ask how he feels about it.”
Kissinger differed again, saying Gandhi “didn’t indicate much interest in anything in her conversations with the president. She spent most of her
time telling him that Baluchistan should never have been made a part of Pakistan. When he asked her about the military withdrawal, she said she
would let him know the next day, and she didn’t even have the courtesy to mention it again.”
Kissinger then asked, what should Washington do if war broke out?
Sisco proposed getting a U.N. resolution passed to “seek some sort of restraining order. I am under no illusion about the practical effect of such
a resolution or that it will be an easy exercise. But I think it is important that we go public before the balloon goes up. After it blows up, we will be
in the Security Council anyhow to get a ceasefire. With this in mind, I’d like to preposition a few things. We have started drafting a resolution and a
scenario for a move into the council. This would, of course, be the first test of the Chinese communists, and I would expect them to be helpful. Of
course, this puts the Soviets in a helluva position. They would be confronted in the council with the same reality as we are. I would see this as a
preempting move.”
Kissinger: “What would the resolution say?”
Sisco: “It would call on both sides to refrain from further activity to exacerbate the situation. We would have to weigh very carefully whether we
wanted to call for everyone to stop shooting. A ceasefire would be very complicated. The issue between India and Pakistan would be easy, but
we have the argument that what is going on in East Pakistan is a liberating movement, so we would have to be very careful. But I think it would be
important to air the issue, bring out the facts, get some speeches and get the council to say everyone should keep their shirts on.”
Kissinger: “What would be the operational significance of a U.N. resolution?”
Sisco: “I don’t overestimate the significance. Of course, it can’t prevent war.”
Kissinger: “What about timing? At what point would we say we have made all the moves?”
Sisco: “That could come later.”
Kissinger: “A Security Council resolution doesn’t do a damned thing. What could it do?”
Sisco: “It would draw the world attention to the situation, expose the facts, including what is happening militarily, and clarify where the
responsibility lies.”
Kissinger: “Both sides would claim the other side has made the first move. The Pakistanis aren’t so stupid as to challenge India militarily now. If
war starts, it would have to be by India.”
Sisco: “Any restraining order would obviously be pointed more toward India.”
Kissinger: “What if the Indians say they can’t control the situation – that only the Pakistanis can control it? Wouldn’t this give them another
excuse to go to war to defend the U.N. resolution?”
Sisco: “A restraining order wouldn’t reinforce India’s justification for going to war.”
Kissinger: “But India will say their troops aren’t doing anything and that it is the Pakistanis who aren’t obeying the ceasefire.”
Sisco: “I don’t overestimate the practical effect of a U.N. resolution, but what is the alternative?”
Kissinger maintained that if Gandhi “wanted a way out, we should try to give it to her. But we have broken our backs to help her and what has