recently, in 2009, Khar revealed that the Bengali leader worried the military would kill him. Mujib had even asked Khar to convey to Bhutto that
he, too, would be killed by the military.
Yahya denied he ever wanted to kill Mujib. During his house arrest under Bhutto, the general maintained a personal journal. He wrote in the
journal before his death in 1980 that Bhutto had wanted Mujib hanged. Yahya also wrote that before he left for Iran in October 1971 to attend the
2500th anniversary of Iran’s monarchy, Bhutto had told him to wind up the military court’s proceedings to quickly finish off Mujib.
“I told him that until the proceedings of the court are finalized I cannot make a decision. He said that in Iran all sorts of pressures would be
brought against me by heads of state to let off Mujib, so I must act at once and hang him,” the general claimed.
Yahya’s claims could not be dismissed entirely, because with Mujib alive, Bhutto could not be sure that the power he had craved so badly
would actually come to him. It was clearly in his interest to have Yahya hang the Bengali leader to clear the way for the fulfillment of his long-held
ambition to get to the top power rung.
Yahya also claimed that he told Bhutto before handing over power that the court proceedings had been completed, but were being reviewed by
the Law Ministry and so he could not take a final decision.
“The way he told the nation that I had ordered the execution of Mujib and that he had saved him! Lies! Lies! Lies! But then what else could be
expected from a master liar? It can be checked up with the proceedings of the military court and the dates and timings of the case, which was
being processed by the central government offices. The funny thing was that [the] good Mujib believed him when he told him that Yahya wanted to
hang him but Bhutto saved him,” Yahya scribbled in his journal.
In an interview with Newsweek magazine in January 1972 after his triumphant return to Bangladesh, Mujib said Yahya wanted to execute him
the day East Pakistan fell, but Bhutto saved him by persuading the general that it would jeopardize the lives of the Pakistani war prisoners in India.
Despite Bhutto’s efforts, there was a move to kill him in jail, Mujib told Newsweek . But Bhutto “smuggled him out in the middle of the night and
kept him in his house and other hideouts until his release.”
Mujib’s comments were possibly based on the misleading information given to him by Bhutto, because the latter was in New York when East
Pakistan fell. While Niazi was negotiating the surrender, Bhutto worked on a U.N. resolution calling for a political settlement with the Awami
League under one Pakistan. In fact, Bhutto told Farland that after taking over on 20 December 1971, he had Mujib released from prison and
ordered him to be housed in a bungalow on his way to Rawalpindi. Bhutto first met Mujib on 23 December, according to an interview Bhutto had
given to Kuldip Nayar, an Indian newspaper columnist.
Mujib, according to Altaf Gauhar, Ayub Khan’s all-powerful information secretary who later became a journalist, was kept in Sihala Rest
House near Rawalpindi. As a prisoner during Bhutto’s rule, Gauhar was kept in the same room where Mujib had stayed. Gauhar was arrested for
criticizing the military action under the Yahya regime in an article in the Dawn newspaper.
“My jailer, Abdul Rahman, who was a senior superintendent of police, was good enough to inform me that this was the room in which Mujibur
Rahman was kept till he was released by Bhutto,” Gauhar later wrote in an article in Gauhar.com. “You will be sleeping in his bed and using his
quilt. The jailer ‘took me outside to show me the shells of peanuts which Mujib used to eat. As time passes one gets used to one’s jailer. One day
Abdul Rahman told me that Mujib nearly went mad and started banging his head against the wall of the room. ‘I want to see Yahya Khan,’ he kept
shouting. ‘I can stop the massacre that is going on in Dhaka.’ Abdul Rahman conveyed this to General Pirzada, but Mujib was not allowed access
to the president.”
Bhutto never admitted having any discussion with Yahya regarding Mujib’s trial on the day he took over. He said Yahya handed over power to
him after a short meeting upon his return from attending the U.N. Security Council session in New York.
Even if Bhutto wanted Mujib’s death during the war, his thinking changed after he assumed power. Concerned about the Pakistani soldiers held
in captivity in India, Bhutto believed that if he hanged Mujib, he would infuriate the Bengalis with serious consequences. Moreover, even after
Bangladesh became independent, he nurtured a dream of an accommodation with the Bengalis and requested Nixon to delay Bangladesh’s
recognition to allow him time to unsuccessfully try to reach an understanding with Mujib. He once told the Americans that he would exchange
Mujib for the war prisoners.
After the war, the Nixon administration claimed that its quiet diplomacy succeeded in saving Mujib’s life. Peter Constable, country director for
Pakistan and India at the State Department during the war, told Congress in 1972 that the administration successfully intervened to save Mujib. “I
should also note here that as part of efforts for a political accommodation, the United States sought and received from President Yahya,
assurances that Sheikh Mujibur Rahman would not be executed. Those assurances were honored, and following the emergence of an independent
Bangladesh, Pakistan’s new president, Mr. Bhutto, released Sheikh Mujib and allowed him to return to Dacca,” Constable said in his testimony
before the Fraser subcommittee.