would be hard-pressed to fulfill its program and satisfy people’s aspirations. It would face defections from its own ranks and mounting opposition
from radical leftist elements outside. The long-term outlook suggested increasing radicalisation and political instability in East Pakistan.
Economically, an independent East Pakistan could maintain its existing low growth rate for some years after separation, assuming improved
mobilisation of local resources. It would enjoy exclusive benefit of the foreign exchange earnings from jute, which had been thus far shared with
West Pakistan. It would also benefit from trade with India and an infusion of huge foreign aid. Its economy was bound to suffer in the long term,
however, because of the population burden. The Americans wondered how the new state could, in the long run, meet its basic needs, let alone
improve its economy, even with sizable external aid.
In contrast to the situation in East Pakistan, the Americans maintained a new state in West Pakistan would most likely be organized around a
left-trending populist type of government dominated by Bhutto. The military would remain an important element in the political equation. An
authoritarian regime headed by Bhutto and backed by the armed forces was conceivable. Given the military’s influence and the more favorable
economic outlook, the chances for stability appeared somewhat better in West Pakistan than in East Pakistan, according to calculations made by
the Americans.
Externally, a new West Pakistan would continue a hostile policy towards India, which could spell trouble for its security and economic progress
as it would entail excessive defense expenditures. The state might move closer to China, while trying to maintain viable relations with both the
United States and the Soviet Union.
Compared with East Pakistan, an independent West’s economic prospects were much better. The new state should be able to maintain its
forward movement for some years to come with continuing foreign aid. But it, too, faced a potentially serious population problem, which could
badly retard its economic progress.
Both the nations would seek aid from the United States. But before America would even receive requests for economic aid, Washington would
face serious diplomatic issues, if events in Pakistan ultimately started rearranging South Asian political realities. The Awami League leaders had
already sounded out the American officials on the posture Washington would take towards an independent East Pakistan. Even if the separation
was uncertain, they could approach America for support against possible West Pakistani resistance. At the same time, the West Pakistani leaders,
including Yahya Khan, could probe the U.S. position regarding Pakistan’s unity.
To deal with these contending forces, the Americans outlined three alternative options:
First, Washington could maintain its existing official position, telling Pakistan: “Our policy has been and continues to be to support independence,
unity and integrity of Pakistan. However, this is your country and how you organize and deal with its problems is your business.”
Second, America could tell the Bengalis that it favored Pakistan’s unity, but “we recognize that there is a rising sense of nationalism in East
Pakistan and that we would be prepared to adjust our policies to the evolving situation.”
And third, “we could, while maintaining our present public position, privately urge President Yahya to make every effort to reach an
accommodation with Mujibur Rahman, which would enable a single Pakistan to continue, even though its federal powers were limited to defense
and foreign affairs, and even though Bhutto’s party refused to cooperate in the process of government.”
Unless and until separation was certain, the United States decided, “any shift in our position would be against our continuing interest in seeing
Pakistan remain unified. Any softening on our part would contribute to the process of disintegration.”
The Americans were concerned that their encouragement of East Pakistan’s separatism would quickly get back to West Pakistan and deepen
suspicions among some West Pakistanis that Washington wanted to split their country. “It would, thereby, prejudice our relations with the present
West Pakistanis as well as our future relations with a possible independent state in West Pakistan,” they concluded.
“We, therefore, prefer at this stage to continue to maintain a balanced posture between West and East Pakistanis. It serves to reassure those
with whom we have to continue to deal in West Pakistan, while leaving the impression with the East Pakistanis that we are not inflexible, although
we would prefer [as Mujib presently seems to] a mutually agreeable constitutional system within a unified state.”
Washington felt that Yahya was doing his best to bring Mujib and Bhutto closer, according to some analysts at the State Department. “He does
not need any urging from us in this matter and we can realistically offer little or nothing that will materially affect the situation. Moreover, an effort
by us to urge compromise could be resented as unwarranted interference in Pakistan’s internal affairs”.
Yahya knew very well when he postponed the parliamentary session that his move could provoke a backlash in East Pakistan. He figured the
alternative to the postponement would be even worse. His two main options were to postpone the session and risk an immediate confrontation
with East Pakistan, or to hold the session and risk an immediate fight with his army.
Because he would eventually have to reject an autonomy constitution, Yahya figured he would inevitably provoke a confrontation with the East
Pakistanis in a few months. So, he could not compromise with Mujib or move closer to Bhutto without jeopardising his own power base and
risking his ouster by hardline military elements. In short, Yahya decided to risk a confrontation with East Pakistan in the slight hope that if he
pushed all the parties to the brink, a compromise might evolve from their coming to grips with the consequences of dividing Pakistan. Given the
sentiment within West Pakistan’s political-military establishment, he saw no other realistic choice.
The looming Bengali-Punjabi fight assumed a greater significance for the Americans as it shook Washington’s core policy in the subcontinent.
The United States had held since India woke up at midnight that a stable South Asia free from outside influence served America’s interests better.
So the CIA argued that a constitutional government along the line advocated by the Awami League would hurt America’s best interest. A divided
Pakistan would leave West Pakistan under the control of an anti-West demagogue, Bhutto, popularly known in Washington as the “Yankee-
baiting foreign minister” of Pakistan and “a drunkard”.
On the other hand, a confederation reserving foreign policy and defense to the central government would check Bhutto’s strongly pro-Chinese
and anti-Indian policies; it was expected that he would not control the Pakistani military as he had an excellent chance of doing if the country split.
So went the logic for American support for a united Pakistan.
Still, the Americans feared that the point at which East Pakistan’s separation became inevitable could rapidly be reached and “we should be
prepared to adjust our posture quickly to take account of this eventuality. Much will hinge on East Pakistani reactions to Yahya’s decision to
postpone the convening of the assembly.”
The Americans concluded that if separation became imminent, but before it was announced, the United States should let the East Pakistanis