given in the context of America’s assurance to India when China moved, and were no longer in effect.
On 4 December, Kissinger called Nixon to tell the president, “We have had an urgent appeal from Yahya.” Yahya was asking whether the
United States would send military supplies through Iran.
Nixon asked: “Can we help?”
Kissinger replied: “I think if we tell the Iranians we will make it up to them we can do it.”
Nixon concurred: “If it is leaking, we can have it denied. Have it done one step away.”
On instructions from Washington, the Shah indicated that he would be glad to help. But he stipulated that the United States quickly replace what
was transferred. On the same day in Amman, King Hussein showed U.S. Ambassador Dean Brown a telegram from Yahya asking for military
assistance. Hussein said Pakistan wanted eight to ten Jordanian F-104 fighters. Since the United States had provided the aircraft, Hussein turned
to the embassy for advice.
America gave the go-ahead to both Iran and Jordan. Rogers told Keating neither to confirm nor deny that the United States endorsed Jordanian
and Iranian transfer of American arms to Pakistan. But the U.S. Embassy in Iran reported to the State Department on 29 December that three F-
5A Fighter aircraft, reportedly from the United States, had been flown to Pakistan. A Northrop official matched the aircraft to a group of planes
originally slated for sale to Libya, but were later placed under the U.S. government control in California after a dispute with Tripoli.
Later, in 1972, Kissinger would admit during a conversation with Chinese premier Chou En-lai that the United States had illegally supplied arms
to Pakistan via third countries during the Bangladesh war.
“We have been prevented by the Democratic Congress from giving aid directly. I wanted to tell the prime minister in strictest confidence that
when we were in Iran we asked the Shah to organize a consortium of Greece, Iran, Turkey, maybe Jordan, to establish military assistance to
Pakistan with American weapons. We did some of this illegally during the war, as the prime minister knows. To do it legally we will have to start a
small arms program to Pakistan because there is a provision in our law that American weapons can be transferred to third countries only if those
countries are eligible to receive American weapons directly,” Kissinger said.
Chou En-lai said: “In December when went to give them twelve planes by Jordan it was not easy, nor did it give any good influence, impression
[sic].”
Kissinger: “We had to do it because the Soviet Union was bringing so much pressure on Iran. There was a complicated arrangement. We flew
Iranian planes to Jordan and Jordan planes to Pakistan. It was an emergency.” He said the United States gave Iran more modern planes so that
some of the Iranian planes could be free to go to Pakistan.
Chou: “And, Pakistan is still remaining a member of CENTO?”
Kissinger: “Yes, it is still technically a member of CENTO. But the major strategy is to give Pakistan enough strength so that India will not be
able to attack it; or that it turns itself into a vassal of India and therefore frees India to move into Southeast Asia or other parts.” Both Chou and
Kissinger believed India intended to establish hegemony over both South and Southeast Asia, a scheme both insisted they must endeavor together
to halt.
On 4 December, again Kissinger called Nixon, who was then vacationing in Florida. He briefed Nixon about the Security Council meeting,
saying “The Chinese jumped all over the Russians and the Indians and apparently the Indians wanted to put on the agenda only the item of
problems of East Pakistan and the Chinese said ‘No, let’s call it problems of India.’ And that’s all right if they all brawl with each other.”
Nixon responded: “Good. Let the liberals choose now between China and India. That’ll be very good.”
Kissinger: “Actually, in terms of the political situation, first of all we won’t take any more immediate flak, but in the six months the liberals are
going to look like jerks, because the Indian occupation of East Pakistan is going to make the Pakistani one look like a child’s play.”
Nixon then turned to the on-going fighting. “God, you know what would really be poetic justice here is if some way the Paks could really give
the Indians a bloody nose for a couple of days. The fighting, any report on that?” the president asked.
Kissinger: “Well, the fighting – we got reports in East Pakistan that the Indians are surprised at the intensity of the Pakistan resistance. But, of
course, they outnumber them there eight to one.”
Nixon: “How about West Pakistan?”
Kissinger: “In West Pakistan, the Indians don’t seem to have gotten very far. And, there I think they’re not going to be able to win except by
wearing them down. They outnumber them there five to one. They’ve been bombing Karachi and burning the oil installations.”
Nixon: “Isn’t that awful. That is terrible. The Indians are bombing Karachi?”
Kissinger: “Yes.”
Nixon: “Oh, for Christ’s sake . . . Rawalpindi I notice is on the list, too.”
Kissinger’s conversation with Nixon followed Gandhi’s declaration of war on Pakistan on 3 December. She told the Indians in a broadcast that
Pakistan had attacked India earlier in the day, shortly after 5:30 p.m. Pakistan’s air force had hit six Indian airfields in Kashmir and the Punjab. The
Pakistani army shelled Indian positions and India had no option but to adopt a war footing.
Pakistan responded to the Indian charges in a note to the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad the same day. Pakistan said the Indian Air Force had
been carrying out aggressive reconnaissance over West Pakistan for the last three or four days. Such action was a prelude to attacks started by the
Indian army between 3:30 p.m. and 4 p.m. of 3 December at several points from Kashmir to Rahim Yar Khan. The attacks on the Indian airfields
were necessary counter-measures.
American intelligence was unsure which side started the war, but Kissinger told Nixon that West Pakistan had attacked because the situation in
the East was collapsing. Nixon refused to accept that. He advised his national security adviser to tell the Soviet Union that “when India talked
about West Pakistan attacking them, it’s like the Russians claiming to be attacked by Finland.”
When the Washington Special Action Group met on 3 December, the CIA chief gave a rundown of the war. “We know that the Pakistanis did
attack the three airfields at Srinagar, Amritsar and Pathankot this morning. It was first reported on the Indian radio and now the Pakistan radio has
reported it. The Pakistan radio also says India is attacking all along the border.”
Kissinger wanted to know if the Indians were seizing territory in the East.