Kissinger: “We have been talking for two years about a Security Council guarantee for the Middle East. What is the impact of the recent chain
of events on other areas and expectations in other areas? Let’s look at the military supply question. We could say that we have done everything
two weeks too late. If we wait until India takes Azad Kashmir, then take action on military supplies for Pakistan, we would merely infuriate the
Indians and demonstrate our impotence. If we had cut off aid two weeks ago, it might have had some influence on the situation in the East, instead
of being a grandstand play. Let’s look at this whole picture.”
Packard: “We should consider some way that would help West Pakistan hold its own.”
Kissinger: “How?”
Johnson: “I agree this should be examined. We should consider exactly what effect military supplies could have.”
Kissinger: “There are two separate problems: The threat of military supply and the fact of such supply. Once a war in West Pakistan is engaged,
provision of planes by Jordan might combine all the disadvantages. I’m more interested in the deterrent effect. If it were done as a token before the
war, it would be an indication that, while we don’t accept what has happened in East Pakistan, we can’t do anything about it, but if they move in
West Pakistan, it would be a whole new ball game.”
Van Hollen: “We could pick up both elements – ask for specific Indian assurances on Azad Kashmir and that they do not seek to destroy Pak
forces in the West.”
Kissinger: “We should also make it clear that if they do, they will face a new situation.”
Johnson: “Of course, the Paks are trying to bite off Kashmir.”
Kissinger: “I don’t think they have the punch.”
Armistead Selden, deputy assistant secretary of Defense, said, “We have a new report indicating that the Paks may have knocked out as many
as one hundred and twenty Indian planes on their first attacks on those four airfields.”
Helms: “Our 1962 assurances to Ayub made it clear that we would come to Pakistan’s assistance in the face of aggression against Pakistan
from India.”
Van Hollen: “That was in the context of our assurances to India when China moved in. This was overtaken by the events of 1965, and our legal
people don’t think the Paks have a binding case in international law.”
Johnson: “If we want to assist Pakistan, we can find a basis for doing it.”
Van Hollen: “If we make a policy decision to assist Pakistan militarily, we don’t have to worry about it.”
Kissinger: “If the word of a country has any legal meaning, it seems to me this would apply. The Pakistanis haven’t raised it with us yet, of
course.”
Packard: “There is the practical problem, though – if we do anything, we should do something effective.”
Helms: “I agree. If we don’t win, don’t do it.”
Packard: “We should take a good look at it.”
Williams: “In 1965, the Pakistanis closed our base at Peshawar and for all practical purposes left CENTO. With the fall of East Pakistan two
days away, I think an attempt to get a ceasefire in West Pakistan needs to be made diplomatically.”
Johnson: “But that would stop the Pakistanis in Kashmir.”
Williams: “But if they will be chewed up, we might be doing them a favor.”
Gandhi Plans To “Balkanize” West Pakistan
After leaving the meeting, Kissinger joined Nixon and U.S. Attorney General John Mitchell in the Old Executive Office Building to discuss the
crisis. Kissinger referred to a message from the Shah that Iran could not send aircraft to support Pakistan, because of the Indo-Soviet treaty. Shah
proposed that Jordan send its planes to Pakistan, because the Pakistanis could fly Jordanian planes. Then Iran would send its planes to Jordan
with Iranian pilots to cover Jordan, while they were engaged in Pakistan.
Nixon said: “I think we could get a commitment from Israel on the Jordanians.” He then instructed Kissinger to discuss the matter with Israeli
Prime Minister Golda Meir. “When you talk to her, you tell her, Henry, that this is a goddamn Russian ploy.”
Turning to the situation in East Pakistan, Kissinger warned that “the Indian plan is now clear. They are going to move their forces from East
Pakistan to the West. They will then smash the Pakistan land forces and air forces.” He added that India planned to “annex the part of Kashmir
that is in Pakistan”.
Kissinger said Gandhi’s goal was to “Balkanize” West Pakistan into units such as Baluchistan and the Northwest Frontier Province. West
Pakistan would become a state akin to Afghanistan and East Pakistan would equate with Bhutan. “All of this would have been achieved by the
Soviet support, Soviet arms and Indian military force.”
Kissinger warned that “the impact of this on many countries threatened by the Soviet Union” would be serious. He pointed in particular to the
potential impact upon the Middle East. If the crisis resulted in “the complete dismemberment of Pakistan,” he worried China might conclude that
the United States was “just too weak” to have prevented the humiliation of an ally.
Kissinger felt that the Chinese would then look to other options “to break their encirclement”.
“So I think this, unfortunately, has turned into a big watershed.” Kissinger then suggested how Nixon should react in this “tough situation”. “It
seems to me that what we have to do now, or what I would recommend, is where we went wrong before is not to try to scare off the Indians.”
Nixon asked: “How could we scare them?”
Kissinger offered no concrete answer, but said that if Nixon’s advisers had understood the situation better they would have proposed a stronger
response to Indian actions. He assured Nixon that he had done “exactly what all your advisers recommended”.
Nixon said he had warned Gandhi during her visit to Washington: “I told her that any war would be very, very unacceptable.”
Kissinger observed that any such warning obviously fell on deaf ears: “She was determined to go” into East Pakistan. “We should have been