22 
Why Niazi Surrendered
n 14 December at 5:20 p.m., the U.S. consul general in Dhaka received a call from General AAK Niazi, the commander of Pakistan’s
Eastern sector, to “receive him urgently.” He appeared at the consulate shortly, along with General Rao Farman Ali, the military adviser to
the governor of East Pakistan. He told Spivack that the bombing of Dhaka in the afternoon “had convinced him that the fighting must be
stopped immediately to prevent further bloodshed, even though, he said, his troops were still in good positions and were not in the danger at the
moment.” Farman Ali had in his possession a rough draft proposal he wished the consul general to transmit to New Delhi so that it could be passed
on through Indian channels to the Indian field commander in East Pakistan.
After some discussion, they drew up a proposal in the form of a letter to Spivack, which both Niazi and Farman Ali signed.
The proposal read:
“In order to save future loss of innocent human lives, which would inevitably result from further hostilities in the major cities like Dacca, I request
you to arrange for an immediate ceasefire under the following conditions: (A) Regrouping of Pakistan armed forces in designated areas to be
mutually agreed upon between the commanders of the opposing forces; (B) To guarantee the safety of all military and paramilitary forces; (C)
Safety of all those who had settled in East Pakistan since 1947; (D) No reprisals against those who helped the administration since March 1971.
“In those conditions, the Pakistan armed forces and paramilitary forces would immediately cease all military operations. I would further abide by
any resolutions, which the Security Council of the United Nations may pass for the permanent settlement of the present dispute. I make this
proposal with the full authority vested in me by virtue of my position as the martial law administrator of Zone B [East Pakistan] and Commander,
Eastern Command, exercising final authority over all Pakistan military and paramilitary forces in this area.”
Niazi asked that the U.S. envoy indicate in his transmittal message that the general was prepared to name a representative immediately to
discuss the details of his offer with an Indian counterpart. He hoped that the Indian commander would do the same immediately, so that
negotiations could begin at once.
Niazi and Farman still wished to avoid using the word “surrender.” Niazi stated he had full authority to take the above action. When Spivack
questioned him specifically whether any concurrence was required by Yahya or anyone else in Islamabad, his reply was a definite “no.”
The consul general reported to Washington that Niazi would send his ADC to his office in about two hours when he hoped some sort of
reaction would be available. He was quite anxious that some progress be made before daylight the next day, when he feared bombing in Dhaka
would resume.
Regarding Niazi’s authority to act, the envoy noted that Malik had left the Governor House to seek protection from the International Red Cross,
thus abdicating any governmental function. Farman Ali said Malik had resigned.
Spivack had earlier received a call from Malik that the governor and Farman Ali wanted to submit certain ceasefire proposals. Malik, who had
received a threat that the Indians would hand over all the prisoners to the Mukti Bahini to be “butchered”, felt a ceasefire was absolutely necessary
because the situation had hopelessly worsened. He assured the consul general the proposals would carry their signatures and would have Yahya’s
approval. Shortly afterwards Malik called Spivack to say he would not submit the proposals because Niazi had stated that talks were taking place
between the central government and Farland, the U.S. ambassador in Islamabad. In fact, Yahya had authorized Malik on 9 December to arrange a
ceasefire based on a bleak picture the governor painted, according to the Pakistan war commission report. But the president backed off on 11
December when he received signals that China and the United States would come to his rescue. Based on the false indications, Yahya ordered
Malik not to take any action on his last message, adding that “very important diplomatic and military moves are taking place by our friends.” It was
“essential that we hold on for another thirty-six hours at all costs,” the general advised the governor.
Commenting on Malik’s backtracking, Spivack said in a cable to the State Department on 14 December, “There still appears to be strong
difference of opinion between Niazi and Farman, with the governor oscillating feebly between. Farman, obviously, desires to initiate some kind of
action on the basis of his appreciation of what he considers desperate local situation. Niazi, whether on instructions from Islamabad or in line with
his own romantic view of himself as a dedicated soldier, is opposed. In effect, the question boils down to whether the Pak army in the East is to be
sacrificed, together with uncounted thousands of civilians in East Pakistan in order to retain some bargaining position in the West.”
Yahya Authorizes Ceasefire In East Pakistan
Subsequently, when the State Department received Niazi’s proposal, it immediately told Farland to see Yahya to ascertain what he wanted the
United States to do. Farland replied Yahya had indicated, through Sultan Khan, that Niazi had the full authority to act along the lines reported in
the telegram from Dhaka.
Yahya authorized passing the proposal to New Delhi and to Bhutto in New York, but the State Department was wary of putting itself between
Indian and Pakistani military authorities. Thus it directed the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi not to deliver Niazi’s proposal to the Indian government.
Rather, the U.S. Mission at the United Nations was advised to give the message to Bhutto, with the suggestion that he might want to pass it either
on to the Indian foreign minister in New York or through the U.N. secretary general. Bhutto chose not to give the message to the Indians. After
confirming that Yahya wanted the message delivered, the State Department told the U.S. Mission to deliver the message to the Indian delegation.
In New Delhi, Keating gave Niazi’s proposal to Haksar on 15 December, with a copy to General Sam Manekshaw, the Indian army chief.
Haksar asked the envoy in a voice choked with emotion, “where our overall relations had gone off the track.” He recounted at some length the
discussions with Kissinger and Sisco during Gandhi’s U.S. visit in November and stressed that there could be no question of the integrity of
Gandhi’s remarks to Nixon.