Bhutto, Yahya told him about his upcoming trip to Dhaka and asked if Bhutto wanted to go, too. Bhutto replied that he would, if Mujib was willing
talk to him. After Yahya began talks with Mujib, he sent a telegram from Dhaka to tell Bhutto that Mujib would talk with him. Bhutto came to
Dhaka on 19 March and met Mujib the next day together with Yahya. “Mujib was all sweetness and light with Yahya,” recounted Bhutto, but not
to him.
“I’ve come to reach an agreement with you, Mr. President, and I want nothing to do with Mr. Bhutto. I’ll tell the press that I have met with the
president and that Mr. Bhutto was there by chance,” Bhutto quoted Mujib as saying. Yahya responded: “No, no, Mujib. You must speak for
yourself.”
Mujib then noted that so many people died in the hurricane in 1970 in East Pakistan, but no West Pakistani politician bothered to show up, a
snub that was an indirect jab at Bhutto. It ticked him off.
“How was I responsible for the hurricane? Had I been the one to send the hurricane?” Bhutto vented. Mujib’s answer was to get up and say
that he had to leave to go to a funeral.
Bhutto got up, too, to escort him to the ante room. But Mujib did not want him to. Three people were present in the ante room: Yahya’s aide-
de-camp; his military secretary; and his political aide, General Ghulam Umar. According to Bhutto, Mujib began screaming, “Go away, everybody
go away! I have to talk to Mr. Bhutto!” After the three had left, he sat down and then told Bhutto: “Brother, brother! We must come to an
agreement, brother! For the love of God, I implore you!”
“Astonished, I took him outside so no one would hear him. Outside, and in a particularly excited tone, he declared that I must take West
Pakistan for myself, he East Pakistan, and that he had set up everything for a secret meeting. After dark, he would send for me. I told him I didn’t
like this business. I hadn’t come to Dacca to meet him like a thief under a banana tree and in the dark. I didn’t intend to dismember Pakistan, and if
he wanted secession, he had only to propose it to the assembly, counting on his absolute majority. But it was like talking to a wall. I had to accept
the compromise of resuming talks through our spokesmen. Which is what happened without leading to anything, of course. In those days, he was
more deranged than ever – he lost his head over nothing. And, so we arrived at the twenty-fifth,” Bhutto elaborated.
“You didn’t notice anything suspicious on March 25?” Fallaci asked Bhutto during their interview.
Bhutto replied that he “felt certain uneasiness, a strange sensation, which had come to a head. Every evening I went to Yahya to report that
Mujib and I weren’t making any progress, and Yahya showed no interest. He looked away or complained about the television or grumbled
because he couldn’t listen to his favorite songs – his records hadn’t arrived from Rawalpindi. Then the morning of the twenty-fifth he said
something that left me disconcerted: ‘There’s no need to meet Mujib today. We’ll see him tomorrow, you and I.’ At 8 p.m., he reported
‘everything to Mujib’s envoy,’ who exclaimed, ‘that son of a bitch has already left,’ ” Bhutto said.
Bhutto did not believe Yahya had already left Dhaka. “I telephoned the presidential residence and asked to speak with Yahya. They told me he
couldn’t be disturbed; he was at supper with General Tikka Khan, who was appointed East Pakistan’s governor on 9 March. I telephoned Tikka
Khan. They told me he couldn’t be disturbed; he was at supper with Yahya Khan. Only then did I begin to worry, and suspecting a trick, I went to
supper, then to sleep. I was awakened by gunfire and by friends running in from other rooms. I ran to the window, and as God is my witness, I
wept. I wept and said, “My country is finished.”
Bhutto said he learned about Mujib’s arrest at 8 a.m. of 26 March. “How did I take it? I was glad he was alive, and I thought they might have
maltreated him a little. Then I thought that his arrest might help to reach a compromise. They wouldn’t keep him in prison more than a month or
two, and, in the meantime, we’d be able to bring back law and order.”
Although Bhutto did not admit to having any advance knowledge of the military crackdown, he did endorse it. Upon his return from Dhaka,
Bhutto commented on the military action in East Pakistan while talking to an Associated Press of Pakistan reporter, I.A. Khan, in Karachi
“Thank God, Pakistan has been saved.”
Fallaci asked, “Did you really mean to say that this massacre was morally justified?” And Bhutto said: “Every government, every country, has
the right to exercise force when necessary. For instance, in the name of unity. You can’t build without destroying. To build a country, Stalin was
obliged to use force and kill. Mao Tse-tung was obliged to use force and kill. To mention only two recent cases, without raking over the whole
history of the world. Yes, there are circumstances where a bloody suppression is justifiable and justified. In March, the unity of Pakistan depended
on the suppression of the secessionists. But to carry it out with such brutality on the people instead of on those responsible wasn’t necessary.
That’s not the way to convince poor people who’ve been told that with the Six Points there’ll be no more hurricanes, no more floods, no more
hunger. I spoke out against such methods more emphatically than anyone else, and when no one dared do so.”
Bizenjo’s Account: “The General Had Spoken”
Yet another account of the Mujib-Yahya talks came from the former governor of Baluchistan, Mir Ghaus Bakhsh Bizenjo, who was elected to the
Pakistan National Assembly [parliament] in 1970 on a National Awami Party ticket from West Pakistan.
As the situation deteriorated with each passing day in March 1971, Yahya Khan expressed his intention to meet with Sheikh Mujib to discuss
matters, but Mujib was reluctant. Some of Bizenjo’s friends and colleagues in Karachi, who had been watching the unfolding events with deep
concern, asked him to go to Dhaka to try to persuade Mujib to meet with Yahya and have a frank and forthright talk on the situation.
East Pakistan was then heading towards the point beyond redemption. Mujib was not expressly opposed to negotiations, but the irony of the
situation consisted in an amalgam of several crisscrossing factors. Punjab’s traditional power elite had already decided to call it quits and get rid of
the Bengalis rather than let them assume power by virtue of their majority in the National Assembly.
Bizenjo recounted an example of the cynicism that marked the West Pakistani rulers” mindset. He went to see Yahya Khan in 1970 to discuss
certain points relating to the holding of elections in Baluchistan based on the one-man-one-vote principle. During the conversation, when the East
Pakistan issue came up, the general said: “Sooner or later, East Pakistan will have to be amputated. And, if at all that is to happen, why let them
suck our blood for two or three more years?”
Bizenjo was appalled.
“I was shocked to hear these words coming from the mouth of the president of Pakistan,” he wrote in his autobiography, In Search of