Brezhnev explained the Soviet policy in a letter to Nixon on 8 December 1971. He said the Soviet Union was “profoundly concerned about the
situation in the Hindostan peninsula, the more so that the dangerous events are taking place in the immediate proximity to the borders of the Soviet
Union.” From the very outset, Moscow favored “a peaceful solution and did everything necessary in this respect, trying in every way to convince
both sides of this.” Moscow told Yahya Khan “the only way to proceed is the way of political settlement, and that a political settlement requires
political means.” It was clear all along that the refugees would not return home without a political settlement in East Pakistan, so Moscow advised
“Yahya Khan to speedily take that path”.
“Our approach in this matter has not been and is not one-sided. We persistently expressed to both Pakistan and India our view about the
necessity of the speediest political solution of the problem. We sought to exert influence on the Pakistani leadership not because we were
interested, for some special considerations of ours, in supporting the other side. We acted in that way because we saw the events in East Pakistan
as the main cause of what was happening. And our viewpoint has not changed. Unfortunately, President Yahya Khan and his government did not
take our advice. We are still puzzled as to the reason why the Pakistani leadership did not want to follow the way of political settlement – the way
of negotiations,” the Soviet leader told the American president.
Nixon’s China Plan Lands India Firmly In Soviet Orbit
What the Soviet Union failed to win through diplomatic courtship with India for years, it got as a byproduct of America’s secret efforts to consort
with China. After Kissinger informed Gandhi about Nixon’s China plan during his visit to India in an attempt to allay New Delhi’s possible
misunderstanding, she rushed to sign a military pact with Moscow.
On 9 August, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Indian External Affairs Minister Swaran Singh signed the 20-year Friendship
Treaty, giving India a strong weapon to face any potential military confrontation, especially if China got involved in East Pakistan.
The pact provided that in the event of an attack there would be immediate mutual consultations. By then the treaty had been discussed for nearly
two years, after India dragged its feet for fear of sabotaging its own credibility in the Non-Aligned Movement.
Analysing its implications, Irwin told Nixon that each side undertook to refrain from giving assistance to any third-party taking part in armed
conflict with the other party, assuring India of the prospect of Soviet help in the event of a war. The decision to depart from its traditional posture
of non-alliance reflected India’s perceptions of changing international power realities, notably the détente in Sino-American relations. In addition,
recent U.S. policies towards Pakistan had reinforced the Indian view that it could not count on U.S. support in the event of hostilities.
From the Soviet point of view, the rising level of tension in South Asia and the prospect that India might extend diplomatic recognition to
Bangladesh, thereby precipitating hostilities, seemed to have prompted Moscow to offer the treaty. By signing the pact, the Soviets dissuaded the
Indians from rushing into recognising Bangladesh. For Moscow, the gains from the treaty were formal Indian assurances that it would not enter any
hostile alliance system, permit foreign bases nor allow the use of India for purposes militarily harmful to the Soviet Union.
The Soviet assurance of support had also diminished pressures on the Indian government and restored a degree of self-confidence and restraint.
The treaty in itself provided no basis for the resolution of the fundamental issues at stake in East Pakistan. But by implicitly giving a deterrent
against a Pakistani or Chinese attack, it encouraged the Indians to step up their covert activities in East Pakistan with less fear that these steps
would escalate into war.
While the treaty represented no substantial change in Indo-Soviet relations, it reinforced the increasing closeness of views between the Indians
and the Soviets. It reflected a Soviet recognition of the preeminence of its interests in India and India’s recognition of the geopolitical necessity of
close ties with Moscow. The pact did not, however, imply any change in India’s desire for close relations with the United States.
The hint that New Delhi still wanted close ties with Washington came from Gandhi’s overture to America. Two days before India signed the
treaty, Gandhi’s office told America she would be pleased to accept an invitation for an official visit to Washington in November. Gandhi was
reluctant to visit America when it was first proposed a few months earlier.
On the day India and the Soviet Union signed the agreement, Jha sought a meeting with Kissinger in Washington. When they met, Kissinger told
the Indian envoy that the treaty was a matter of secondary concern to the United States, “though it was hard to reconcile with the nonalignment
policy of India.”
“What did concern us, however, was the possibility that India might draw the conclusion from it of an unlimited freedom of action vis-à-vis
Pakistan,” Kissinger said. He cautioned he could not be more categorical in pointing out that a fresh Indo-Pak war would set back Indo-American
relations for half a decade.
If New Delhi ended up because of this treaty as a diplomatic appendage to Moscow, America’s interest in India would diminish. America
wanted a strong independent India, Kissinger said. Jha assured him that India would not be anybody’s diplomatic satellite.
Kissinger called Jha’s attention to Article 9 of the treaty and said that if read literally, this meant that India would have to support the Soviet
Union diplomatically in a new crisis over Berlin. Jha said that such was not the treaty’s intention. India simply wanted an ally to counter Pakistan’s
repeated claims that China would be on its side in the event of a new war.
Kissinger said that anything that exacerbated conditions in the subcontinent was against U.S. policy. He hoped the ambassador “understood that
we were deadly serious about it”. He also said it seemed a pity for the United States and India, which had no conflicting interests, to quarrel over a
problem whose solution was preordained by history.
Jha asked Kissinger what he meant by the last statement.
Kissinger replied: “It seemed to him that over a historical period, East Bengal would be gaining autonomy even without Indian intervention. We,
in turn, had no interest in the subcontinent except to see a strong and developing India and an independent Pakistan. Indeed, there was a difference
in our approach to India and in our approach to Pakistan. India was a potential world power; Pakistan would always be a regional power. For all
these reasons, the problem would sort itself out if we separated the issue of relief from that of refugees and the issue of refugees from that of
political accommodation.”
Jha said he had no difficulty separating relief from refugees, but he saw no way of separating refugees from political accommodation. The
ambassador then handed Kissinger a letter from Gandhi to Nixon, which was couched in very conciliatory terms. Jha said it would provide an