19 
India Begins Blitzkrieg
aced with a potentially explosive situation in South Asia, on 1 December Nixon sent a letter to Gandhi, which Keating delivered to the Indian
premier. She read it and promised the American ambassador she would reply promptly, adding that every country must first look to its
national interest and it was her duty to see what was in her country’s own.
Speaking on the East Pakistan crisis, the prime minister blamed Yahya for creating his problems and insisted that he must face the consequences
of his action. “We are not in a position to make this easier for him,” Gandhi said, adding that India was being asked to allow Yahya’s misdeeds to
stand, but “we are not going to allow that.”
No one in India opposed war more than she did, Gandhi declared. “I wouldn’t like to take this country to war,” but “this war and this situation
are not of our making.”
In an indirect jab at the United States, she noted that many countries said they were exerting pressure on Yahya, but “what has it yielded?”
Nothing, she herself answered, except that “Yahya had his back to the wall” and wanted “to be bailed out”. Then she commented, “We have to
take steps which will make us stronger to deal with this situation.”
Gandhi said Yahya’s step to start a political process, especially what she called the “farcical” elections, had moved the situation in the wrong
direction. These so-called elections were “not going to make any difference whatsoever”.
When Keating commented that her position was very firm, Gandhi replied that things had become a little harder than before. She said her own
patience had worn thin, and she did not know how to tell India to continue to wait. “I can’t hold it.”
When Keating started to comment about the recent Indian military incursions, she cut him off. “We can’t afford to listen to advice which
weakens us.”
Following his conversation with Gandhi, Keating informed Washington: “In the absence of some major development toward a meaningful
political accommodation, India will assure that the efforts of the Mukti Bahini to liberate East Pakistan do not fail.”
The day Keating met with Gandhi, the United States decided to cut off military aid to India, as Nixon had threatened many times since the crisis
erupted, to punish New Delhi. Nixon held India responsible for the trouble in South Asia.
Sisco informed Rasgotra of America’s new aid policy. The Indian envoy regretted the decision. He said India would note the alacrity with which
the United States cut off its military sales to India, compared to the delays involved in the similar cut-off to Pakistan.
In New Delhi, the aid cut-off did not create much of a wrinkle. Keating reported to Washington that when he informed Kaul of the new U.S.
military supply policy, the foreign secretary “took the news well, but said that pressure tactics would not succeed in dissuading India from the path
on which it was embarked.”
America’s decision to cut off aid followed concerns in Washington that India was embarked on a mission not just to partition Pakistan, but also
ensure its complete disintegration. When the Washington Special Action Group met on 1 December, Kissinger asked whether Gandhi would
“allow the Pakistanis to stay in West Pakistan for the time being.” His statement alluded that India wanted to destroy West Pakistan as well. But
before anyone could answer, Kissinger was called from the meeting room.
When the group resumed discussion in Kissinger’s absence, Irwin asked if the war would be over in a month. Both Cushman and Moorer said,
“Yes.” Moorer said the Pakistan army in East Pakistan had begun to ration ammunition – ten rounds per tube. “They’re beginning to feel the
squeeze.”
When Kissinger re-joined the meeting, he cited some media reports that were critical of the administration. “Some of the papers are saying
we’re not doing our arithmetic – that we’re losing 500 million Indians for 150 million Pakistanis. I don’t know what we’re losing in India and, in
any event, that’s not the purpose of our policy.”
He then asked: “How long do you think Pakistan can hold out?”
Moorer replied, “Two or three weeks.”
The next day, Kissinger told Nixon that Indian and guerrilla offensive was gaining momentum, with the insurgents operating more freely. They
had captured some towns as close as seventeen miles from Dhaka, and the Bangladesh flag was flying in several towns in the interior.
Yahya Appeals For Nixon’s Help
Yahya made an appeal to Nixon on 2 December to make India stop the war. “India has chosen the path of war, aided and abetted by Soviet
Union, in a bid to break up my country. Time is fast running out and the choice before me has, indeed, become very limited.”
He said the U.S. actions announced so far had failed to deter India. Yahya urged Nixon to issue a personal statement “condemning India’s
aggression, aided and abetted by the Soviet Union, and calling for an immediate end to hostilities and withdrawal of opposing forces to a safe
distance behind their respective borders.” He asked Nixon to advise the Soviet Union to “desist from militarily supporting India”.
To win military aid from the United States, Yahya invoked the Pakistan-United States Bilateral Agreement of Co-operation Pact of 1959.
Under the pact, Pakistan claimed, the United States had an obligation to come to its aid; Washington disagreed with Pakistan’s interpretation of
what the agreement implied.
“I shall be most anxiously awaiting your reply,” Yahya told Nixon.
The administration discussed whether America ever agreed to provide military aid to Pakistan under the pact in the event of an attack by a third
country. Kissinger said a secret clause provided such assurances, but State and Pentagon officials disagreed. Van Hollen said the assurance was