and hold to the demarcation of the present boundaries. We might add Bangladesh to this equation in some way.”
Sisco: “I don’t exclude the possibility of a deal of some sort, even now.”
Williams: “There are still elements of concession. Don’t forget that the spirit of nationalism was terribly strong in East Pakistan even before the
fighting broke out. This is where any talent we have needs to be applied. I think we should discuss it with Yahya. If we put some force behind it,
we may even have a chance of getting the Russians behind it. Many West Pakistanis will recognize and accept the loss of East Pakistan, although it
will be hard for the army to take.”
Kissinger: “Assuming that this kind of option will be kept open, the president wants India to understand very clearly that we would not look with
indifference on an Indian onslaught on West Pakistan. Our press spokesmen should not press the idea of neutrality or noninvolvement to the point
that the Indians could misunderstand that this foretells our attitude toward an attack on West Pakistan. We should keep open the option of trying
to deter the Indians, by a show of force, if necessary.”
Kissinger then asked Moorer if he could give the pros and cons of getting an American aircraft carrier into the Bay of Bengal and make it
appear as if it was meant to evacuate Americans, although in reality to threaten the Soviets and the Indians. The point of Moorer’s analysis became
mute when Kissinger met with Nixon in the Oval Office after the meeting and the president ordered him to move the carrier, ruling out Kissinger’s
mild opposition. Kissinger opposed the move based on advice from Treasury Secretary John Connally, who favored using a helicopter ship rather
than a carrier, as the latter could be interpreted by the American public as a threat to intervene militarily.
Nixon responded angrily: “Goddamn it, I’ve got a responsibility to protect American lives. I’m going to do it.” Nixon apparently said he was
prepared to use the carrier force to protect U.S. citizens in East Pakistan, who numbered two hundred.
Kissinger: “Nobody will believe it. The Indians will scream we’re threatening them.”
Nixon: “Why are we doing it anyway? Aren’t we going in for the purpose of strength?”
Kissinger saw Nixon’s determination to use the carrier. “I’d move the carrier so that we can tell the Chinese tomorrow to move their forces to
the frontier,” Kissinger said, adding that a decision to move the carrier group into the Bay of Bengal meant that “we’d have to do a lot of things,
and we’d have to do them toughly.”
Nixon: “I understand.”
Kissinger: “We’d have to get the Indian ambassador called in and demand assurances against annexation. We’d have to leak at that moment
that secret understanding to protect the Indians [Pakistanis] against aggression.”
Nixon: “I understand.” He then asked Kissinger “to get the whole thing together.”
Turning to the political impact of using the carrier, Kissinger noted that it would take six days to move the carrier from Southeast Asia to the Bay
of Bengal, by which time Congress would have already been out for a recess. He said he would talk to Admiral Moorer “to see whether we can
keep the carrier back of the Bay of Bengal”.
Nixon: “Then can we move the other helicopter thing in?”
Kissinger said yes.
On 12 December, Moorer informed Kissinger that the plan was to move the carrier through the Malacca Straits separating Malaysia and
Indonesia. The carrier force that had been stationed off Vietnam was expected to traverse on
12 December morning, Washington time. The force was anticipated to arrive off East Pakistan by 16 December morning and then on to the Indian
Ocean. “In forty-five hours they can move where we want them. It’s a carrier, four destroyers, an oiler and amphibious force [the Tripoli] with
three destroyers – all set to go at daylight Monday [13 December], their time.”
Kissinger: “Send it where there are Americans – say, Karachi.” He said the Pentagon could comment “that they were sent to help in a possible
evacuation.”
Irwin: “Will we announce it?”
Kissinger: “Wait for a question from the press.”
Nixon Moves Seventh Fleet To Bluff Soviets
When Kissinger met with Nixon in the Oval Office, he did not recommend sending the carrier, fearing public backlash in the United States,
although he suggested sending a helicopter ship and some escorts.
“From the Chinese angle, I would like to move the carrier. From the public opinion angle, what would the press and television do to us if an
American carrier showed up there?” the national security adviser asked.
Nixon asked: “Can’t the carrier be there for the purpose of evacuation?”
Kissinger responded: “But against whom are we going to use the planes? Are we going to shoot our way in?”
Nixon asked what good it would do to move a helicopter ship into the area.
Kissinger said it would be “a token that something else will come afterward”.
Kissinger told Nixon that the White House and the State Department were following different approaches to the crisis. He said the State
Department “would propose a ceasefire in the west in return for in effect our recognition of Bangladesh,” and added that such an approach would
constitute “a total collapse” and “it would hurt us with the Chinese.”
Nixon, however, felt it was necessary to take into account the “realities” of the situation. “The partition of Pakistan is a fact. You see those
people welcoming the Indian troops when they come in. Why then are we going through all of this agony?” the president asked.
Kissinger replied: “We are going through this agony to prevent the West Pakistan army from being destroyed. And secondly, to retain our
Chinese arm. And thirdly, to prevent a complete collapse of the world’s psychological balance of power, which will be produced if a combination
of the Soviet Union and the Soviet armed client state can tackle a not insignificant country without anybody doing anything.”
Kissinger felt that if the United States would “put enough chips into the pot” it could persuade the Soviets “for their own reasons, for the other
considerations, to call a halt to it”.