7 
Yahya’s Misadventure:
Dark Clouds Over Pakistan
n 6 April, the day the U.S. consulate general in Dhaka dispatched the dissent cable, the American Embassy in Islamabad also sent a
telegram to Washington, commenting on a letter Yahya had written to Nixon seeking help against India’s possible intervention in East
Pakistan.
Yahya’s letter followed a plea by Pakistan’s Foreign Secretary Sultan Khan for a public statement by America against any attempt to
“internationalize” the East Pakistan issue.
Farland, the U.S. ambassador in Pakistan, had recommended that Washington accommodate Khan’s request. But he no longer saw any need
for such a statement because of India’s assurance that it would not interfere in East Pakistan. “I will not press our recommendation further,”
Farland wrote on 10 April, noting that India’s assurance had made his earlier suggestion, mute.
India gave the assurance when the U.S. ambassador to India, Kenneth Keating, met with Foreign Secretary T.N. Kaul. On 2 April, Keating
told Washington that Kaul had assured him India did not intend to interfere in Pakistan’s internal affairs. Keating had also reviewed Indian military
dispositions and concluded the Indian army was not oriented against East Pakistan.
Keating opposed the initiative proposed by Yahya – to issue a public warning against India: “Given Indian military dispositions and positive
statements of responsible Indian officials I believe there should be no question of démarche to the government of India along lines suggested by
President Yahya in his last letter.”
Despite Farland’s decision to go back on the earlier recommendation, he still wanted Washington to let New Delhi know about its opposition to
India’s possible interference in Pakistan, but privately.
“Since our position against intervention has been made clear to [the government of India], we have, in effect, already, albeit privately, responded
to Yahya’s request,” he wrote. “Nonetheless, given what intelligence sources have reported about covert Indian activity, this mission believes the
department, on an early occasion and at an appropriately high level, should underscore our strong feeling that no outside power should take any
steps that would tend to broaden and escalate the conflict.”
Giving his outlook as to how the situation would evolve, Farland wrote: “As we have previously reported, we do not believe the army over the
long run can hold the East by bayonet against the overwhelming opposition of the Bengalis. I think Yahya’s action against the Awami League is a
self-defeating step.”
Six days after Farland first voiced his concern over the East Pakistan situation, he sent yet another note to Washington, making a comment on a
7 April conversation between Sisco and Pakistan’s Ambassador Agha Hilaly.
Hilaly sounded optimistic about a political solution in East Pakistan. He said Yahya would concede the Awami League’s six-point agenda, with
minor adjustments. Yahya had already reiterated his plan to transfer power to a provincial government in East Pakistan. Hilaly, who speculated the
change would happen in months, did not feel that Mujib’s arrest or the Awami League’s banning would have any substantial effect on the political
outcome in East Pakistan.
Farland’s assessment, however, painted a bleak picture. He wrote that two weeks after Pakistan launched a crackdown, the military controlled
only major cities in East Pakistan. “But the Bengalis still hold major areas, especially in the countryside.” If the resistance continued on to June
when monsoon begins, the military “will face major logistical and operational difficulties.” However, if the resistance crumbled in the next two
months, the military should control the province, at least for the short, and possibly, medium-term.
U.S. Ambassador Doubts Pakistan’s Survival
Over the long term, Farland continued, Pakistan would be unable to hold East Pakistan. In time, renewed resistance would possibly emerge,
“because the breach between the two wings was too deep to permit reconciliation.”
“In short,” he commented, “we believe the Hilaly prognosis, as would be expected, is overly optimistic,” reflecting the official Pakistan
government line rather than the current unclear situation on the ground.
He explained that the operation in East Pakistan had not been a breeze as expected by the Pakistani military leadership. Mujib’s supporters still
held major parts of the countryside.
Farland questioned whether the army’s control extended beyond the cities, and also wondered if the army would succeed in breaking the back
of organized Bengali resistance. For the moment, Awami Leaguers apparently rallied the Bengali nationalists in the western half of East Pakistan.
He expressed doubt that Pakistan could regain of the Bengalis’ loyalty.
“Hilaly was wrong on this fundamental point,” Farland flatly declared.
He said that the events of the past two weeks had left such severe emotional scars that it was hard to conceive that there was anything Pakistan
could do to make most of the Bengalis willing citizens of Pakistan.
“Bengali grievances are now etched in blood,” the ambassador observed.
Even if West Pakistan won the short-term victory, he continued, the Bengali resistance movement was likely to be revived eventually. In the
early stages, such activity might consist of random acts of terror and harassment of the Pakistani troops. However, the movement was likely to gain
momentum. If the Awami League movement crumbled before it consolidated its position on the ground, the resistance movement was likely to pass
on to more radical and left extremist groups, such as the Naxalites in India.