release. The Indians were only likely to press the Bangladesh leadership towards talks if they believed the Americans would use their influence with
Yahya.
On 8 October, the Indian envoy in Washington asked if Kissinger could ask Pakistan to release Mujib and let him enter the Bengali political life
– it was necessary to keep the moderate control over the Bangladesh movement. He said the so-called foreign minister in Kolkata was being
attacked by the Maoists, and the Awami League leaders were reluctant to let him talk with Yahya lest he be discredited further, and left the field
wide open to the extremists. Kissinger responded that “it was important to understand what was possible and warned against unilateral action.” He
did not elaborate.
The next day, the State Department told the American mission in Kolkata to respond to Moshtaque’s requests. “While much of the substance of
what Moshtaque had to say, particularly with reference to expectations of what the United States could or should do in the present crisis, was
fatuous or naïve. We, nevertheless, believe it is worthwhile to give him a response, with the intent of developing some momentum in moving the
Bangladesh representatives toward talks.”
Washington’s instruction to its Kolkata post was clear: “You should tell him that the U.S. government has no desire to place itself between the
government of Pakistan and the Bangladesh representatives or to enter into merits of the positions of either side.” It added, “The U.S. government,
therefore, has no substantive comment to make on the points raised by Moshtaque. We would urge, rather, that the Bangladesh representatives
seek the earliest opportunity to present their views directly to the government of Pakistan representatives in an effort to explore the possibility of a
negotiated settlement.”
Washington also suggested that the consulate general tell the Bangladesh leaders that the American diplomats had “already discussed the
possibility of such a meeting with President Yahya and he had indicated his interest. The U.S. government is willing to assist in passing messages
back and forth that might lead to a meeting, but we are not interested in playing the transmission belt for ‘demands’ or ‘positions’ of one side or the
other.”
Regarding Moshtaque’s “desires”, Washington said: “You should suggest to him that the Bangladesh representatives present these directly to the
government of Pakistan in talks and not to us. Only by engaging in talks can the two sides hope to find ways toward an early end of violence,
killings and other hardships that now afflict the people of East Pakistan. The alternative what we see is escalation violence, and possibly war, with
further tragic consequences for the entire subcontinent. In our view, those who refuse to participate in unconditional talks may have to assume the
responsibility for the continued loss of life and for the loss of ‘opportunity’ to achieve a constructive outcome.”
Despite their reluctance to get involved directly, the Americans wanted to keep their “options open for contacts with other elements of the
Bangladesh leadership, although this will continue to be controlled from Washington. Hence, while we assume that Moshtaque may remain the
principal channel for future communications, we do not wish to give him the impression that he will necessarily be the only channel. For example,
we obviously might be in touch with the Bangladesh delegation in New York, which presumably was sent to this country for the purpose of
contacting foreign officials, including the United States. Therefore, you may inform Moshtaque at your discretion that we intend to maintain some
contact with the other Bangladesh representatives, if an occasion arises.”
On 12 October, in Moshtaque’s absence from Kolkata, the political officer met with Hossain Ali and gave him the substance of the instructions
contained in the telegram. Ali promised to report the response to Nazrul Islam. If Islam deemed it necessary, Ali said he would make arrangement
to send a copy to Moshtaque, who was believed to be in Tripura at that time, visiting guerrilla training camps.
Ali, however, questioned the usefulness of a dialogue with Pakistan in light of Yahya’s 12 October broadcast to the nation, which contained no
glimmer of hope for a change in the general’s atti tude. The officer clarified that it would be difficult for Yahya not to take the hard line pub licly. Ali
readily agreed that the speech obviously was meant for public con sumption in West Pakistan.
The officer urged that the Bangladesh government seriously consider U.S. suggestions to save the lives of thousands who would perish in a
potential war. He argued the worst the Bengalis could expect in a dialogue was Pakistan’s refusal to talk. That would be no worse than the present
Bangladesh position.
The officer had contacted Ali to make an appointment with Moshtaque. Ali told him Moshtaque was out of Kolkata and not expected to return
until 28 October. Bearing in mind the scheduled 23 October Awami League meeting, the officer decided to meet Ali instead.
Ali asked whether the United States had passed to Yahya the Bangladesh “desires,” which were given to the officer earlier by Moshtaque. The
officer said he had not; Yahya had been informed of US-Bangla contacts, but not of the substance of the talks.
Ali said Nazrul Islam might wish to seek clarification and asked if the officer was willing to meet with the acting president. The officer replied in
the affirmative. Ali then said he had no idea what the leadership’s reaction would be, but that the “total independence” and freedom of Sheikh
Mujib were its only concerns.
In Pakistan, U.S. chargé Sober told Yahya on 11 October that he had nothing new or positive to report on U.S. contacts with the Bengali
leaders. Yahya reiterated his continuing interest and asked to be kept informed. The American diplomat told Yahya that it would be difficult to
arrange direct contacts with the Bangladesh leaders “unless one took into account the apparent continuous attraction of Mujib for the mass of East
Pakistan population”. Yahya said he would not deny that Mujib was still an important symbol. He thought, however, that Mujib’s strength even at
the time of the 1970 elections might have been overestimated. Actually, a fairly large proportion of the East Pakistan electorate had not voted in
December, and a significant proportion of those who voted for Mujib were of the “minority population”, namely, the Hindus. Many of those who
did not vote had been intimidated.
By October, New Delhi had become fully aware of the contacts secretly made between U.S. and Bangladesh. On 2 October, India’s external
affairs minister visited New York to attend the U.N. General Assembly. When Sisco met with Singh, he urged the Indian leader to influence the
Bangladesh officials to start talks with Yahya. Singh replied that India lacked influence with Bangladesh, which had independent financial sources
and was critical of India for its failure to accord it official recognition. He quickly added that this did not mean India opposed the dialogue.
When Sisco suggested that India initiate dialogue without insisting upon Mujib’s participation to see what could be accomplished, Singh said the
United States had contacts with the Bengalis and it had a greater influence on them, and thus it should try to bring about the dialogue on its own.
Sisco said Washington would do what it could with Pakistan to get talks started.
On 22 October, the State Department told Nixon that Farland should tell Yahya to include the Bengalis in Kolkata when the general talked with
East Pakistan’s elected members. But the problem was that the Bangladesh representatives had refused to talk with Yahya, insisting that nothing