Gandhi’s war preparations took urgency after Kissinger told her about Nixon’s secret communications with China. During a private meeting
with the Indian prime minister in July, Kissinger disclosed to Gandhi the Nixon administration’s intention to normalize relations with China. He said
there could be significant developments in the months ahead and assured her that “these were not directed at India and that they derived from our
global policy.” They, rather, derived from Nixon’s feeling – which India seemed to have shared in the past – that a more normal world order and
structure for maintaining world peace required that China be drawn into the international community of nations.
Kissinger’s soothing words did not really put Gandhi at ease; rather they caused her significant anxiety. She told Health during a visit to London
in 1971 that Nixon’s friendly overtures to the Chinese – and their closeness to Pakistan – had pushed India into signing the Indo-Soviet treaty,
according to a secret transcript of Heath-Gandhi talks released by the British Public Records Office in 2003.
India, she said, faced a triple whammy with the new development, because the United States was establishing links with Beijing, which was
already tied to Pakistan, a long-time foe of India. She felt that the United States was aligning itself with China, which fought a war with India less
than a decade ago and still claimed part of its territory. India’s pact with the Soviet Union ensured that the United States would not intervene in
East Pakistan. It also helped deter China from opening a second conflict on India’s northern border during the 1971 South Asian war.
Turning to East Pakistan, Kissinger told Gandhi that the use of force could lead to a serious war. On the other hand, there was a political
situation that must permit the refugees to return to their homes.
Gandhi noted that she had written to Nixon about the urgency of resolving the refugee problem. While the flow seemed to be slowing down, it
was difficult to be accurate about the actual numbers because many were in private homes fearing that if they registered, the Indian government
would send them back to Pakistan. She put the number at 6.8 million “registered” refugees. She said that a good part of the feeling in India was
emotional, created by the refugees – food shortages, rising prices and depressed wages.
When Kissinger asked whether the settlement in East Pakistan must include Mujib, Gandhi avoided a direct answer. Instead she said, “The
settlement must be between East Pakistan and West Pakistan. This is not an Indo-Pakistani problem. India would not have been involved except
for the refugees.”
During Kissinger’s meeting with Jagjivan Ram, India’s defense minister discussed the Chinese military threat to India. Ram said he saw no
change in the military balance between India and China. The Chinese had their concentrations of troops at some points and India’s preparedness
continued the same as it had been. The Chinese had been training roughly 1200 Mizos in East Bengal for commando work on the Northeast
Frontier. Generally, however, the Chinese threat continued to be the same. They had not increased their forces in light of the East Pakistan crisis,
although they had gradually improved their communications, their bunkers and their airports. About 100,000 Chinese troops were stationed on
India’s northern border.
Kissinger asked whether the Chinese could fight without reinforcement there or they were preparing some sort of an attack.
K.B. Lall, India’s defense secretary who was also at the meeting, responded: India would know ahead of time of such an attack because the
Chinese would have to build up their supplies there. Kissinger asked what had happened in 1962, and Lall replied that India was unprepared and
that its information was bad.
When Kissinger asked how many months it would take the Chinese to build up their supplies to the necessary level, Lall said two to three
months.
Kissinger commented that the United States made studies in Europe to try to determine the kind of build-up required by the communist forces
before they could launch an attack. Ram said India had made similar studies, too. Ram added that a surprise attack by China would be difficult,
even from Tibet. Nevertheless, Lall interjected, there is a great deal of talk and natural apprehension about what the Chinese might or might not do.
He asked Kissinger whether he thought the Chinese would do anything without some provocation, and Kissinger replied that it seemed unlikely. It
was possible, however, that the Chinese would intervene if there were to be a war with Pakistan.
Lall asked what would be the justification for such an attack. India was not going to go to war with Pakistan.
Keating, who accompanied Kissinger, explained that the Chinese had said they would support Pakistan in a war.
Kissinger added the United States “would take a grave view of any Chinese move against India”, a promise Kissinger would later reverse during
a conversation in Washington with Jha, the Indian ambassador. The Chinese, Kissinger added, had been cautious in their military moves, although
they had been tough in their talk.
When Kissinger asked what the Indian problem was on the west, Ram said there was constant tension on the western border. Any accretion of
military hardware created difficulties for India. Bangladesh should be seen in the wider perspective of peace and stability. The United States had to
judge whether Pakistan could retain Bangladesh, Ram advised.
“Will it be in the U.S. interest for Pakistan to stay together?” he asked.
Kissinger replied that America was considering that question. “What can the United States do?” he asked.
A lot, Ram replied, noting how Pakistan had been sustained by the United States. He asked whether the secretary agreed, and Kissinger
replied, “partially”.
Ram said: “Look at your support for building the army of Pakistan.” The refugee problem was bad enough as an immediate problem. If the
people think they were going to stay in India, then it would be a problem of great social concern. But even ignoring that, a solution of the
Bangladesh problem had to be found. Pakistan ought to have another election. “I would not mind that.” He said he knew the Bangladesh leaders
from Partition days. He knew what was going on in Bangladesh. If Pakistan did not get massive outside aid, it could not survive, he said, in an
indirect lash at U.S. policy.
Kissinger defended America’s policy, saying it was to try to avoid a confrontation with Pakistan and to have some influence on developments.
The Indians were less than satisfied with the explanation. What was not clear to the Pakistanis, Lall said, was that the U.S. policy was directed
at encouraging a change in the situation.
Kissinger made it abundantly clear where the United States stood. America was “not in favor of secession. We are in favor of a political
solution. We don’t want to mislead India. What we want is a situation that will permit the refugees to return.” The United States had no fixed view
on what a solution should be.
Ram said he understood the situation in East Bengal. The Punjabis did not regard the Bengalis as of the same stock. The Punjabi rulers had not