he could avoid a military government he would go to great ends to do so.” Mirza then added he hoped the United States would understand if he
had taken any drastic action.
The State Department, which shared the embassy’s concern over Mirza’s planned authoritarian rule, was “reluctant to take any action which
could be construed as interference in internal political affairs [of] Pakistan and thus would prefer at present not to make suggested representations
to Mirza.”
With what would later prove to be disastrous for both South Asia and the United States, America pursued the same hands-off policy during the
initial phase of the 1971 South Asian crisis, lest it face accusation by Yahya of interfering in Pakistan’s internal affairs.
Mujib’s 7 March address in Dhaka relieved the Americans, who had anticipated that the Bengali leader could opt for outright secession from
Pakistan, thus putting America’s long-pursued South policy in disarray. Washington felt that his speech, which was broadcast live in East Pakistan
and attended by an estimated one million Bengalis, was a step back from a call for immediate independence. Instead of announcing an outright
separation, Mujib called for a continuation of the peaceful non-cooperation movement, including the closure of all government offices and
educational institutions. He said he would consider attending the National Assembly scheduled for 25 March if martial law was terminated, the
troops in East Pakistan sent to their barracks and power returned to the elected representatives. His retreat appeared tactical. He made it clear
that something very close to independence – i.e., his people’s emancipation – was his goal and that his movement would not be deflected until that
was achieved.
That Mujib quite openly took issue with Yahya was similarly noteworthy. He accused the general of “submitting to the declaration of a minority”,
a reference to West Pakistan and Bhutto. Mujib asserted that his Awami League was Pakistan’s sole legitimate source of authority, an assertion
the West Pakistanis found hard to swallow.
“Our embassy in Islamabad believes that Rahman’s goal remains unchanged – “emancipation” of East Pakistan from West Pakistani domination.
This could still conceivably mean “full provincial autonomy” within a united Pakistan. But it is just as likely, if not more so, that Rahman has come to
believe firmly that the freedom he seeks is only attainable by outright independence,” Kissinger told Nixon on 13 March 1971.
Mujib’s speech on 7 March suggested he wanted to achieve his goal by gradually asserting power without risking a direct confrontation with the
army that could have possibly followed a unilateral declaration of independence.
The other element in this delicate political equation – Z.A. Bhutto – remained relatively quiet. Since triggering the current crisis in mid-February
by refusing to attend the constituent assembly, Bhutto had worked to further consolidate his support in the West wing and at least to appear more
conciliatory. The differences between Bhutto and Mujib on dividing powers between the center and the provinces could be reconciled or at least
papered over if the constituent assembly met.
Noting that Yahya would shortly visit Dhaka and meet with Mujib, Kissinger outlined three scenarios that could then develop: Yahya could
decide not to take Mujib’s challenge lying down and to retaliate, perhaps to the extent of arresting Mujib and the other leaders, and attempting to
clamp a military lid on East Pakistan. In doing so, Kissinger added, Yahya faced two basic problems: Mujib’s was a Gandhian-type non-violent,
non-cooperation campaign that made it harder to justify repression; and the West Pakistanis lacked the military capacity to put down a full-scale
revolt over a long period.
A static waiting game could develop with neither the army nor the civilians prepared to take a bold initiative to break the deadlock, and each
hoping the other would break first. This was where Mujib would probably prefer to continue the status quo for a while longer so that he could
gradually take de facto control of East Pakistan without forcing a showdown, he surmised.
Finally, Yahya could make more tactical political moves to let Mujib or Bhutto probe for accommodation and buy more time without giving up
anything. This had been his operational strategy so far but it might be that just about all of the possibilities in this sphere had been played out.
“In short, the Pakistan crisis was far from over and could suddenly flare up again,” Kissinger cautioned.