speaking of a Kennedy obligation.”
The Soviet diplomat assured Kissinger that within an hour this message would be on Brezhnev’s desk. “And, I told him we’re moving some
military forces, but it will not be visible until Sunday night . . . In effect, it was giving him sort of veiled ultimatum.”
Kissinger then predicted a ceasefire resolution to be approved in three days – on 12 December or 13 December. He said: “I think that the
Russians will agree with us to call for one.” The Chinese would accept such a proposal, he assured Nixon, “because we’ve got Yahya. What we
are proposing to the Russians, Yahya gave us.”
Nixon had written to Brezhnev on 10 December, suggesting a ceasefire in the West. “If this does not take place, we would have to conclude
that there is in progress an act of aggression directed at the whole of Pakistan, a friendly country toward which we have obligations,” Nixon told
Brezhnev. Nixon proposed an immediate joint appeal by Moscow and Washington for a complete ceasefire.
Kissinger was to meet with Vorontsov at 11:58 a.m. He outlined a modified U.S. proposal for a settlement. It no longer called for a withdrawal
of Indian forces, but stipulated a ceasefire and standstill agreement to be monitored by U.N. representatives in Pakistan’s both wings. After the
ceasefire, negotiations were to take place for troop withdrawals and the satisfaction of Bengali aspirations. Kissinger also conveyed to Vorontsov
the text of Nixon’s letter sent to Brezhnev on 10 December. Kissinger briefed Nixon on the meeting shortly thereafter, saying Vorontsov needed
no further proof of U.S. resolve.
“We got the message loud and clear from the president yesterday.” Kissinger quoted Vorontsov as saying, adding, “I can tell you informally that
if they are not working through the night now in Moscow, they are not doing their duty.”
Nixon said: “If Brezhnev does not have the good judgment not to push us to the wall on this miserable issue . . . we just may as well forget the
summit.” Kissinger’s judgment was that “by Sunday night or Monday” [12-13 December] there would be an acceptable ceasefire. He said: “I
think that the Russians will agree with us to call for one.” The Chinese would accept such a proposal, he assured Nixon, “because we’ve got
Yahya. What we are proposing to the Russians, Yahya gave us.”
On 13 December, the day Moscow vetoed for the third time an American resolution at the Security Council for a ceasefire, the Soviet Union
informed the White House via the hotline that “we are conducting a clarification of all the circumstances in India. We will inform you of the results
of the clarification without delay.” A handwritten note on the message indicated Haig received it at 5 a.m. and transmitted the text to Kissinger at
7:37 a.m. “Obviously, we are still in a holding pattern,” Haig commented in his note.
In Islamabad, the U.S. ambassador met with Yahya in his residence at 10 a.m. on 10 December, and conveyed to him Kissinger’s message
regarding the proposed ceasefire. Yahya initially indicated he did not understand exactly what was implied by the message conveyed. After
Farland reiterated salient points, Yahya still indicated strong objections, because “Russia is giving India everything she wants.”
Farland then undertook the hardest “sell job” of his life. “After about thirty minutes, I brought Yahya around to a point where he was making his
own proposition.” Except for the slightly different wording.
Yahya proposed, according to Farland’s message to Kissinger, that India and Pakistan agree to an immediate ceasefire, “and that the United
Nations provide observers to monitor it. Yahya also proposed that India and Pakistan immediately begin talks to settle the war and withdraw
troops, while entering discussion toward a political solution in East Pakistan.”
Kissinger sent word back to Farland that the United States would ask the Soviet Union to join Washington in the ceasefire Yahya approved. He
instructed Farland to tell Yahya that Pakistan should refrain from making additional proposals until America had the opportunity to move within the
above framework.
Kissinger also asked Farland to inform Yahya that Nixon “has made the strongest démarche to the Soviets and included warning to them that
we have obligations towards Pakistan, which will not permit aggression against West Pakistan.”