was the No. 2 strongman, but he thought the best man was still Ayub.
John D. Jernegan, deputy secretary of state for the Near East, offered a different viewpoint. He did not know Mirza, but said State Department
specialists thought that Mirza, who definitely expected to be prime minister one day, was more competent than Ayub.
The admiral replied that such might very well be, but as far as honesty and directness were concerned, Mirza was no match for Ayub. Further
discussion prompted the admiral to recount that during the recent government crisis in Pakistan involving Prime Minister Mohammed Ali, Ghulam
Mohammad wanted to name Ayub as prime minister, but Ayub himself persuaded the governor general to keep Ali in place. Jernegan said that
both Ayub and Mirza had persuaded the governor general to keep Ali.
Commenting further, Radford said that “Ali was not the man we would want to have stay in ...” He emphasized that Pakistan was a potential ally
of great importance and that from the military point of view, it had “a trained armed force which no other friendly power can match, not even the
Turks.”
Nixon explained his rationale for supporting Pakistan against India during a conversation with Rogers on 24 November 1971. He compared
India’s move into East Pakistan with North Vietnam’s support for South Vietnam, because New Delhi denied that it was actively aiding the Bengali
insurgents, as did Hanoi. Nixon, however, was convinced that “the Indians are going to win” and that “Pakistan will eventually disintegrate.”
“They want Pakistan to disintegrate,” Nixon said, referring to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. “Despite what she says that’s what she wants,
there’s no question about that. Now under those circumstances, it seems to me that the fact that Yahya has been more decent to us than she has
been; clearly apart from that, I think that our policy wherever we can should definitely be tilted toward Pakistan, and not toward India. I think India
is more at fault.”
Nixon Sees Strong India Will Hurt U.S. Interests
America’s strategy contained an element of curbing India’s regional influence. Nixon feared that if India broke Pakistan and emerged as South
Asia’s most dominant power, it would have an adverse effect on America’s interests. Nixon and Kissinger were also wary of another brewing
threat from the Soviet military and its moral support for India. An Indian victory would only boost India’s prestige and tip the global power
balance, away from America and in Moscow’s favor. To prevent such an outcome, with their frantic efforts, combined with scarcely veiled threats,
they sought to stop Pakistan’s total meltdown, to thwart what they thought was a sinister Indo-Soviet scheme.
On 22 June 1972, Kissinger told the Chinese prime minister that “as far as we are concerned, we would also look with disfavor on an attempt
by India to establish hegemony in that area.” He prefaced his statement by saying that India was pursuing “an aggressive foreign policy”, which in
essence was an extension of the Soviet geopolitical strategy. By way of illustration, Kissinger noted that India had offered to both Indonesia and
Japan, drafts of treaties that were “word for word the same as its own treaties with the Soviet Union”.
He agreed with the Chinese that India’s ability to pursue hegemony in Asia depended to some extent on its ability to gain freedom of action on
the subcontinent. “We believe that the strategy of India is to do to West Pakistan what it has already done to East Pakistan by disintegrating it, by
bringing about the secession of Northwest Frontier and Baluchistan.”
He recalled that when Gandhi visited Washington in 1971 she did not talk much about East Pakistan. Instead she talked about the betrayal
involved in West Pakistan – the inclusion of Baluchistan and the Northwest Frontier in the Islamic nation. Therefore, the problem was whether it
was possible to save West Pakistan and thus absorb some of India’s energies on the subcontinent rather than free them all for expansion. “I’m
saying this cold-bloodedly; it’s our analysis,” Kissinger said.
To some extent, Nixon’s steps in 1971 followed a familiar path treaded by previous U.S. administrations. In 1965, for example, when the
Johnson administration dealt with the war between India and Pakistan, it simply decided to cut off military aid to both nations. Nixon did exactly
the same six years later. The only difference between 1965 and 1971 was that in Johnson’s time, Pakistan succumbed to U.S. pressure when the
president asked Ayub not to encourage China to get involved in that war. On the other hand, when Nixon urged Gandhi not to interfere in East
Pakistan, she simply ignored him.
Nixon also carried forward the Eisenhower administration views that America’s interests were better served “by a unified Pakistan.” When
Yahya told the U.S. ambassador in 1971 that he worried Pakistan’s two wings might split up, Farland reassured him that America continued to
support Pakistan’s unity.
“I recalled that I had carefully explained to him during our first meeting that it was the policy of the United States to respect the unity and
integrity of Pakistan, and that I had publicly reiterated this policy on every occasion,” the ambassador informed the State Department in a cable on
1 February 1971.
Farland told Yahya that any propaganda to the contrary had been spread by those who disliked better ties between the United States and
Pakistan. He asserted that whatever rumor that the United States was covertly attempting to divide the two wings “was not only false and
fallacious, but that it was contrary to the most elementary political or military judgments.”
“Further, to believe that the United States sought or desired another underdeveloped country in Southeast Asia could be deemed ludicrous were
it not for the fact that such a posture had been given credence in the press and unfortunately was believed in many places of high political
importance,” Farland also told Yahya.
Farland’s assurance was merely a renewal of a strong commitment Nixon had made a year earlier, when Yahya visited Washington in October
1970. At that time, Nixon told him, “Nobody has occupied the White House who is friendlier to Pakistan.”
All the key U.S. officials – Nixon, Kissinger, and Rogers – blamed India for the war to justify their support for Pakistan. Rogers told a National
Security Council meeting on 6 December 1971, that “the conflict was obviously the result of a carefully worked out plan designed by the Indians
some time ago.” Kissinger added that despite giving an appearance that “the Indians were practising restraint, but it was obvious now that they
moved as early as they could.” India had waited for the monsoon to be over, the passes from China to be closed by snow and the Bengali
guerrillas to be trained before making the move. “All was completed as Prime Minister Gandhi traveled abroad,” Kissinger said. Nixon summed
up: “The Indians had long wanted to hurt Pakistan. Their interests involved Kashmir more than East Pakistan.”
Nixon continued his hard-line policy towards India even after the war had ended as part of his decision to punish Gandhi for her anti-U.S.