military to impose martial law and assume power.
The American intelligence community, which had inaccurately predicted Ayub would survive the political turmoil, was unsure exactly how the
power transfer had occurred. On 25 March, when Kissinger briefed Nixon about Ayub’s departure, he commented: “The possibility that the army
moved at its own initiative and forced Ayub’s resignation cannot be excluded, but initially, at least, it appears more likely that the move was
mutually agreed upon.”
Yahya made it look like Ayub had handed over power on his own. In a letter to Nixon on 27 May 1969, the general wrote: “On March 24th
President Mohammad Ayub Khan addressed to me a letter, explaining that since the civil administration and constitutional authority in Pakistan had
become ineffective, he had no option but to step aside and let the defense forces of Pakistan, as [the] only remaining effective and legal instrument,
to take over full control of the country’s affairs. On March 25th, he announced his decision to relinquish office of the president of Pakistan and
called upon me, as the commander-in-chief of the Pakistan army, to fulfill my constitutional responsibilities to defend the country not only against
external aggression but also to save it from internal disorder and chaos.”
After the takeover, Yahya revealed his true intentions and confided to some of his senior officers: “Gentlemen, we must be prepared to rule this
unfortunate country for the next 14 years or so,” Siddiqi claimed. Soon, Yahya announced general elections after the intelligence agencies
convinced him that they would result in a split vote and a factious National Assembly, making it impossible for the victorious party to fulfill the
stipulation of an approved constitution within 120 days as Yahya had mandated. Such a failure would then lead to fresh elections, while power
would remain indefinitely in the army’s firm grip.
However, the election results could not have been farther from Yahya’s calculations. Badly let down by the intelligence agencies, Yahya decided
to pursue a new course of action. His famous reference to Mujib as the future prime minister was in reality no more than “a calculated maneuver
aimed, at first, to set the military against Mujib, and, second, to provoke the Pakistan Peoples Party,” Siddiqi asserted.
The worried generals then recruited Bhutto to ensure that any chance of a compromise with Mujib would be nonexistent. In fact, Umar even met
many West Pakistani minority party leaders to dissuade them from attending the first National Assembly session in Dhaka. And, when Mujib began
his non-cooperation movement in response, the army-controlled West Pakistani media retaliated by accusing the Bengalis of treason.
Mujib apparently was aware of what the military was up to. According to Ghulam Mustafa Khar, Punjab’s former chief minister, Mujib feared
the army would kill him. Mujib once asked him to tell Bhutto that the army would kill him first and then murder the People’s Party leader. Khar
said Mujib opposed Pakistan’s bifurcation, but some leftist Awami League elements forced him to support Pakistan’s division. Mujib only wanted
“true autonomy” for East Pakistan, Khar said.
The Pakistan War Inquiry Commission appointed by Bhutto in December 1971 to examine the setback in East Pakistan held the top generals
responsible for the East Pakistan mess up. It recommended that Yahya Khan, General Hamid Khan, chief of staff of the Pakistan army and deputy
chief martial law administrator, Lieutenant General S.G.M.M. Pirzada, Lieutenant General Gul Hassan Khan, chief of the general staff who was
later appointed army chief by Bhutto, Major General Ghulam Umar and Major General Osman Mitha, be publicly tried. Tikka Khan, Rao Farman
Ali and Major General Khadim Hussain Raja, commander of the Infantry Division, were associated with the planning of the military action,
according to the Pakistan war commission report. They “were present in Dacca along with Yahya Khan, and secretly departed there on the
evening of that fateful day after fixing the deadline for the military action,” the commission said. They created a situation in East Pakistan that led to
a civil disobedience movement, armed revolt by the Awami League and the subsequent surrender of the Pakistani troops and Pakistan’s partition.
But the Pakistan government took no action against them.
To the Pakistanis, the report’s fate remained a mystery; neither Bhutto nor his successor published it. “When Justice Hamoodur Rahman in his
official inquiry recorded the truth of 1971, Bhutto as prime minister personally ordered that each and every copy of the report be burnt,” wrote
political analyst Jamaluddin Naqvi in The Dawn, a Pakistani newspaper. Parts of the report were leaked and published in the Indian magazine
India Today in August 2000.
Why did Bhutto suppress the report? An authoritative explanation has yet to emerge. One possible explanation was the fear of reprisal by the
Pakistani military. Bhutto, who had little military support, dared not face the all-powerful Pakistan armed forces. If the report were published,
Bhutto would possibly have faced public clamor to put the generals on trial. But he was under threat from Washington not to put Yahya on trial. In
a personal message Nixon had told Bhutto “that he should treat Yahya well in retirement and we would not look favorably on any retribution,”
according to Kissinger, who disclosed it in February 1972 to the Chinese premier Chou En-lai during Nixon’s trip to China.
Chou En-lai commented that Bhutto had assured him “he was taking good care of him and protecting him, and if he did not do so, some other
generals would want to take care of him [Yahya] differently.”
“Both of us owe something to Yahya, although he didn’t show much statesmanship in leading his country, for bringing the link between our two
countries,” Chou En-lai told Nixon and Kissinger in March 1972. “We should not forget and we cannot forget, especially that Dr. Kissinger was
able through him to come secretly for talks here. And, when a man makes a contribution to the world, we should remember him.”
Yahya really did not lead his troops in East Pakistan well, the Chinese leader said. At the time of the surrender, Pakistan still had 80,000 troops
in East Pakistan. “It was not a situation in which they couldn’t keep fighting. We know the Pakistanis are good fighters, and the men wanted to
keep on. The trouble was the commanders were terrible – they really just scattered the troops.”
Yahya should have concentrated his troops to win a victory, and once the Indian side had suffered a defeat they would have stopped because
West Bengal was not very secure either, Chou En-lai observed. The Indians had eight divisions at first, but these were also scattered. They had
three divisions in the western part of East Bengal; the northwestern part had two divisions; and in the eastern part they also had two divisions.
They also had two other divisions on the McMahon line, which they did not move. They only took one division from the McMahon line down to
East Pakistan. In Sikkim, the Indians originally had three divisions, from which they took one division over to eight in East Pakistan and left two
divisions facing China.
“If at that time the Pakistanis had concentrated a force of 40,000 against one Indian division, they would have been able to win and that would
have demoralized the Indians. So at that time even our vice foreign minister still believed they could win the war. Bhutto, too. They are both men of
letters; not soldiers. But we didn’t believe this. We said that if they fought, they would sacrifice everything.”
Yahya was probably a good man with good intentions, according to Chou, “but he didn’t know how to lead an army, how to fight.” This was
why the younger generals in the Pakistani army were dissatisfied with Yahya, he added.