Preface
On 28 February 1971, at 9 a.m., U.S. Ambassador Joseph Farland stepped out of his car in front of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s house in Dhaka.
The Bengali leader, basking in the glory of his landslide victory in Pakistan’s first general election, greeted the envoy at his car and escorted him
into his residence.
During an hour-long conversation, Mujib urged Farland to exert maximum influence with “those who would use force of arms to keep” the
Bengalis in a colonial status. Farland had expected Mujib to raise the issue of East Pakistan’s recognition as an independent nation, but he did not.
Farland had met President Yahya Khan on 25 February. Yahya told the envoy that many in West Pakistan suspected that America supported
East Pakistan’s independence. Yahya’s intelligence told him Farland had met Mujib when he visited Dhaka in January. Farland protested he did
not.
Based on intelligence reports, America concluded early March that unless a compromise formula was found, secession by the Bengalis or
separation of the two wings by mutual consent had become real possibilities. But Washington’s ability to influence the course of these events was
very limited. Moreover, the United States decided a unified Pakistan served its interests better. So, its objective was to promote an orderly
transition from a military regime to an effective parliamentary system that would adopt foreign and domestic policies in line with U.S. aims.
Pakistan’s uncertain internal situation forced Washington to walk a narrow tightrope. Washington faced a decision whether to take a more
neutral stance toward Mujib as a hedge against the day when it might have to deal with an independent East Pakistan. A realistic assessment
argued for adjusting America’s posture toward Mujib, whom Nixon’s aides considered pro-American. But Nixon doubted Mujib’s pro-American
credentials. He advised his advisers against supporting East Pakistan’s independence. His advisers, accordingly, adopted a do-nothing-now
posture toward East Pakistan.
But soon America realized the Bengalis were marching on a road toward independence. What was needed to keep at least a vestige of
Pakistan’s unity was a solution that “would give something to Bhutto, something to Mujib and something to Yahya and the army”.
One such solution was to form a confederation. Under such a scenario, Zulfiquar Ali Bhutto would become West Pakistan’s prime minister.
Mujib would lead Bangladesh. Yahya would hold the confederate presidency, while the military would receive its sustenance from both the wings.
But this solution posed a big problem in foreign affairs. Mujib and Bhutto were diametrically opposite in their views on relations to India. Mujib
favored warm ties with New Delhi, but Bhutto’s eyes were fixed on Kashmir. On top of all this, Yahya considered East Pakistan’s autonomy as a
half step towards full independence. But America saw no other feasible alternative.
However, a ray of hope emerged when Mujib backed off from a unilateral declaration of independence of East Pakistan on 7 March. Despite
an open rift with West Pakistan, Mujib apparently kept the possibility of remaining within one Pakistan under a loose federation. Or so, at least the
Americans thought. Mujib wanted to work out with Yahya some political deal to avoid bloodshed, satisfy Bengali aspirations and preserve some
vestige of a link with Pakistan. He sought America’s help to bring about a solution.
Despite their reluctance to support East Pakistan’s independence, the Americans had begun seriously thinking that soon they might have to deal
with a new South Asian nation. Based on this assumption, they started examining what they would face if East Pakistan separated from West
Pakistan. An independent East Pakistan would face formidable economic and political problems. Its leaders would be hard pressed to satisfy
people’s aspirations. A new West Pakistan, on the other side, would continue to be hostile toward India, creating trouble for its security and
economic progress, because of excessive defense expenditures.
To deal with these contending forces, the Americans outlined three alternative options but agreed that unless and until separation was certain,
any shift in their position would be against America’s continuing interest. They were concerned that their encouragement of East Pakistan’s
separatism would quickly get back to West Pakistan and deepen suspicions among the West Pakistanis that Washington wanted to split their
country.
Washington felt that Yahya was doing his best to bring Mujib and Bhutto closer. Yahya knew very well when he postponed the parliamentary
session that his move could provoke a backlash in East Pakistan. He figured the alternative to the postponement would be even worse. His two
main options were to postpone the session and risk an immediate confrontation with East Pakistan, or to hold the session and risk an immediate
fight with his army.
Yahya figured he would inevitably provoke a confrontation with the East Pakistanis in a few months because he would eventually have to reject
an autonomy constitution. So, he could not compromise with Mujib or move closer to Bhutto without jeopardizing his own power base and risking
his ouster by hardline military elements. In short, Yahya decided to risk a confrontation with East Pakistan in the slight hope that if he pushed all the
parties to the brink, a compromise might evolve from their coming to grips with the consequences of dividing Pakistan. Given the sentiment within
West Pakistan’s political-military establishment, he saw no other realistic choice.
To the Americans, Pakistan’s major political figures represented a cocktail of ideologies and characters. Yahya, Mujib and Bhutto possessed
different ideological outlooks. Yahya, whose power base was the military and the economic elite who opposed any compromise with Bhutto to
avoid an “equitable distribution of wealth”, was fairly conservative. Bhutto, a leftist and populist, did not want to accommodate East Pakistan
because he wanted to control a strong central government. Yahya and Bhutto, however, had one thing in common – both opposed Mujib, who
remained steadfast on his autonomy plan.
The key to resolution of the autonomy issue was Yahya Khan. He had accepted the need to work with Mujib, but this decision was doubtless
predicated on a belief that the West Pakistanis would be well-represented by centrists who could work with the Awami League and protect West
Pakistani interests. Bhutto had destroyed this belief.
Mujib’s action confused the Americans, who initially felt that the Bengali leader had possibly slammed the door on the East-West compromise
by dumping Yahya’s planned conference. However, they were not entirely sure what Mujib actually wanted as he kept the door open for
negotiations.