on 16 December, with the Pakistani army’s capitulation in East Pakistan “because they had no one from whom to expect help”, according to The
Mitrokhin Archive.
India’s involvement in the Bangladesh war was perhaps more fortuitous rather than preplanned. New Delhi’s war policy evolved gradually,
shaped by events at home and abroad. Until 25 March the Indians believed their interests were better served by a united Pakistan in which the
Bengalis would be the dominant force. When the Pakistani military launched a crackdown in East Pakistan, India’s estimate of its own best
interests shifted in favor of an independent Bangladesh under a moderate leadership.
India opted to take advantage of the opportunity after it had solidified its position, militarily with its treaty with the Soviet Union, and
diplomatically with its spectacularly successful campaign that generated a groundswell of global support for the Bengalis’ plight. India initially
showed reluctance to create Bangladesh by force, despite widespread support for it in parliament. Gandhi’s decision to support the guerrillas was
based on her calculation that if New Delhi did not support them, the insurgents would turn to China, causing peril to India’s interests. Gandhi chose
to march on the warpath, convinced that negotiations would not work even if Mujib and Yahya were able to work out a deal, because she
believed that the insurgents were no longer loyal to the Bengali leader.
Gandhi also suspected that Yahya was not really interested in negotiations that would install Mujib in power. Her views were solidified by
Yahya’s attempt to hold a farcical election to fill the parliament seats that he had declared vacant and the formation of a civilian government with
discredited right-wing Bengali politician Nurul Amin at its head and Bhutto as deputy.
Ultimately, India saw the 1971 conflict as an opportunity to weaken its main enemy in South Asia. After all, Pakistan had humiliated India in
1965. New Delhi was determined not to be defeated by Pakistan this time around. A weak Pakistan would greatly simplify its defense problem.
India, therefore, covertly supported the Bangladesh movement while putting its military on a war footing, should the need arise. Indian public
opinion gave overwhelming support to New Delhi’s policy. They had been feeling the effects of the crushing refugee burden, which had caused
social unrest, especially in West Bengal. On top of all this, most Indians saw Pakistan as a threat that could eventually lead to another war. Why
not eliminate that danger when the opportunity knocked on the door?
By the second week of December, the United States had concluded that the birth of Bangladesh was inevitable. William I. Cargo, director of
the Planning and Coordination Staff, sent a memo to Rogers on 11 December, blaming Yahya for the setback.

“It is not a new truth to note that the massive use of military force by Pakistanis against the people of East Pakistan, begun on March 25, was a
colossal blunder and miscalculation,” he wrote. “The disastrous effect of this initial blunder was compounded by the unwillingness or inability of the
Yahya government to move rapidly to political reconciliation with the East Pakistan leaders.”
The drastic weakening in Pakistan’s real power position vis-à-vis India gave New Delhi an opportunity unequaled in the confrontation of these
two countries. Given the deep-seated suspicion, fear and hostility between India and Pakistan, it might have been inevitable that India would
conclude that military operations against Pakistan were a welcome means of exploiting the shift in the Indo-Pakistan power balance. Thus, India’s
resorting to war in East Pakistan was almost certainly dictated by Indian concerns that Pakistan might, by eleventh-hour political accommodation,
escape the worst consequences of its initial blunder, Cargo concluded.