Brezhnev reiterated Moscow’s position in detail in this letter.
“We stated to President Yahya Khan and the Pakistani government that the only way to proceed is the way of political settlement, and that a
political settlement requires political means. Also, we repeatedly laid emphasis on the essence of the problem to be solved.”
It was clear all along that it would be impossible to get the refugees to return home without a political settlement. That was why Moscow
advised Yahya to speedily take that path.
“Unfortunately, President Yahya Khan and his government did not take our advice. We are still puzzled as to the reason why the Pakistani
leadership did not want to follow the way of political settlement – the way of negotiations. But the fact remains that they preferred to conduct the
affairs in such a way as to make the guns speak and the bloodshed.
“The thing to do now is to stop the war already underway. This requires a ceasefire. But the question arises – what is the best way to achieve
it?” he asked, adding that the logical answer would possibly be “a political settlement, based on the recognition of the will of the East Pakistani
population.”
“Otherwise it is impossible to ensure the respect for the lawful rights and interests of the people of East Pakistan and to create conditions for the
return of the millions of refugees. Without it a ceasefire will not be stable. You already know about this proposal of ours, i.e. to solve together and
simultaneously both questions – of ceasefire and of immediate resumption of negotiations between the government of Pakistan and the East
Pakistani leaders concerning a political settlement in East Pakistan. Those negotiations should, naturally, be started from the stage at which they
were discontinued. We feel that this proposal provides a way out for all, including Pakistan. On the other hand, all would lose – and Pakistan
maybe even more than others – on the way of continuing the war and rejecting a political settlement.”
Kissinger briefed Nixon on Brezhnev’s letter less than two hours after he received it.
“They’re proposing a ceasefire and a political negotiation between Islamabad and the Awami League.” He characterized the proposals as “old”
and added that although the letter was “very conciliatory” it was still “in itself unacceptable”.
He proposed a response: “If this negotiation is within the framework of a united Pakistan, with maximum autonomy for the East, we are willing
to discuss it with them. That will separate them to some extent from the Indians. And, secondly, it will get us a ceasefire in the West, which we’ve
got to have if the West Pakistanis aren’t to be smashed.”
The same day, Helmut Sonnenfeldt, a member of the National Security Council staff, prepared an analysis of Brezhnev’s response, saying the
Soviet proposal “can have no other effect than the dismemberment of Pakistan”. It had “no reference to withdrawal of forces”.
He dismissed the proposal to resume negotiations between Yahya and the “East Pakistani leaders” as without merit, given that India had already
recognized a separate government in East Bengal. “In fact, I think this proposal is a phony – and the Soviets either know it or the news has not
caught up with them. I do not see how Yahya will negotiate with anybody in East Pakistan when the place is practically occupied by India; and I
do not see how the East Pakistanis will negotiate with Yahya when they see victory in their grasp.”
He suggested that instead of sending another letter to Brezhnev, Nixon should discuss this matter with visiting Soviet minister Matskevich and
Kissinger should talk with Vorontsov to supplement the president’s message. He proposed that the United States demand “there must be
categorical guarantees that the Soviets will not support the dismemberment of Pakistan, de facto or de jure; there must be a ceasefire, there must
be convincing evidence that the Soviets are working to restrain the Indians, in word and deed.”
When Haig sent the analysis to Kissinger, he said Sonnenfeldt would draft talking points for the president along foregoing lines, but “he will
soften conditions and language in recognition of our weak position and diplomatic niceties.”
On 11 December, Kissinger summarized the latest developments in South Asia in a memo to Nixon. “Pakistan late yesterday revised the
proposal reported here yesterday morning from Dacca for a ceasefire, repatriation of the Pakistani troops and a transfer of power to the elected
representatives of East Pakistan. The revised proposal contains only a call for ceasefire and guaranteed safety of the military and civilian personnel;
there is no reference to a political settlement or the withdrawal of the Pakistani troops.”
The diplomatic effort, he said, stood still, while Bhutto, who was in New York, awaited instructions from Islamabad. Bhutto told Bush he had
arrived to find conflicting instructions and was seeking a clarification. Indicating a division within the Pakistani government, Bhutto said the first
proposal had “flabbergasted” him and that if it remained the government’s policy he would take the first plane home and not be shackled by it.
The first proposal, according to Pakistan’s U.N. ambassador, had been drafted by a field commander under great strain and it contained “such
unprecedented requests as asking the United Nations to effect a transfer of power” to the Awami League.
Kissinger met in New York with Bhutto, Raza and Shahi, on the day he spoke with Nixon. After that meeting, the Americans concluded that
Kissinger’s ceasefire proposal had been overtaken by events and was too complicated to succeed at the United Nations. Now they decided that
Pakistan would obtain third-country support to introduce a Security Council resolution that would include both ceasefire and withdrawal. But such
a resolution was likely to be vetoed, which would lead Washington to move to accept a simple ceasefire without any linkage to the Soviet
formulation of political negotiation.
Kissinger instructed Farland to urgently meet with Yahya to explain the new strategy.
Farland reported on 12 December that Yahya “expressed his full accord with the procedures suggested” by Kissinger. The military ruler
indicated that Shahi would be instructed accordingly.
In the evening, Kissinger told Nixon he had talked with Bhutto, who said the Chinese had assured him “they were willing to do something and, in
fact, I think that they are going to do something, but they said that they had their doubts about us.”
“They just don’t think that we are firm and they want some word from us what we’re going to do, if the Russians press them. Of course, you
know, I couldn’t help Bhutto,” Kissinger said.
Kissinger also told Nixon that Indian military advances in East Pakistan remained virtually unchecked outside Dhaka. The Pakistani troops
retreated in a disorderly fashion. Even in Dhaka, where many of the survivors seemed to be holding up, morale was low amongst both officers and
enlisted men. The Indian forces were consolidating for the final thrust at the capital city, in the event that ceasefire efforts failed.
On the Western front, the largest tank battles took place in Kashmir. Gandhi’s staff said that as soon as the East Pakistan situation was settled,
India would begin a major offensive against West Pakistan. India hoped to end all major fighting by that month’s end.
In New Delhi, meanwhile, reports were circulating that the Seventh Fleet was moving towards the Bay of Bengal. The Soviets showed no sign