Van Hollen offered a different explanation: “One possible reason was that Yahya was unable to sell the settlement in West Pakistan.”
Yahya Backtracks After Mujib Victory
A version of what caused the breakdown came from Council Muslim League President Mumtaz Daultana. On 29 March, three days after the
military started Operation Searchlight in Dhaka, Hobart Luppi, the U.S. consul general in Karachi, spoke with Daultana at his residence. Daultana,
who was in East Pakistan during Yahya’s visit, spoke at length about the Mujib-Yahya talks.
He said Mujib’s demands were much as those Yahya had spelled out in his address to the nation on 29 March, except that Yahya had not
detailed Mujib’s views on an interim central government. Mujib had wanted Yahya to remain as president with no political government at the
central level. Mujib was not “particularly concerned” about the six points. He was willing to accept an interim arrangement based on the 1962
constitution. However, he envisioned that the president would allow the Awami League to exercise full control over East Pakistan affairs, while
Yahya would coordinate inter-provincial affairs of the West wing.
On the “two-assembly” proposal, Mujib had been rather vague whether he envisaged two separate assemblies or two subcommittees of the
National Assembly. Daultana pressed Mujib to let the full assembly meet to sanction the interim arrangements, but Mujib refused. He said his
supporters would not tolerate his sitting in the same room with Bhutto.
Daultana also tried to persuade Mujib to let the leaders of the small parties work on a solution that would put Mujib in power at the center.
Mujib said they could try, but he was convinced the West Pakistani establishment – as represented by Yahya and Bhutto – would never permit the
Bengalis to rule Pakistan.
Mujib was also infuriated by the president’s choice of advisers for the negotiations in Dhaka – Justice A.R. Cornelius, Yahya’s law minister,
General S.G.M.M. Pirzada, Yahya’s chief of staff, and M.M. Ahmed, Yahya’s economic adviser, whom Mujib considered a representative of the
anti-Bengali establishment of West Pakistan.
In a conversation alone with Mujib, Daultana had asked him if he genuinely wanted Pakistan to remain one. He told Mujib that some forty
MNAs-elect in West Pakistan were prepared to work with the Bengali leader towards a constitutional settlement that would permit the Awami
League majority to take power at the center and to enjoy maximum provincial autonomy in the East wing. If, however, Mujib was working
towards separation, Daultana and his friends needed to know so that they could work to prevent a bloody rupture. Mujib replied that while he was
under great pressure to declare an independent Bangladesh, he wanted to maintain Pakistan. Daultana accepted Mujib’s response as sincere.
Daultana concluded from his conversations with Mujib in Dhaka that the Awami League leader was unshakably persuaded that the West
Pakistanis would never permit a Bengali to assume power through democratic means. He was convinced that the recent moves by Yahya and
Bhutto, such as the postponement of the National Assembly, were additional steps in a historical process of conspiracy against the Bengalis.
As a result of these suspicions, Mujib’s goal in the negotiations with Yahya appeared to be the achievement of de jure control in East Pakistan
under an interim arrangement. If he achieved this, Mujib believed he could then negotiate on an equal basis with West Pakistan over permanent
constitutional arrangements. Daultana surmised that Mujib would ultimately have sought a confederal arrangement.
Daultana’s account indicated that Yahya had reassessed his position after Mujib’s election victory. There are two possible explanations as to
why Mujib agreed to keep Yahya as president. He probably wanted to entice Yahya to hand over power peacefully, or else Yahya himself had
bargained for it.
Yahya’s contacts with Mujib went back at least to 1969 when the Bengalis revolted against the military strongman Ayub Khan. Although Ayub
gave the appearance of relinquishing power on his own, recent accounts show he was, in fact, toppled by Yahya. One such account came from
Brigadier Abdul Rehman Siddiqi, head of the Inter Services public relations and press adviser to Yahya Khan.
In February 1969 when Ayub Khan faced street agitation and sought to negotiate his way out by hosting a Round table Conference, Yahya
started plotting against his superior. He secretly met Mujib and encouraged him to press on his demands, a tactic that Altaf Gauhar, Ayub’s
powerful information secretary, later espoused as an effective way to stage a military coup d’ etat. Yahya went as far as to tell Mujib that “he could
go ahead with his anti-Ayub campaign without any let or hindrance from the army.”
Siddiqi narrated this tale in a book, East Pakistan: The Endgame – An Onlooker’s Journal 1969-1971, based on his diaries and other
sources he had cultivated as the army’s chief public relations official.
General Ghulam Umar, Yahya’s political assistant, ordered Siddiqi one week before the conference to secretly prepare an advance draft of
Yahya’s address to the nation as the chief martial law administrator. Two days after that order, Yahya flatly refused Ayub’s direct request for the
army to come to the government’s rescue. Yahya made it clear that it was either complete martial law under his own control, or nothing. Ayub
knew then that his days were numbered. Following his refusal to help Ayub quell the violent civic unrest, Yahya cunningly enlisted the support of
his old friend and drinking buddy, Interior Minister Admiral A.R. Khan, who persisted in presenting highly pessimistic daily briefs to further
undermine Ayub. When Siddiqi confronted Pirzada, Yahya’s chief of staff, with these peculiar goings-on, the general politely told him to keep his
silence. Within a month, Ayub left the scene, allowing Yahya to enter the scene through the back door.
The process of Ayub’s fall started after the politicians failed to reach an agreement with him at the conference. After his failed attempt to find a
way to bring the unrest under control, he called the army commanders to devise a plan to quell the unrest. Ayub first approached Yahya in late
February 1971 when he told him that he might need the army’s help to restore public order. In mid-March, he asked Yahya to come to the aid of
the civilian administration. Yahya told Ayub the military could not impose martial law in only selected cities where political disturbances were
intense, because the politicians could easily move into areas not under martial law and continue fomenting trouble for the government. He argued
that martial law must be imposed all over the country to be effective. In addition, he told Ayub, if he wanted to quietly leave, he must put Abdul
Jabbar Khan, speaker of the Pakistan National Assembly, in power because he was in line according to the constitution. If he wanted to give
power to the military, he must abrogate the constitution.
Ayub, who had recently suffered a heart attack, felt disturbed by Yahya’s suggestion to abrogate the constitution. According to War and
Secession: Pakistan, India, and the Creation of Bangladesh , by Richard Sisson and Leo E. Rose, he had said: “My God, it’s impossible. It’s
my creation, my legacy. It has my blood in it.” Yahya then suggested that Ayub resume talks with the politicians and work out solutions. “The
politicians are all swine and won’t listen to me,” a frustrated Ayub fumed. In the evening of 25 March 1969, as field marshal, Ayub ordered the