On 8 December, Brezhnev wrote to Nixon again, offering what Kissinger described were conciliatory proposals to resolve the crisis, but he still
found them unacceptable. Blaming Yahya for his failure to end the conflict politically, the Soviet leader said, “The thing to do now is to stop the
war already underway. This requires a ceasefire. But the question arises – what is the best way to achieve it? It seems to us that, proceeding from
the situation which developed from the very start, effective can be such a ceasefire, which would be connected with a simultaneous decision for a
political settlement, based on the recognition of the will of the East Pakistani population.”
He proposed to solve “together and simultaneously both questions – of ceasefire and of immediate resumption of negotiations between”
Pakistan and the Bengalis. “Those negotiations should, naturally, be started from the stage at which they were discontinued. We feel that this
proposal provides a way out for all, including Pakistan. On the other hand, all would lose – and Pakistan maybe even more than others – on the
way of continuing the war and rejecting a political settlement.”
Kissinger briefed Nixon on Brezhnev’s letter less than two hours after he had received it: “They’re proposing a ceasefire and a political
negotiation between Islamabad and the Awami League.” These he characterized as “old proposals” and added, “It is a very conciliatory letter,
which is in itself unacceptable.”
He proposed a response, thus: “If this negotiation is within the framework of the united Pakistan, with maximum autonomy for the east, we are
willing to discuss it with them. That will separate them to some extent from the Indians. And, secondly, it will get us a ceasefire in the west, which
we’ve got to have if the West Pakistanis aren’t to be smashed.”
Moscow Pushes India To Capture Dhaka Fast
On 12 December, Soviet First Deputy Foreign Minister V.V. Kuznetsov arrived in Delhi heading a five-man team. Meanwhile, former Indian
ambassador to Moscow, D.P. Dhar, who negotiated the Indo-Soviet treaty, flew to Russia. Both moves occurred under the consultation provision
of the friendship treaty.
Kissinger told Nixon that the Soviet delegation pressed for a decisive Indian action to quickly end the war in East Pakistan. Quoting an unnamed
source, Kissinger said the Soviets were disappointed by the pace of the Indian offensive in the East, but the other two suggested that in general
Moscow was satisfied. Kuznetsov advised the Indians to “liberate Bangladesh in the shortest possible time.” He encouraged the Indians to confine
their objectives to East Pakistan and not to try to take any part of West Pakistan, including Azad Kashmir, as the Indians had earlier decided.
Moscow was concerned that a great power confrontation over South Asia could ensue and that the longer the war lasted, the greater was the risk.
Quoting a high-level Indian government official, who was a CIA agent and whose identity still remains classified as of this writing, the CIA said
Kuznetsov arrived in India to discuss the Bangladesh recognition by the Soviet Union. India had asked Moscow to recognize Bangladesh and sign
a defense treaty with Dhaka. But Kuznetsov said Russia would not recognize the new country until India liberated Dhaka, according to a CIA
dispatch to Washington from New Delhi on 15 December. If the Soviet Union was to retain whatever small influence it still had in Pakistan, it could
not recognize Bangladesh until these conditions were met, the Soviet minister reasoned.
The Soviet Union, according to a secret CIA agent, was impatient with the Indian armed forces for their inability to liberate Bangladesh within
the ten-day time frame mentioned before the outbreak of hostilities. Kuznetsov told the Indians the Soviet position in the Security Council of
opposing a ceasefire became more untenable the longer the war went on in the East. Kuznetsov said the Soviet Union would continue to use its
veto power to stall any efforts to bring about a ceasefire. He, however, stressed the importance of a quick and decisive Indian action in liberating
Bangladesh in the shortest possible time.
Kuznetsov delayed his scheduled return to Moscow because he was awaiting special instructions from Brezhnev about India’s request to the
Soviet Union to sign a defense agreement with Bangladesh. Brezhnev was not in Moscow when Kuznetsov sent him the request for guidance.
Kuznetsov also discussed the threat of Chinese intervention. Both the Indian officials and Kuznetsov agreed the Chinese could attack through
Sikkim. China would seek to overwhelm the Indian defensive position in the Siliguri area and then withdraw back across the border, as it did in
1962, to embarrass India.
The Soviet ambassador to India, Nikolai M Pegov, said he saw no need for India to attack West Pakistan because Pakistan’s military machine
had already been crushed. However, if India ignored the Soviet advice and took Pakistan-held Kashmir, it should be done in the shortest possible
time. Moscow “would not interfere.” Pegov discounted possible U.S. or Chinese intervention. He asserted that the Soviet fleet, already docked in
the Indian Ocean, would prevent the U.S. Seventh Fleet from intervening. If the Chinese moved into Ladakh, “the Soviets would open a
diversionary action in Sinkiang.”
As the major powers debated their plans behind the scenes, America’s deployment of the naval task force in the Bay of Bengal put Keating on
a tough spot. In a cable to the State Department on 15 December, the ambassador vented his anger: “Up until last few days, I have felt able to
defend the U.S. policy on the basis of our overriding concern to bring a halt to hostilities. I am now troubled by the fact that a number of my
diplomatic colleagues view the deployment of the carrier task force as a military escalation by the United States.”
Especially, Canadian High Commissioner James George felt that the move encouraged Yahya to continue his military effort. He said Yahya’s
disavowal of the initial ceasefire message, sent by Major General Rao Farman Ali from Dhaka, and the subsequent message from East Pakistan
Governor A.M. Malik was directly related to the carrier task force deployment.
The high commissioner viewed the task force deployment as a direct superpower involvement. It was bound to make both the Soviets and the
Chinese nervous and likely to serve as a screen for their increased participation in the conflict. George told Keating he wold send a strong message
along these lines to his prime minister, recommending that Pierre Trudeau, in turn, contact Nixon.
After the war ended, Gandhi denied, the Soviet Union ever promised her that it would intervene against the Seventh Fleet or China. “There is
fantastic nonsense being talked about in the United States about our having received promises from the Soviet Union,” she told newsmen on 22
December. “I assure you that these matters were not talked over with the Soviets.”
As to the economic consequences of the war, a penalty Nixon had promised to impose on India if it started a war, Gandhi said, “We’ll have
some hardship but we are used to it and can bear it.”
Nixon’s policy to apply economic pressure on Gandhi resembled the tactics followed with success by previous U.S. administrations, especially