and positive action by it”. He, however, postponed the idea of a U.N. meeting after the Americans told Pakistan that “a discussion in the Security
Council might generate a good deal of emotion, fail to achieve anything constructive, and thus serve to further polarize the situation. There was the
additional concern that India would broaden the discussion to include the entire range of problems affecting relations between India and Pakistan.”
Jha Gives Kissinger Ultimatum
On 8 October, Jha gave Kissinger an ultimatum during a meeting, which followed a conversation between the two some weeks earlier when
Kissinger had mentioned that a year’s interval was needed for a political settlement in Pakistan. Jha told Kissinger that they simply did not have the
luxury of a year – India would be forced into some military action by year-end. The ten million refugees in West Bengal would break India’s
political cohesion; they were all Bengalis and did not leave West Bengal. In West Bengal, they would tip the power balance totally in a Maoist
direction. Finally, the huge financial costs would be more likely to cause bankruptcy than a war.
Kissinger responded with a dire warning: “Have no misunderstanding: If you start a war we will cut off all economic aid and you must include
that in your cost calculation.” He said that if the constant harassment of the president in the Indian press and the constant playing with America’s
political opponents did not cease, the ambassador could not expect a very forthcoming attitude on the part of the United States.
Jha, in his typical manner, put all the blame at the footsteps of the pro-Soviet group in New Delhi for all the problems hounding Indo-American
relations. He told Kissinger that the pro-Soviet axis in India was currently in some difficulty, because apparently the Soviet Union had given the
strongest warnings against unilateral Indian actions against Pakistan. New Delhi believed Moscow seemed to be participating in delaying
maneuvers.
Jha’s remarks sounded alarm bells in Washington. The State Department asked the U.S. ambassador to meet immediately with Gandhi to
propose that both India and Pakistan pull back forces from the borders. When Keating sought an appointment with Gandhi, he was told that the
prime minister could not immediately meet with him as she was quite occupied. The envoy then met with the External Affairs minister on 12
October. Swaran Singh told Keating that the insurgency existed deep within East Pakistan and the significance of cross-border activities were
being easily exaggerated. He said New Delhi could not order to “shoot down the East Bengalis entering or departing India.” Singh confirmed that
India did not anticipate a huge infiltration by Mukti Bahini. On the U.S. proposal to pull out forces, he remained vague. In the event Pakistan did
withdraw its troops, he said, India could reconsider the situation based on the circumstances at such time.
When Keating began speaking of how Indo-U.S. relations would suffer if the guerrilla operations in East Pakistan escalated into a war, Singh
interrupted him. Singh repeated the scenario and asked Keating if he understood correctly that if an armed conflict took place because of Pakistani
incursions against India in retaliation for successful guerrilla activity in East Pakistan, Indo-U.S. relations would be adversely affected and it also
would be injurious to US-Pak relations.
“I replied, large cross-border activities, supported by the Indian army, which resulted in a military conflict with Pakistan, would be injurious to
Indo-U.S. relations. If Pakistan were to attack India, I was convinced U.S.-Pak relations similarly would be seriously affected,” Keating said in a
telegram to the State Department. He told Singh that Washington was delivering the same warning to Islamabad. America also urged Pakistan to
move rapidly towards a political settlement with the Bengalis.
Keating’s remarks provoked Singh. He told Keating – who was by then at the tail-end of his posting in India – that he wanted to take the
opportunity to give the envoy a perspective about the Bangladesh situation. Singh said the hard core of the freedom fighters was formed by trained
former Bengali military and police personnel of about 45,000. The highly motivated and embittered East Bengali youth were participating in the
insurgency in large numbers. If out of some 9.5 million refugees only one percent, or 95,000, were highly motivated activists, the number was a
reasonable enough figure of insurgents; add to that the former Bengali police and military who would join them
Singh said the insurgents were reasonably well-equipped with weapons taken upon defection or otherwise liberated from the Pakistan army, as
well as with weaponry purchased in Europe by a fairly large number of well-to-do Bengalis living abroad. Singh stated that India could not stop
these activities; it had tried to explain basic realities and greatly resented the natural process of the growing Bengali resistance being interpreted by
the United States as bolstered from India.
He urged the United States to consider the profound, alienated attitudes of the Bengalis as shown by the defections of well-placed Pakistani
diplomats, the most recent one being the Pakistani ambassador in Buenos Aires. History knows no parallel and the situation shows even hard-eyed
diplomats taking decisions. India’s impression was that such psychological factors were not appreciated in Washington, which was blinded by the
Pakistani military regime’s charisma. History would show that the United States had the greatest responsibility in the present situation since its
support for Pakistan had contributed to the reinforcement and continuation of Pakistan’s military repression.
He told the ambassador that America should “exercise its immense influence with Yahya to bring him to reality.” Continuing the U.S. support to
the Yahya regime would only deepen the rift between East and West Pakistan and make the struggle in East Pakistan more bitter. It would kill a
negotiated deal. Singh said the recent statement of Bangladesh authorities dismissing a compromise was an indirect repudiation of his statement.
Singh had told an All India Congress Committee meeting that “Bangladesh might be realized within the framework of Pakistan, autonomy, or
independence.”
When Keating attempted to verify whether the freedom fighters would go into East Pakistan in large numbers beginning in October, as the
intelligence reports from Washington indicated, Singh provided more than a diplomatic answer. The Mukti Bahini, he said, did not take India or its
army into confidence and “has never consulted us.” The Mukti Bahini had its own tactics, he added, stressing that India refused to believe that the
freedom fighters who were on “the Indian border in such large numbers prepared to march openly into East Pakistan”.
Singh assured Keating, “India will never attack Pakistani positions and will never commit any incursions against Pakistan territory. If Pakistan
starts war, India will defend itself with every possible means available.”
On 15 October, Rogers sent a telegram to the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi in the light of the responses from India and Pakistan regarding
pulling back soldiers from their respective borders. In his note, the secretary of state conveyed to India Yahya’s assurance that Pakistan would not
initiate war. Yahya accepted in principle the U.S. proposal and suggested the military chiefs of the two countries meet to work out the details.
Rogers told the embassy to elicit India’s response to Yahya’s suggestion. He also sent a note to the U.S. mission in Moscow to brief Gromyko
about the U.S. withdrawal idea.