originate but pursued zealously. This fiasco paved the way for India to opt for a military solution.
As the Indian military marched into East Pakistan full throttle, and international efforts to stop the fighting gained momentum at the United
Nations, Gandhi found herself between a rock and hard place. If she advanced her campaign to completely crush the Pakistani military in the West
as she had promised to her cabinet months ago, she would face a potential fight with Washington and Beijing. She would also antagonize Moscow,
which wanted to end the war after capturing Dhaka. If she backed off, her colleagues would give her a hard time and India would lose a rare
opportunity to cripple an archenemy forever.
She explained to her cabinet that if India accepted the U.N. ceasefire proposal after Bangladesh’s liberation, it could avoid further complications
and “might also rule out the current possibility of a Chinese intervention in Ladakh.”
India’s Defense Minister Jagjivan Ram and several other military leaders opposed a ceasefire until India had taken certain unspecified areas of
Kashmir and destroyed “the war mechanism of Pakistan.”
Gandhi overruled the opponents, saying that “for the moment India would not categorically reject” the U.N. ceasefire proposal. India would
accept a ceasefire after the Awami League regime was installed in Dhaka.
Many Indian parliament members, both from her own party as well as the opposition, were unhappy with Gandhi’s decision, apparently
unaware of the international pressure she faced to quickly end the war. They wanted India to capture at least Azad Kashmir and Lahore.
Jagjivan Ram, when criticized for the ceasefire, told parliament the prime minister was “responsible for that”. He, however, refused to go
publicly against her decision. When the members pressed him on capturing Azad Kashmir, he simply responded: “Enough is enough.”
Gandhi’s decision to abruptly halt the campaign short of her desired goal was not a pleasant one to herself, either. “Madame Gandhi said she
couldn’t forgive her father for leaving Baluchistan out of India, because it was in India’s ‘historic sphere,’ ” Kissinger recalled during a conversation
in Washington with the Shah of Iran in1975. If she could not undo her father’s historic mistake, she could at least blunt its effect by turning
Baluchistan into a neutral country, one that would not pose a security threat to India as a united West Pakistan would.
Gandhi’s action resulted from strong pressure put on her by Moscow, which incorrectly perceived Nixon meant business when he dispatched
the naval fleet into the Bay of Bengal. In fact, the United States later took credit for saving West Pakistan from disintegration by sending the
Enterprise, which the Americans believed scared both the Soviet Union and India. The Soviet Union, which came under U.S. pressure to end the
war, told India that it would accept the ceasefire as soon as Bangladesh was liberated. Moscow was “concerned about the possibility of a Chinese
intervention.”
For Pakistan, the end game neared on 14 December, when U.S. consul general in Dhaka, Herbert A. Spivack, received a call from General
A.A.K. Niazi, Pakistan’s Eastern sector commander, to “receive him urgently.” He appeared at the consulate a short time later, along with General
Rao Farman Ali, the military adviser to the governor of East Pakistan. He told Spivack the bombing of Dhaka in the afternoon “had convinced him
that the fighting must be stopped immediately to prevent further bloodshed, even though, he said, his troops were still in good positions and were
not in the danger at the moment”. Farman Ali had in his possession a rough draft proposal he wished the consul general to transmit to New Delhi
so that it could be passed on through Indian channels to the Indian field commander in East Pakistan.
Niazi asked that the U.S. envoy indicate in his transmittal message that the general was prepared to name a representative immediately to
discuss the details of his offer with an Indian counterpart. He hoped the Indian commander would do the same promptly, so that negotiations could
begin at once. Niazi and Farman still wished to avoid using the word “surrender”. Niazi stated he had the full authority to take the stated action.
When Spivack questioned him specifically whether Niazi needed any concurrence by Yahya or anyone else in Islamabad, his reply was definitely
“no.”
Spivack had earlier received a call from East Pakistan Governor A.M. Malik that he and Farman Ali wanted to submit certain ceasefire
proposals. Malik felt a ceasefire was absolutely necessary because the situation had hopelessly worsened. He assured the consul general the
proposals would carry their signatures and would have Yahya’s approval. Shortly afterward, Malik called Spivack again to say he would not
submit the proposals because Niazi had stated talks were taking place between the central government and the U.S. ambassador in Islamabad.
Subsequently, when the State Department received Niazi’s proposal, it immediately asked Farland to see Yahya to ascertain what he wanted
the United States to do. Farland replied Yahya had indicated, through Sultan Khan, that Niazi had the full authority to act along the lines reported
in the telegram from Dhaka.
Yahya authorized passing the proposal to New Delhi and to Bhutto in New York, but the State Department was leery to put itself between
Indian and Pakistani military authorities. So, it directed the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi not to deliver Niazi’s proposal to the Indian government.
Rather, the U.S. Mission at the United Nations was advised to give the message to Bhutto with the suggestion that he pass it on to the Indian
foreign minister in New York or pass it through the U.N. secretary general. Bhutto chose not to give the message to the Indians. After confirming
that Yahya wanted the message delivered, the State Department told the U.S. Mission in New York to deliver the message to the Indian
delegation.
In New Delhi, U.S. Ambassador Kenneth Keating gave Niazi’s proposal to Haksar on 15 December, with a copy to General Sam
Manekshaw, the Indian army chief. In his reply, Manekshaw reiterated his guarantees previously given to Rao Farman Ali, promising to ensure
“safety of all your military and paramilitary forces who surrender to me in Bangladesh”.
Along with the guarantees came Manekshaw’s warning: “I assure you I have no desire to inflict unnecessary casualties on your troops as I abhor
loss of human lives. Should, however, you do not comply with what I have stated, you will leave me with no other alternative but to resume my
offensive with the utmost vigor at 0900 hours Indian standard time on 16 December”.
On 16 December at 2:30 p.m., Gandhi, who had been compared with the Hindu goddess Durga by many Indians, told Lok Sabha that the
Pakistani forces commanded by Niazi had surrendered unconditionally an hour earlier in Dhaka. She hailed Dhaka as “the free capital of a free
country”.
Niazi, who surrendered to Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Aurora, commander of the Eastern sector of the Indian army, remained defiant until
his death. He refused to accept the blame for the surrender, rebuffing the Pakistan war commission’s suggestion that he should have embraced a
hero’s death fighting to the end. He blamed Yahya for the setback.
Niazi claimed he surrendered at the general headquarters’ instruction. Yahya and the other generals told him to surrender because they were