Johnson opposed Pakistan’s use of force: “On the autonomy, if West Pakistan does not accept that solution and seeks to use force, I think we
would want to discourage the use of force. We would do the same in the event of a unilateral declaration of independence.” Because Mujib had
campaigned on East Pakistan’s full autonomy, America feared he could leave Pakistan, if the military rulers refused to grant him autonomy.
Kissinger played the devil’s advocate, asking Johnson, “Why should America do anything at all?”
Johnson explained what was at stake: “If the West Pakistanis use force, there will be a bloodbath or, at least, a situation of great turmoil in East
Pakistan. If it is quickly over, there would be no problem. But if it continues, there would be problems. The Indians, and possibly others, might feel
impelled to intervene if it continued.”
Johnson’s response elicited more questions from Kissinger. “What would we do to discourage use of force? Tell Yahya we don’t favor it?”
Johnson answered: “We would first go to the British to try to get them to take the lead. We shouldn’t take the lead.”
Despite drawing doom and gloom scenarios, the Americans remained convinced that keeping their mouth shut was the best course of action, at
least for the moment. They feared that Yahya would turn against America, because Pakistan suspected Washington of favoring East Pakistan’s
independence. “If we tell Yahya to call off the use of force, it will merely fuel this suspicion,” Van Hollen noted.
Kissinger reminded the group of the position being taken by President Nixon, who was preoccupied with establishing ties to China with Yahya’s
help. “The president will be very reluctant to do anything that Yahya could interpret as a personal affront. When we talk about trying to discourage
the West Pakistan intervention, we mean try to get another country with a history of concern in the area to do it. Would they do it in both our
names?”
Johnson persisted with his line of thinking: “We’ve just begun to look for someone to do it, if necessary. How it is done and the degree of our
association will be decided at the time. Our objective is to discourage the use of force.”
Kissinger continued with his probing questions: Would Yahya soon be gone?
“Not necessarily,” answered Van Hollen. “He could still remain as president, with Bhutto wielding all effective political power.”
Yahya had played off Bhutto against East Pakistan. Kissinger offered a scenario: If East Pakistan became independent, Bhutto would control
West Pakistan
Even if that happened, Van Hollen added, “Yahya will continue to represent the military establishment, which is a significant political force in
West Pakistan. He may retain some limited residual power.” The following exchange of views then transpired:
Kissinger: “In any event, we can’t neglect him.”
Johnson: “No.”
Kissinger: “Let’s keep that in mind.”
Johnson: “It would be most unwise to do anything to prejudice our relations with Yahya. To whatever degree he remains and has power, we
should do what we can to help him.”
Kissinger: “Would it make any difference if we suggested to West Pakistan that use of force would be unwise? You understand I don’t mind
having another country taking the rap.”
Johnson: “When we say ‘discourage‘ or ‘participate in discouraging’ we don’t mean pound the table and tell them they can’t do it. We mean
discuss it with them.”
CIA’s Helms had a different take. While most of the members of Nixon’s foreign policy team viewed Pakistan’s crisis as serious stuff, the CIA
boss labeled it merely as a family squabbling. “We don’t want to get into a family fight,” Helms said
But Kissinger would not drop the ball altogether: “If we could go in mildly as a friend to say we think it’s a bad idea, it wouldn’t be so bad. But
if the country is breaking up, they won’t be likely to receive such a message calmly. If we can get the British to do it, I wish them well!”
Johnson concurred. “We can’t reach a decision now on how to proceed. If we can get someone else to take the lead, okay. If not, we will have
to decide whether we want to do anything. I am not proposing we do anything, but it is a course of action we may have to consider.”
Kissinger: “I think we all see the pros and cons clearly. Alex [Johnson] and I will talk after his talks with the British. Every department will be
consulted before we make any move. We will also have a chance to take the issue before the president, if necessary.”
Van Hollen argued that the British might be very reluctant to do anything. However, if London agreed, it would have some advantages,
“because the Pakistanis are not as suspicious of the British as they are of us.”
Kissinger wondered whether sending the American ambassador in to argue against using force did not buy the United States “the worst of
everything. Will our doing so make the slightest difference? I can’t imagine that they give a damn what we think.”
Helms agreed: “My visceral reaction is to keep our distance as long as we can.”
Kissinger said Johnson would talk to the British if Mujib made a conciliatory speech on 7 March. He then wondered: “What if they declare their
independence? Will we get an immediate recognition request?”
Johnson thought Mujib could seek America’s recognition, “but we don’t have to rush. We can see what Mujib says in his approach to us. We
shouldn’t be the first to recognize. We will want to consult with the British first since they have interests in both East and West Pakistan.”
Van Hollen suggested consulting with Japan, West Germany and France.
Johnson advocated against America being the first nation to recognize East Pakistan’s independence: “We will want to recognize eventually, but
not be the first.”
Kissinger wanted to know what the U.S. consul general in Dhaka should do if the East Pakistanis sought America’s recognition.
He would refer to Washington, Van Hollen suggested.
Kissinger then asked whether Washington should consult with India if a military situation developed. “I wonder whether we should do that. I can
see that, if there is a threat of Indian military intervention, we might wish to advise them that we think it unwise.”
Van Hollen: “The prospect of Indian intervention is very slim in the early stages.”
Kissinger thought the Chinese were unlikely to intervene militarily.
Van Hollen wanted to explore how the United States would act if a real bloodbath developed, something comparable to the Biafra situation,