Mukti Bahini.”
Kissinger then turned to what the Soviet Union was doing, recalling Gromyko’s claim during the previous week that the Russians were
restraining the Indians. Were they doing this?
Helms replied, “All our evidence indicates this is true.”
Kissinger then asked, “In what way?”
Helms replied, “Madam Gandhi gave the Soviets a whole list of things she wanted. She asked them to arrange for Mujibur to be the go-
between.”
“Kissinger: “The Indians have a great ability for determining the impossible and then demanding it.”
Johnson: “The Soviets were quite firm in telling the Indian representatives who went to Moscow that they would not support Bangladesh. The
Soviets don’t want hostilities, if they can be avoided.”
Kissinger: “When I was in India recently, I formed the opinion that if the Indians were prepared to accept a slow evolution in Pakistan, we could
work effectively with them, and they would eventually get most of what they want. But they keep lumping all these things together – the refugee
problem, independence for Bangladesh, Pakistani forces on their borders. In their convoluted minds, they really believe they can give Pakistan a
powerful blow from which it won’t recover and solve everything at once. If they would cooperate with us we could work with them on 90 percent
of their problems, like releasing Mujibur or attaining some degree of autonomy for Bangladesh, and these steps would lead eventually to their
getting it all.”
Van Hollen: “The Indians don’t have complete control over the Mukti Bahini. They couldn’t stop them all if they wanted to.”
Kissinger turned to Saunders and said, “Weren’t you with me when I talked with the [Indian] army chief of staff? He was so cocky, he thought
he could defeat everyone in sight, all at the same time. We can’t ask them to shut off the guerrillas. It will get us nowhere.”
Van Hollen offered, “We could ask them to try to curb the guerrillas.”
Kissinger shot down the idea, saying, “No, that’s a nonstarter. We can’t ask them to cut off aid to the guerrillas. It’s an internal affair.”
Helms: “When you fatten up the guerrillas they become a different force. They aren’t the guerrillas any longer.”
Kissinger: “Yahya is a slow learner. He is very deliberate, but if you force him to make a decision, his Moslem instinct may assert itself, and
perhaps he will start taking rapid action.”
Moorer: “If the Indians really want to punish the Pakistanis, they may be ready to go all the way to a break to do it.”
America’s efforts to undertake intensified relief efforts to allow Yahya an avenue for a peaceful solution in East Pakistan was highly ineffective
because this strategy underestimated India’s resolve to use military force. America’s active diplomacy – instead of Kissinger’s decision to stay one
step behind – could have helped Yahya open up his eyes and see his ruin in East Pakistan, leading him to develop pragmatic policies that could
result in an entirely different outcome than that which actually happened. Kissinger also failed to realize the depth of India’s historical distrust of
America. Given the divergent interests of India and the United States and their often-acrimonious ties, one would be hard-pressed to imagine
Gandhi could put her full faith and confidence in Nixon to come to her rescue in a real crisis.