“Judging by Kissinger’s tone during the entire conversation, one got the sense that the White House is nervous about the fairly complicated
situation in which the United States has found itself given the current development of events on the Indian subcontinent,” he explained.
He added, “The fact that the Soviet Union, not the United States, will gain all the political benefits if Bangladesh appears as a new country in
Asia as a result of current events . . . has caused the hasty attempt to transfer the dissatisfaction over the situation in South Asia that is developing
unfavorably for the United States onto Soviet-U.S. relations.”
On 10 December at 10:51 a.m., Nixon met with Kissinger in the Oval Office for another round of discussion on South Asia. Nixon began by
telling Kissinger about the protest the State Department was instructed to lodge about the strafing of U.S. military planes, (belonging to the U.S.
defense representative and the United Nations ) on the ground in Pakistan, by the Indian Air Force. Nixon wanted to make certain that the protest
had indeed been made.
Kissinger said the State Department did not promptly nor effectively carry out White House instructions. Then he briefed the president on the
latest in the subcontinent. “I want to tell you what I have done, tentatively, subject to your approval. They’ve got this East Pakistan, they’ve got the
offer of the commander of the Pakistan forces in East Pakistan to get a ceasefire and so forth. They [the State Department] were going to run to
the Security Council and get that done. We don’t want to be in a position where we push the Pakistanis over the cliff. So I told them to link the
ceasefire in the East with the ceasefire in the West.”
Kissinger said the ceasefire in the East had gone “down the drain”. He added, “The major problem now is to protect the West.”
Nixon nodded, “Yeah.”
Kissinger continued, “I’ve got Vorontsov coming in at 11:30 and I’m going to tell him that what the Pakistanis did in the East was as a result of
what we did. Which is true. I’m going to show him the Kennedy understanding. I’m going to hand him a very tough note to Brezhnev and say this
is it now, let’s settle the conflict, let’s get a ceasefire now. That’s the best that can be done now. They’ll lose half of their country, but at least they
preserve the other half.”
Nixon agreed that “our desire is to save West Pakistan.” He asked for an assurance that the necessary steps were being taken to keep the
Seventh Fleet moving.
Kissinger assured him that “everything is moving.” In addition to the carrier group, Kissinger reported that “four Jordanian planes have already
moved to Pakistan, twenty-two more are coming. We’re talking to the Saudis; the Turks we’ve now found are willing to give five.”
Later in the conversation, Nixon asked when Kissinger planned to meet with the Chinese. At 5:30 p.m, Kissinger replied.
Nixon asked what would be discussed, and Kissinger said, “I’m going to tell them what forces we’re moving.”
Nixon: “Could you say it would be very helpful if they could move some forces or threaten to move some forces.”
Kissinger: “Absolutely.”
Nixon: “They’ve got to threaten or they’ve got to move, one of the two. You know what I mean?
Kissinger: “Yeah.”
Nixon: “Threaten to move forces or move them, Henry, that’s what they must do now. Now, goddammit, we’re playing our role and that will
restrain India. And, also tell them this will help us get the ceasefire.” He indicated he did not want to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union that
China would reject.
Kissinger: “If we stay strong, even if it comes out badly, we’ll have come out well with the Chinese, which is important.”
Nixon: “Coming back to this India-Pakistan thing, have we got anything else we can do?”
Kissinger: “I think we’re going to crack it now.”
Nixon: “Well, the Indians will be warned by the Chinese, right?”
Kissinger: “Well, I’ll have to find out tonight.”
Nixon: “You do your best, Henry. This should have been done long ago. The Chinese have not warned the Indians. They haven’t warned them
that they’re going to come in. And, that’s the point. They’ve got to warn them. All they’ve got to do is move something. Move their, move a
division. You know, move some trucks. Fly some planes. You know, some symbolic act. We’re not doing a goddamn thing, Henry, you know
that. We’re just moving things around, aren’t we?”
Kissinger: “Yeah.”
Nixon: “These Indians are cowards, right?”
Kissinger: “Right, but with Russian backing. You see the Russians have sent notes to Iran, Turkey, to a lot of countries threatening them. The
Russians have played a miserable game.”
In response to Nixon’s question, Kissinger said the Russian threats were vague rather than specific. He felt that the Soviet Union would change
course in light of Nixon’s conversation with Soviet Agriculture Minister Vladimir Matskevich on 9 December. Kissinger felt that Nixon should
make the point that Soviet support of the Indian use of force in East Pakistan raised serious questions as to whether the United States could work
with Moscow on issues of mutual concern.
Looking ahead, Nixon posed the question of whether the United States should recognize the emerging political reality in East Pakistan. “What
do we do about that? Are we going to just say Indian occupation or Bangladesh? Or what? Are we going to oppose Bangladesh recognition?
What’s our position? Is anybody involved on these things?”
He added that what was lacking was a plan, outlining “how we want it come out.”
Kissinger replied: “After the Brezhnev letter came yesterday, we sent a copy of it to Yahya . . . And now Yahya has come back with a proposal
saying ceasefire, negotiations for mutual withdrawal, and negotiations to settle the political future. And, then what will happen on Bangladesh, Mr.
President, is that whatever West Pakistan and these people work out we will accept. But we will not be in the fore, in the front.”
Nixon: “Whatever West Pakistan works out with whom?”
Kissinger: “The negotiations on East Pakistan.”
Nixon: “But India will not agree to negotiations on East Pakistan.”