15 
India Beats War Drum
y September of that year, both India and Pakistan started preparing for a possible war. New Delhi informed Washington that time was
running out for a peaceful solution and India might act by the year end to bring the crisis to an end.
To the Indians, it had become quite evident that the Mukti Bahini, on their own and even after their training in India, would be unable to
face a pitched battle with the Pakistan army. New Delhi could ill-afford to prolong the war by proxy indefinitely because of the fear of a possible
escalation and takeover by the leftists.
In the meantime, Pakistan also started preparing its armada. To the Americans, signals coming from South Asia clearly indicated a looming war.
On 16 September, Saunders and Hoskinson wrote to Kissinger that both India and Pakistan had started taking increased military preparedness.
“In some cases, these surpass those made before the war in 1965. Forces on both sides are now at a high state of alert, and other related
measures have been taken against the contingency of the outbreak of war.”
The most worrisome report, according to intelligence estimates, was that some units of India’s armored division and an independent armored
brigade had begun moving towards the West Pakistan border, opposite Lahore. This move was reportedly intended to warn Pakistan that New
Delhi was ready to face any Pakistani incursion and to discourage any thoughts Islamabad might have had that it could successfully mount a
preemptive strike against India.
However, the analysts wrote, the Pakistanis could interpret the move as an indication of India’s plan to attack Pakistan, and Islamabad could
show some drastic reaction, perhaps along the ceasefire line in Kashmir.
India also stepped up the pace on the political front. It played a guiding role in forming a multiparty Bangladesh “National Liberation Front”,
which was to function as an overall steering committee. The front included, among others, pro-Moscow communists, who were brought in at
Indian and Soviet insistence. At least, the front broadened the base of the Bangladesh movement and strengthened the leftist hardliners against the
pro-West moderates.
In a related move, India’s foreign secretary publicly said India would recognize Bangladesh “very soon”. Gandhi’s major foreign policy advisers,
including Kaul, privately held the view that war was inevitable.
India was coordinating with the Soviets to bring pressure to bear on Pakistan. Gromyko, for instance, had sternly warned Sultan Khan,
Pakistan’s foreign secretary, to refrain from hostilities, but offered no solution to Pakistan’s problems.
Gandhi went to Moscow towards September end, possibly to assess Soviet reactions and support.
The American intelligence had difficulty to say exactly what the situation added up to. Based on statements by India, American diplomats
assessed that it was not actually preparing to begin a direct attack on either East or West Pakistan. They interpreted the military moves taken by
India as defensive measures against the possibility of an attack by Pakistan. They also believed India’s actions were part of its plan to increase
significantly its support to the insurgents, perhaps even involving Indian “volunteers,” but not necessarily geared towards a general war.
India’s strategy, according to this assumption, involved an attempt to capture some of the more isolated border areas in northwest East Pakistan
and establish the Bangladesh government there. America thought that it was the right time to begin preparing for the likely Pakistani reaction by
moving armor up to the Western front if the operation in the East were to begin in early October. The rains in East Pakistan would end soon. The
area would be more conducive to military operations by early October. It appeared that the level of tension and the danger of war, at least by
accident, had increased another notch in the recent weeks. War might not yet be the most likely outcome, but a grave sense of inevitability hovered
over the subcontinent, influencing actions on both sides. Under these conditions and with tensions running so high, events could gain a momentum
of their own, leading to a war that no one really wanted but all were willing to fight out of fear of losing, if they did not mobilize and go on the
offensive.
Such assumption changed quickly, however. By October, the Americans started to foresee a possible war in South Asia, a realisation that
prompted Washington to leap into action. On 8 October, the State Department sent a telegram to the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan, expressing deep
concern over increasing risks of war over East Pakistan. Johnson instructed the ambassador in New Delhi to seek an immediate meeting with
Gandhi to tell the Indian premier that “we are not convinced that intensified guerrilla activity will achieve results compatible with India’s interests.”
He told the U.S. envoy to strongly urge India to immediately reduce the risks of war by restraining cross-border operations by the Mukti Bahini.
“Should such cross-border operations lead to a conflict with Pakistan, this would have serious effect on US-India relations,” he cautioned.
At the same time, Johnson told the U.S. charge in Pakistan to seek an urgent meeting with Yahya to tell him that “any military action initiated by
Pakistan directed against India would have an adverse effect upon our relationship”.
“You should make clear to Yahya that we continue to believe that the only long-term resolution of the current danger can be found through
progress toward a political solution and accommodation in East Pakistan,” Johnson told the envoy.
While Johnson sent notes to U.S. posts about heightened risks of war, Yahya wrote to Nixon, alerting him of “a warlike situation between
Pakistan and India”. “All available evidence indicates that Indian Armed Forces have been put in a state of readiness and moved to forward
positions for offensive action at a short notice against our frontiers in both the wings,” Yahya wrote. “An armed conflict between the two countries
is likely to erupt, if it is not brought under control immediately.”
Yahya was quick to add that the Russians told the Pakistanis the previous month in Moscow that India would not start a conflict because the
Soviets were exercising restraining influence on India. “Unfortunately, the facts are quite different. The bulk of the Indian forces have moved in
operational positions against our borders after the signing of Indo-Soviet Treaty and there has also been a marked increase in shelling and raids on
our territory since then. Apparently, the Indians are either not amenable to the Soviet advice or are deliberately misleading them.”
He indicated that Pakistan would seek a Security Council meeting to discuss the issue and sought America’s help “for a constructive decision