contact with the U.S. government.
“We told Qaiyum, frankly, what we reported to the United States was at a considerable variance with the ‘hardline attitude’ openly taken by
other Bangladesh representatives. We suggest it might be useful if the Bangladesh government found additional ways of their desire for negotiated
settlement known,” the consulate reported to Washington.
Qaiyum replied he could get signatures of 375 MPAs and MNAs [members of provincial and national legislatures, respectively] on a statement
attesting to their agreement to seek a negotiated settlement. He also offered to have the foreign minister draw up a document explaining their
position and present it to the Americans.
When Qaiyum talked to the political officer in Kolkata, the U.S. relief coordinator for East Pakistan discussed the idea with Yahya in
Islamabad. During the meeting with Williams on 19 August, Yahya refused to deal with anyone under the Awami League banner. The next day,
Farland cabled Kissinger that Williams’ effort to persuade Yahya to reinstate the outlawed Awami League proved to be an “out and out
nonstarter”.
Still, America decided to persist. On 22 August, in a telegram cleared by Sisco, Irwin and Kissinger, Washington authorized the embassy in
Islamabad to inform Pakistan’s Foreign Secretary Sultan Khan about the contacts with the Awami League “on [the] off chance that the Qaiyum
proposals might provide a glimmer of hope for a negotiated political settlement”. The embassy was instructed to stress that the American officials
had just listened to Qaiyum, but formed no judgment on the value of his proposals. America was not seeking to be a mediator, but was willing to
help “as a friend”.
Two days later, Farland requested a private conversation with Yahya after a formal session on narcotic drugs issues with Ambassador David H.
Popper, who was stationed in Cyprus and fighting to combat drug abuse.Farland told the general that many Awami League legislators “were
seriously amenable to the acceptance of an agreement which would maintain the integrity and unity of Pakistan, within the general concept of the
so-called ‘six points,’ if such an agreement could be somehow reached between Mujibur and Yahya.”
“I told Yahya that in making mention of this I wanted him fully to understand that the U.S. government had taken no initiative whatsoever in
gathering this information nor was the U.S. government seeking to play a mediatory role between the government of Pakistan and the outlawed
Awami League,” Farland reported to Washington. “Conversely, I stated that the U.S. government had consistently maintained a diplomatic stance
of non-involvement and had in no way sought out or solicited contacts with the ‘Bangla Desh government’ representatives. However, I noted
Yahya’s many conversations with me during which he emphasized his hope for a return to normalcy and his additional hope that with such a climate
he could turn power back to the people. Since the U.S. government was now privy to this information, I thought that in the interests of the much-
sought-for peace, I should bring it to his attention.”
Yahya was pleased with the ambassador’s gesture.
“Yahya’s reaction was favorable and positive,” Farland wrote to Washington. “He was most happy that I had provided him with this type of
intelligence” and he felt that the United States had been correct in its political and diplomatic posture. Farland added, “Yahya hoped our officials,
with their customary care and exercise of discretion, would maintain appropriate contacts.”
Farland asked Yahya if he saw any major obstacle to a select Pakistan government members’ meeting, unpublicized and on neutral ground in a
foreign country, with key people for whom Qaiyum indicated he spoke. “Yahya replied he would favor such a development wholeheartedly, asking
that in case such a contingency developed, I keep closely in touch with him on this matter generally,” the envoy reported.
Farland then gave his interpretation of the developments, saying several forces were at play: (a) “At least some of the Bangladeshers are
realizing that their independence would be sorely limited by the interests of India; as such independence may be an illusion; and (b) Yahya may be
coming to the conclusion that his appetite wasn’t commensurate with the bite he took.” The second point referred to his unleashing the military on
the Bengalis. In any event, he added, the foregoing represented a glimmer of light amidst the encircling gloom and a hoped-for vindication of U.S.
policy vis-à-vis Pakistan.
On granting Moshtaque a visa to visit Washington, Farland told the State Department he opposed the idea. “To do so would almost inevitably
raise concerns here about our good faith in not encouraging the separatist movement,” the ambassador reasoned. The State Department had
sought the U.S. Embassy’s idea on the suggestion put forward by Qaiyum that Moshtaque be granted a visa to visit Washington to meet with the
U.S. officials there.
While Farland sounded upbeat, on 26 August the CIA gave a negative outlook for the secret talks.
“Although Yahya Khan says he would be agreeable to talks between the representatives of Islamabad and Bangladesh, for the purpose of
seeking a political rapprochement, such negotiations remain unlikely as there is no prospect for the release of the East Pakistan leader Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman,” the agency said in a report.
“Although he has reportedly decided against executing the East Pakistani leader, it is unlikely he would consider halting the trial and releasing
him. The Awami Leaguers, however, have consistently said that Mujib would have to participate in any final settlement, and they would probably
be reluctant to agree to any talks without prior assurance that his release would at least be a subject of discussion.”
Based on the CIA’s input, the State Department backtracked on the talks. On 31 August, it sent a telegram to the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan,
saying, “We do not, however, believe that the time has come for the United States to play any mediatory role.” The department added, “There
may be some merit in carrying out the present honest broker role one step further, i.e., by helping the two sides communicate with each other on
arrangements for a meeting on neutral territory for an exploratory session on the possibility of serious negotiation.”
Washington further advised Farland to verify Qaiyum’s bona fides; the best way to do that was to contact Moshtaque directly. “If he, in effect,
verifies the content of the approaches previously made by Qaiyum, we would then want to inform him that the substance of talks with Qaiyum had
been passed to President Yahya. We would also inform Moshtaque Ahmed that Yahya showed interest in a meeting of Pakistan government and
Bangladesh representatives.”
“Should reactions from both sides to a meeting prove favorable, we could then examine the question whether further U.S. role in providing the
communication link between them would be necessary or desirable,” the State Department advised.
Farland endorsed the State Department’s scenario, indicating he would put forward the suggestion in his meeting with Yahya on 4 September.
The department specifically told the consulate in Kolkata that if Farland received Yahya’s approval, the post should at the earliest opportunity