On 18 December, Bhutto also met with Nixon for some half an hour in the White House. When Nixon asked what he thought the future held for
Pakistan, Bhutto said in the long run he hoped to re-establish good relationships with India. However, this would depend largely on India’s actions
in the weeks ahead. If India intended to crush Pakistan, animosity would last long, perhaps for decades. Bhutto expected the East Pakistan
situation to be very fluid. In the long run, he said, India might find it had bitten off more than it could digest. He asked Nixon to avoid immediately
recognizing Bangladesh, because this would cause big difficulties for Pakistan. Nixon said the time was not yet right to address the recognition
issue.
Bhutto Finally Topples Yahya
In Pakistan, huge demonstrations protested Yahya’s handling of the crisis after the surrender in Dhaka. Faced with public uproar, Yahya handed
over power to Bhutto on 20 December under pressure from the military. Bhutto was brought in as president and martial law administrator by high-
ranking military officers after they had dismissed Yahya. Farland was the first ambassador to meet with Bhutto in his residence at the Punjab House
[annex] in Rawalpindi at 4:30 p.m. for thirty minutes after he became president.
When Farland asked how the power transfer had come about, Bhutto said he had called upon Yahya soon after his return from New York. In a
short but dramatic exchange, Yahya resigned as president and chief martial law administrator. Bhutto was operating under martial law authority,
but said he would end the concept soon, because this was against his character. Asked about the promulgation of the constitution promised for 20
December, Bhutto said the events superseded that. A new constitution had to be written, which would be done as soon as possible.
Regarding Bangladesh, Bhutto rhetorically asked, “Can the two wings even yet be held together?”
Farland said his conversation with the Bengalis indicated that religiously and historically the bond was strong. But the events that had caused
strains since 1947 and the untoward happenings of March 25 onward were matters that he, as a Pakistani and a Muslim, could best judge. Bhutto
acknowledged the historic errors and disasters of the more recent past, but said that, if at all possible, he would strive to reconcile and reunite,
holding the wings in some loose federation.
The ambassador asked whether Bhutto intended to release Sheikh Mujib. Bhutto said he wanted to do so, but his key supporters had warned
him that Mujib’s release “would be tantamount to Bhutto decreeing his own imprisonment”. Bhutto intended to condition the Pakistanis to the need
to free Mujib. He anticipated that Mujib might be exchanged for the thousands of Pakistani prisoners India had been holding since their surrender
in East Pakistan.
Several hours after assuming power, Bhutto told the Pakistanis that Yahya and several other senior officers had retired and Lieutenant General
Gul Hassan Khan had been named the new army commander-in-chief. He also declared that “East Pakistan is an inseparable and indissolvable
part of Pakistan.” He was, however, prepared for talks with the East Pakistani leaders within a Pakistan that could be a “loose arrangement”.
Bhutto’s takeover in Pakistan caused concern in Afghanistan. King Zahir Shah was deeply troubled with the prospect of having to deal with
Bhutto. He described Bhutto as an “unbalanced man” and a “pathological liar”, who was inflexible one moment and wavering the next. Zahir Shah
said Bhutto would seek to strike a balance with the military but wondered how long it would last. It lasted only five years. The Pakistani military
was back in its old game just five years after suffering the most humiliating defeat in its history and losing a part of its country.
The day Bhutto became president, Nixon met privately in Bermuda with the British prime minister. During the meeting, Nixon explained to
Heath his policy regarding the Bangladesh Liberation War. “As we saw it, Yahya badly bungled the situation. We faced the question, should we
keep our communication with Yahya? We decided to do it.”
All America did was to elicit conciliatory steps from Yahya and to try to restrain the Indians. “The major mistake we made was to be too
reassuring. We were the only restraining factor. We knew what the relative numbers were; we knew what the outcome of a war would be. Why
not let it move? I felt that if it was true that her goal was to force Pakistan to surrender in the West, there would be serious repercussions on the
world scene.”
Nixon saw the South Asian crisis as part of a global power play. He said he would seek to prevent the Soviet Union from gaining an advantage
from the creation of Bangladesh.”With respect to the Soviets, we’ll play an arm’s-length game. We won’t recognize Bangladesh,” Nixon told the
British prime minister.
Heath, however, saw things differently. “We feel we must persuade Pakistan to recognize that it has lost the East. We need to put Bangladesh
on a self-sustaining basis, or at least to mitigate its losses. We shall help both West Pakistan and Bangladesh, and also help in the consortium for
India,” he said.
On 21 December, Kissinger informed Nixon that the Bangladesh cabinet was expected in Dhaka by mid-week. The Bangladesh prime minister
told Dhaka radio that his country needed massive foreign aid but that his government would “not touch” any part of American aid because of its
“hateful and shameful” policy toward the new nation’s “freedom struggle”.
Kissinger told Nixon the next day that Bhutto would put Mujib under house arrest as a gesture, but it could be important for setting the tone for
a dialogue with the Indians and the Bangladesh leaders involving Mujib’s release and the fate of the POWs in India’s custody.
On 29 January, Kissinger met with Jha, who was to end his tenure in Washington in April. After an initial discussion on the U.S. military and
economic aid to India and Pakistan, their talks shifted to an upcoming dinner planned by the Indian Embassy and issues related to Bangladesh.
Jha: “On the 28th, you are dining with us.”
Kissinger: “Are you going to invite Huang Hua down? “
Jha: “I am prepared to!”
Kissinger: “And, Prime Minister Meir. She will be here then.”
Jha: “It is too bad we could not have good relations with Israel, but we had to worry about the Moslem reaction or at least neutralize the
Moslems on the Pakistan question. There are many Jews in India. They are very happy. One of the oldest synagogues is in Kerala.”
Kissinger: “Where does the Indian Christian or Jew fit into the caste system?”
Jha: “The caste tradition is so ingrained that it is carried forward even in other religions. There is a church in Madras with separate sections for
Brahmin Christians and non-Brahmin Christians!”