16 
Gandhi Goes to Washington
n 11 October, Jha met with Kissinger to discuss Gandhi’s visit to Washington. Before discussing serious matters, Kissinger told the Indian
ambassador that a U.S. military plane would be provided to bring Gandhi to the Andrews Air Force Base from New York, as Jha had
earlier requested.
When the two turned to serious issues, Jha quickly blurted out a question in an effort to sway the administration from its pro-Pakistan position.
He asked what interest America had in keeping East Bengal a part of Pakistan.
Kissinger replied that Jha had misunderstood U.S. policy. “We had no interest in keeping East Bengal a part of Pakistan,” Kissinger began.
“We did have an interest in preventing an outbreak of war and preventing that issue from turning into an international conflict. As for the rest, we
would not take any active position one way or another.”
Jha pointed out that India was facing tremendous pressures.
Kissinger shot back, saying some of those pressures were self-generated.
Jha, unsurprisingly, blamed Haksar and Kaul for India’s trouble with America. Haksar, he said, was on his way out; maybe Kaul, too. But it
was difficult to tell who would replace him and whether the replacement would be any better. “If we played our hand intelligently,” Jha said, “it
>would even turn out that India might now look for a compensating move to take towards the United States.”
Kissinger promised to reciprocate such gestures in kind, but sounded a note of caution: “We would certainly be ready, but it was important for
India not to be playing with the president. If it turned out that some of our reports were correct, that India was using the visit to the president to
cover an imminent attack on Pakistan, our relations would not recover so soon.”
As Gandhi’s trip approached, the White House started receiving word about India’s concerns that Nixon might mistreat the prime minister. On
29 September Kissinger received a phone call from the former U.S. ambassador to India, John Kenneth Galbraith. He had recently met with
Gandhi, who expressed to him her anxiety about the kind of reception she would receive in Washington. Galbraith said that one of her assistants
told him that “she was afraid of some brush-off at the White House, which would be very damaging.” Galbraith urged that Nixon send a personal
note “saying he is looking forward to her visit, getting better acquainted, understanding her problems on the subcontinent.”
Kissinger assured Galbraith that Gandhi would be received with “special courtesy,” and that the type of note Galbraith suggested had already
been sent to the prime minister. Nixon had written to Gandhi, saying he was looking forward to wide-ranging discussions.
On 8 October Jha met with Kissinger again. The ambassador began the conversation by discussing Gandhi’s upcoming visit. He had noticed
some coolness on the part of the protocol team and wanted an assurance that the prime minister would receive a warm welcome in Washington.
Kissinger reassured Jha of a cordial reception. He then telephoned Robert Mosbacher, the State Department protocol chief, in Jha’s presence to
make sure the ambassador heard that Kissinger had given instructions about the need for a Grade-A treatment for the Indian premier.
Gandhi met with Nixon in the White House on 4 November. Haksar and Kissinger were the only two aides present at the two-hour discussion.
While Nixon met with Gandhi in the Oval Office, U.S. and Indian advisers met in the Cabinet Room. Sisco headed the American team, which
included Keating, Van Hollen, Saunders, and Schneider. Kaul headed the Indian delegation, which included Jha and Maharaja Krishna Rasgotra,
minister for political affairs at the Indian Embassy in Washington.
Nixon suggested to Gandhi that they use the first session to discuss the situation in South Asia and the second session for a discussion of
broader issues, including China, the Soviet Union, and Southeast Asia. Gandhi agreed and expressed India’s admiration for Nixon’s skill in
handling the Vietnam situation and his initiative to establish a normal relationship with China. However, Gandhi feared that Nixon’s China move
posed a serious threat to India's security.
Gandhi observed that America’s each move had been carefully thought-out and well-designed. Nixon said he expected much criticism
domestically from more conservative elements opposed to the normalisation of relationships with China. On the other hand, he was convinced that
the steps had to be taken to bring stability to Asia, which could best be done when the parties could communicate – and this had been his initial
objective.
Nixon then moved right into the situation in South Asia, cautioning Gandhi that an Indo-Pak war would be unacceptable from every perspective.
For this reason, America’s Pakistan policy had been shaped by an imperative to retain influence with Islamabad. He assured Gandhi the United
States had discouraged military actions by Pakistan and would continue to do so.
Addressing the East Pakistan issue, he said Yahya appointed a civilian governor in East Pakistan at America’s urging. Nixon then listed the
results his policies had squeezed from Yahya: Yahya’s amnesty and his promise to welcome back both Hindu and Muslim refugees were among
them. He also cited Yahya’s pledge not to execute Mujib; Yahya’s agreement to pull some military units back from Pakistan’s western border; and
his vow to hold direct discussions with cleared Awami League leaders. Besides, the president noted Yahya’s willingness to meet with a
Bangladesh leader from India and to consider our America’s suggestion that Mujib be allowed to designate the representative.
He said he understood India’s concerns about the refugees, but “the United States could not urge policies which would be tantamount to
overthrowing” Yahya. “It is recognized that Mujib is a core factor in the situation and that unquestionably in the long run Pakistan must acquiesce in
the direction of greater autonomy for East Pakistan, but the situation is extremely fragile and Yahya’s flexibility is very limited in the short run.
Unquestionably Mujib’s fate is an essential aspect of the problem and ultimately he will have to play a role in East Pakistan’s future. However, this
depends largely on the way events proceed in the shorter term. The greatest danger of all would result if either side were to consider that the
military action could provide a solution that only a historical process can settle. Should India resort to force of arms, the current balance suggests
that it would succeed in a military sense but in a political sense there could be no winner.”
He said the military action’s consequences were “dangerous”. In this regard, he said, India’s agreement with the Soviet Union was understood