because the State Department had told everything to the Indian Embassy in Washington. Qaiyum said he told the Indians the Bangladesh
government had not sold its soul to India and that as an independent government, it could talk with any other government it wished, the political
officer reported.
Qaiyum claimed he heard about the Dhar-Moshtaque exchange and pro tested about it to Syed Nazrul Islam, D.P. Dhar and Ashok Ray of the
External Affairs Ministry. He said that he – rather than Moshtaque – had been the one who talked with the U.S. government representatives. If
India did not like what he had done, it was just too bad, he said, as he and his group in the Awami League did not intend to be dictated to by
India. He had threatened to walk out on the Bangladesh government along with some forty-three supporters and go to Pakistan rather than “sell
out” to India.
America’s failure to bring about a negotiated settlement was later raised by Moshtaque during a conversation with the U.S. ambassador in
Dhaka after he became Bangladesh president following Mujib’s overthrow in 1975. Making an appeal for American support for his government,
Moshtaque told Ambassador Davis Boster on 20 August 1975, that Washington “must not lose the opportunity today which we had lost in 1971,”
according to a telegram sent by the U.S. Embassy in Dhaka to the State Department.
The Awami League’s fear of a leftist takeover of the guerrilla movement, its desire to be free from India’s dictatorial grip, and its resolve to save
Mujib – coupled with its fear of massive destruction and loss of lives if a war broke out – prompted the Bangladesh leaders towards seeking
negotiations with Yahya. Moshtaque might have been movitated by his rivalry with Tajuddin, who enjoyed little support among most of his senior
colleagues in the Awami League. The Bengalis feared an all-out war would reduce East Pakistan to ruins, plunging them into an almost
insurmountable task of rebuilding the free country from ashes. They were frightened out of their minds by other thoughts as well, such as the effect
of a prolonged guerrilla war as witnessed in Vietnam, or India potentially annexing a part of East Pakistan to resettle the refugees along the
borders. Moreover, they worried that if India succeeded in slicing East Pakistan and West Pakistan would hold a big chunk of Kashmir, they might
be caught in a diplomatic wrangling between Islamabad and New Delhi in which their interests would become a lesser priority. In the end,
America’s dilly-dallying in arranging a meeting, as well as Yahya’s reluctance to talk with the Bengali leaders in Kolkata and Mujib, along with
India’s ultimate resistance to any direct talks, thwarted the idea that Washington did not originate but fervently pursued.