statements, especially on the Vietnam issue. On 24 June 1972, he instructed his former Treasury Secretary John Connally, who was sent on a
diplomatic mission by the president after he quit his cabinet post, to be tough in his talks in New Delhi.
“I would like to emphasize that it is essential that you take the strongest stand on this issue and would like to reemphasize the importance I
attach to your maintaining the toughest and most aloof demeanor during your Indian leg in the face of these Indian attacks,” Nixon advised his
emissary. “The Indian press is suggesting that your visit to Delhi is associated with an effort by me to admit past mistakes in our policy towards
India as part of an apologetic move to re-establish better relations. Thus, it is essential that you not contribute to this impression, which can only
invite further Indian insolence. It is also essential to our strategy vis-à-vis Hanoi and other countries that we in no way contribute to the impression
that we are buttering up a state, which has been in the forefront of vitriolic attack against my recent Vietnam decisions. You should make it very
clear from the outset that the United States cannot accept continuing anti-U.S. attacks whether they involve the conflict in Southeast Asia or some
other aspects of U.S. policy. I know I can count on you to ensure that this climate is clearly established during your stay in India.”
The Nixon White House saw the South Asian crisis from a much wider perspective, as revealed in a 9 December 1971 conversation between
the president and his aide. In the Oval Office meeting, Kissinger repeated his warning of the dangers he saw if India dismembered Pakistan: The
impact of a U.S. ally’s dismemberment would “be severe in Iran, in Indonesia and in the Middle East.”
Referring to the ongoing war between India and Pakistan, he said “there is no good deal possible any more at this stage. And, if the Russians
want to press it to a brutal conclusion, we’re going to lose.” He saw possibilities, however, in the “conciliatory” letter from Brezhnev. The Soviets
wanted a Middle East settlement, a European security conference, trade with the United States, and a summit meeting. Also, the Russians possibly
did not want to push the United States and China closer together.
“So we are not without assets,” Kissinger added.
To scare the Indo-Soviet axis, Kissinger told Nixon that America could “warn the Russians and the Indians that ... Kennedy made a
commitment to Pakistan against aggression from India.” “Secondly,” he added, “we should move that helicopter ship and some escort into the Bay
of Bengal,” ostensibly to evacuate the Americans. He was not, at this point, recommending introduction of the carrier. “From the Chinese angle, I
would like to move the carrier. From the public opinion angle, what the press and television would do to us if an American carrier showed up
there.”
Nixon asked: “Can’t the carrier be there for the purpose of evacuation?”
Kissinger: “But against whom are we going to use the planes? Are we going to shoot our way in?”
Nixon asked what good it would do to move a helicopter ship into the area.
Kissinger said it would be “a token that something else will come afterward.” He also recommended letting “the Jordanians move some of their
planes. And I’d get the Indian Ambassador in and demand assurances that India doesn’t want to annex territory.”
Kissinger again highlighted the differing approaches to the crisis adopted by the State Department and the White House. The department, he
said, “would propose a ceasefire in the West in return for in effect our recognition of Bangladesh.” Such an approach would constitute “a total
collapse” and “it would hurt us with the Chinese.”
Nixon, however, saw the need to take into account the situation’s “realities.” “Pakistan’s partition was a fact,” he said. “You see those people
welcoming the Indian troops when they come in.” “Why then,” he asked, “are we going through all of this agony?”
Kissinger replied: “We are going through this agony to prevent the West Pakistan army from being destroyed. And secondly, to retain our
Chinese arm. And thirdly, to prevent a complete collapse of the world’s psychological balance of power, which will be produced if a combination
of the Soviet Union and the Soviet armed client state can tackle a not insignificant country without anybody doing anything.”
Kissinger felt that if the United States would “put enough chips into the pot” it could persuade the Soviets “for their own reasons, for the other
considerations, to call a halt to it.”
Nixon asked: “What are we going to ask the Russians to do?” Kissinger: “Ceasefire, negotiation and subsequent withdrawal.” He added:. “But
we’d have to clear it with Yahya first.”
Nixon: “Ceasefire and negotiation on what basis.”
Kissinger: “Between the Awami League and Islamabad.” He added “on the basis of the December 1970 election,” and “within the framework
of a united Pakistan.” Withdrawal, he said, would occur after the negotiations.
When Nixon asked what the United States could do to influence the outcome, Kissinger replied: “I would keep open the possibility that we’ll
pour arms into Pakistan.” If the Soviet Union could ship arms to India, Kissinger said, why should the United States not do the same to Pakistan?
“I don’t understand the theory of noninvolvement,” he said. “I don’t see where we will be as a country. I have to tell you honestly I consider this
our Rhineland.” He warned: “If the Russians come out of it totally cocky, we may have a Middle East war in the spring.”
But Nixon was concerned about the implications of taking a hard line. “We have to know what we are jeopardizing,” he said.
Kissinger responded: “You are jeopardizing your relationship with the Soviets, but that is also your card, your willingness to jeopardize it.” Not
to play that card, Kissinger suggested, would be to concede the Soviet Union a dangerous victory.
Nixon said opponents of his South Asian policy worried about jeopardizing Indo-U.S. relations.
Kissinger: “You could argue that it will help us in the long term with the Indians.”
Nixon: “I don’t give a damn about the Indians.”
Kissinger later sought to smooth out the rough edges of Indo-U.S. relations caused by America’s support for Pakistan. On 15 April 1974, he
told Swaran Singh, “Whatever our views in 1971 were, now that Bangladesh is independent we want it to be stable. In any case, our position in
1971 had nothing to do with India or Bangladesh. It was affected by our opening to China and our relationship with the USSR.”
Singh had a different issue on his mind. “We also have information that the Chinese are keen to come to Bangladesh soon. We assume that they
will use the internal situation for their own advantage.” he told Kissinger.
Kissinger: “I have the same impression. They talk in terms of the closeness of the Bangladesh and the Chinese people.”
Singh: “They have some people who will be quite active there. They will use their presence there to generate anti-Indian acts. But we will have
to live with that problem. We are neighbors of China, and there is nothing we can do with the fact that they are there and will be active in their own