misconstrued as giving aid and comfort to anti-government elements or as constituting intervention in the forthcoming election campaign or in any
aspect of the domestic affairs of Pakistan,” McConaughy promised.
His pledge was intended to blunt “systematic efforts of elements unfriendly to the United States to propagate fabricated stories of American
sympathy with opposition parties in Pakistan.”
“I said that our people had not been guilty of any such impropriety, but I knew that allegations to this effect had been manufactured out of the
whole cloth and that unfortunately they seemed to have been given some degree of credence,” the ambassador reported to the State Department.
Ayub replied that he had heard similar reports, especially about East Pakistan – a statement Yahya would mimic two years later. He said the
reports charged the Americans with keeping prejudicial contacts with such opposition leaders as Sheikh Mujib, anti-government student groups
and other dissidents. Ayub said the charges asserted that America financed these elements.
“I told him that it was incredible that such preposterous insinuations could be seriously entertained by anyone who knew anything about
American policy. I said that as he knew the Americans were mostly gregarious people who liked to get acquainted with all manner of people
among whom they lived,” the ambassador wrote to Washington.
Borrowing a phrase Ayub had used earlier in the context of the Pakistanis hobnobbing with communist China, the ambassador said the
“Americans could not be expected to ‘go into purdah’ as far as casual social contacts with non-official Bengalis in East Pakistan were concerned.
But I assured him that I had issued new instructions to all our people to use the greatest circumspection so as to avoid any even half-way
reasonable inference that they were consorting improperly with anti-government elements.”
Ayub had said Pakistan’s representatives could not “go into purdah” so far as contacts with Chinese communists were concerned. He made the
comment in response to America’s complaints that Pakistan was consorting with its communist enemy.
Ayub was very pleased with the ambassador’s assurances as was his successor, Yahya, two years later. However, Ayub picked up a book on
his desk, whose title alone, he said had been giving him surprise and shock: The Invisible Government . It was David Wise and Thomas Ross’
book, which describes how various U.S. government agencies conduct secret operations. He said he hoped that nothing like the operations
narrated in the book were actually going on. Pakistan’s foreign office had distributed copies of the book to most of the government officials.
McConaughy wanted to reassure Ayub: “Of course, we were not assisting and would not assist in [sic] any opposition element in Pakistan.” By
the same token, he asserted, “Although the United States recognized the key importance of Ayub to Pakistan’s stability and welfare, we were, of
course, not in any way intervening in his behalf, either, in the election campaign.” Ayub was facing a formidable challenger – Fatema Jinnah, sister
of Pakistan founder M.A. Jinnah – in his re-election bid in 1965.
Five years later, on 25 March 1969, under mounting political unrest, Ayub Khan was forced by army chief General Yahya Khan to quit the
stage, ending his eleven-year rule which was kept afloat by technocrats, the military, and the business mughals in West Pakistan. Yahya made it
look like Ayub let him take over the government through the backdoor on his own volition, which was nowhere near the truth. Yahya simply
pushed him out, but quietly. He later succinctly described his ascension to the presidency: “The people did not bring me to power. I came myself.”
To calm down street agitation and placate the politicians clamoring for civil rights and economic justice, the new military ruler vowed to return
Pakistan to an elected administration. Yahya’s real motive was threefold: to keep a strong central government intact, to prevent East Pakistan’s
entry into West Pakistan’s power structure, and to stop the Bengalis from getting the national political power proportionate to their share of the
nation’s population. The military, however, recognised that East Pakistan’s neglect caused the current crisis and vowed to address the issue their
way.
The new military regime promised to eliminate many of the causes for complaints against Ayub. But Yahya Khan’s longer-range political
objectives – particularly about East Pakistan – and his probable success in attaining these goals, were obscure.
Under these circumstances, Washington faced a dilemma: how closely to support a government that might or might not win public support and
ran the risk of becoming a repressive force striving to preserve the existing social inequalities. Despite these potential hazards, America chose to
cast its lot with Pakistan’s new military strongman, whom Nixon’s associates described as a “tough” general – “a splendid product of Sandhurst”
with a “good sense of humor” and pukka shahib manner.
“Our conclusion is that we should support Yahya, but should seek to expand the leverage of our assistance to increase chances of a satisfactory
political solution,” the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan advised the State Department in a cable message, setting the policy tone that would eventually
lead America to its worst diplomatic flop in South Asia in years.
Just about two years later, on 22 February 1971, Kissinger sent a memorandum to Nixon to brief him on East Pakistan’s fast brewing turmoil.
“The chances seem to be increasing that we might before long be faced with an internal crisis in Pakistan that could over time have far-reaching
implications for our interests in South Asia,” the memo said. “I have ordered some contingency planning and want to describe the situation as it
now stands.”
The immediate potential for trouble, Kissinger explained, arose from the hard negotiations that were about to begin over writing Pakistan’s new
constitution. The main issue was the power relationship between East and West Pakistan.
The dominant political leaders – Mujib in East Pakistan and Bhutto in West Pakistan – had failed even to begin the process of forming an
informal consensus on the new constitution. Yahya remained committed to turning his military government over to the politicians, but vowed not to
“preside over the splitting of Pakistan”.
The constituent assembly was scheduled to meet on 3 March to draft a constitution within 120 days for Yahya’s approval. Kissinger continued,
in the same memo, that the odds seemed high against the assembly’s success to write a constitution acceptable to the major actors – Mujib, Bhutto
and Yahya.
Kissinger predicted that, Mujib planned to stick with his demand for the East wing’s autonomy, and if he did not get his way, he was very likely
to declare East Pakistan’s independence.
“This may be a negotiating ploy on his part, but strong and growing provincial nationalism limits Rahman’s flexibility and he has considerable
organisational momentum behind his maximum demands,” Kissinger said. “Further evidence of his intentions can be seen in recent approaches he
has made to the United States and other diplomats to play a peacemaking role to avoid an East-West civil war, if he does not get his way and
makes a unilateral declaration of independence.”