Secret China Plan Makes Gandhi Nervous
On top of all this, India got nervous after it learned from Kissinger about Nixon’s secret overture to Beijing. Gandhi countered America’s move by
hurriedly signing a pact with Moscow – a strategic milestone that made India confident of a favorable outcome in a future war against Pakistan.
With India’s diplomatic offensive over East Pakistan gaining traction internationally, New Delhi got down to rethinking its strategic move, ultimately
deciding to end the East Pakistan crisis through military intervention.
On 9 April 1971, following a Senior Review Group meeting on Sri Lanka and Pakistan, the panel moved into an executive session at the
request of the CIA member. CIA’s Deputy Director Cushman began by summarizing a request from a undisclosed party that had been circulated
in a short memo before the meeting. Some analysts speculated the undisclosed party was India, which asked the intelligence agency to supply
unmarked small arms to what it called “freedom fighters” in East Pakistan.
Cushman remarked that the CIA had a secure channel through which it could deliver such weapons but that his personal opinion was that this
operation would not remain secret much beyond that. He noted that his boss did not favor the project.
In response to Kissinger’s query, Irwin said he was “reluctant” to provide arms. Joint Chiefs Chairman Admiral Moorer felt that it would be
“very wrong” to be working on both sides of the East Pakistani issue at once. Cushman also felt that an affirmative response would pre-judge the
larger policy issue that the Senior Review Group had been discussing.
Kissinger summarized by saying that he felt that Nixon would never approve this project. Sisco said that he felt the Indians were “testing us.” It
was one thing, he noted, for the United States to close its eyes to the reports of clandestine Indian support for the East Pakistani resistance
movement, but quite another thing for America to collude with the Indians in this supply.
Kissinger stated his assumption that the United States could not, in any case, deliver enough equipment to make a difference to the outcome in
East Pakistan. Moreover, he assumed that the Indians would have sufficient stock to supply any small arms that might be needed.
Blee said that the Indians lacked a large enough quantity of unmarked, unattributable weapons to supply what the East Pakistanis needed, in the
quantities they needed, so there would be a need if someone wanted this done. On the other hand, he did not see how Indian supply could make a
difference in the outcome of the contest between the leftists and the moderates to gain control over the East Pakistani nationalist movement. He felt
that it was a foregone conclusion that the leftists would win out. That was a very serious judgment, Kissinger said, which should be taken into
account in the U.S. policy considerations. “If we feel that, under present circumstances, the radicals are likely to take over, that could affect our
judgment about the necessity of bringing the civil war to an end.”
He continued that if the United States had been presented with a choice on 25 March, it would certainly have urged Yahya not to take military
action. But he recalled that everyone had been taken by surprise when the negotiations broke down and Yahya turned to military action.
Sisco noted that the United States and Yahya both had a large stake in the preservation of moderate leadership in East Pakistan. He noted that
he had said privately to Hilaly that Pakistan had some interest in allowing those whom it had jailed to play a role in establishing a moderate
leadership in East Pakistan.
Sisco said the CIA, much earlier than the State Department, had indicated the likelihood of Yahya’s taking recourse to military action. The State
Department had been much more inclined to see a negotiated settlement and, therefore, had worried less about this issue before 25 March.
Blee noted that the main opposition to Mujibur Rahman was the leftists. The moderate leadership was now mostly either in jail or dead.
Sisco described Hilaly’s present line about how Yahya was planning to concede the “six points” to East Pakistani leadership.
Kissinger wondered why Yahya would have tried a military solution if he had expected to end up conceding anyway.
Blee surmised that the army had misjudged its ability to quickly subdue East Pakistan.
The discussion then turned to what the Indians wanted, and Kissinger pointed out that in earlier sessions the panel had assumed that the Indians
wanted a unified Pakistan.
Blee replied that he felt what the Indians had really wanted was a very loose confederal relationship between East and West Pakistan.
Irwin noted that the Indians had proposed rescheduling the Indo-U.S. bilateral talks – from January, because of the election, to 24-25 May. He
noted the problem of going to New Delhi without stopping in Islamabad. Saunders noted the difficulty of going to New Delhi if the East Pakistani
insurgency were continuing and the West Pakistanis were holding India responsible for fueling it.
Kissinger showed great reservation, noting that Nixon “had a special feeling about Pakistan”. He said he felt this problem would have to be
checked with the president.
The assumption underlying the discussion after Kissinger asked individuals’ views on the Indian request to provide arms to the guerillas was that
there was no question of approving it.
The Central Intelligence Agency produced an analysis of South Asia on 12 April, examining “the present and prospective state of the Pakistani
civil war, the role of India and other powers.” It gave an outlook for Pakistan’s two parts – “if the Bengali uprising should be put down and if it
should succeed.”
The study said that when Pakistan launched the crackdown on 26 March, the military leaders probably expected to destroy the Awami League
and regain effective control of East Bengal in days, if not hours. They clearly miscalculated.
While precise figures were unavailable, large numbers of the 13,000-man East Pakistan Rifles remained intact, as did the several Bengali units of
the Pakistani army. Despite serious logistic and leadership problems, these armed cadres continued fighting the Pakistani forces.
“The prospects are poor that the 30,000-odd West Pakistani troops can substantially improve their position, much less reassert control over 75
million rebellious Bengalis,” the CIA observed. “This is likely to be the case even if the expeditionary forces are augmented. For most of East
Pakistan’s residents, the time has come for a separate Bengali nation.”
Whether the Pakistan army would face widespread non-cooperation or continued active resistance would depend partly on how much help
India gave the Bengalis. East Bengal’s vast land frontiers with India would make it impossible to prevent the movement of arms and guerrillas
across these extensive borders.
Significant evidence – including observation of weapons being trucked into East Bengal from the Indian border – showed that some arms