Kissinger asked what the choices were, adding, “You can’t go to war over the refugees.”
Jha said some people wanted to arm the refugees and send them back into East Pakistan. Others advocated bringing pressure on Yahya. The
prevailing high level of tension could result in serious disruptions in the already unstable West Bengal. It could also pose a serious threat to Indo-
Pak relations, which in turn would have a “backwash” effect on Indo-U.S. affairs. Jha said he hoped the president could reply to the prime
minister’s letter in such a way as to convey support for India in international forums and inform her of what the United States was advising Yahya.
Kissinger asked what the United States could do, noting Yahya claimed he wanted a political settlement.
Jha said what India needed was a sense of movement in that direction. “We need confirmation that he is moving toward a political settlement,”
he said.
Kissinger said East Pakistan’s evolution should be “gradual and most delicately handled”. He told Jha he was unsure if an “independent East
Pakistan is in India’s interest.”
Jha replied India did not favor Pakistan’s breakup, nor could he see Pakistan surviving. India feared guerrilla activity and China’s involvement
eventuality in East Pakistan, an eventually that he predicted would tear the Muslim nation apart.
Kissinger advised the ambassador to tell Gandhi, “We are concerned and are doing here what we can with a low visibility.”
Jha said Gandhi wanted to keep the situation under control, but needed a feeling of confidence from Nixon’s reply to her letter.
Kissinger assured the response would reflect Washington was “trying to move in a constructive way”.
Jha again stressed the need for some indication of support for India in international organizations.
Kissinger responded that Nixon had “personal influence” with Pakistan, which needed to be used privately.
By June, the Americans had started voicing their opinion that Pakistan’s partition was unavoidable. On 3 June, the U.S. ambassador to India
told Kissinger, “East Pakistan will eventually become independent.” He advocated that America move to resolve the crisis and retain its influence
with the Bengalis.
But when Nixon and Kissinger, who were deeply submerged in their secret China plan, discussed Keating’s outlook on 4 June, they disagreed
with the ambassador. Kissinger said, “It was important to buoy up Yahya for at least another month, while Pakistan served as the gateway to
China.”
Nixon, widely known for his disdain of Indian leaders, replied: “Even apart from the Chinese thing, I wouldn’t do that to help the Indians. The
Indians are no goddamn good.”
Nixon fumed that every U.S. ambassador who went to India “got sucked in”, including Keating.
Bangladesh: “Ripe Field” For Communism
Kissinger saw no sense in Keating’s advice. “If East Pakistan becomes independent, it is going to become a cesspool. It is going to be 100 million
people, they have the lowest standard of living in Asia, no resources. They’re going to become a ripe field for communist infiltration. And, then
they’re going to bring pressure on India because of West Bengal. So the Indians in their usual idiotic way are playing for little stakes, unless they
have in the back of their minds that they could turn East Pakistan into a sort of protectorate that they could control from Calcutta.”
Nixon concluded that all the Indians had in mind was to damage Pakistan.
On 6 June, Farland met with Yahya. He told the general that the continued stream of refugees indicated a serious situation in East Pakistan. “I
pointed out that the embassy continued to receive reports of Hindu villages being attacked by the army, that fear is pervasive and that until this
situation changes the refugees will continue to cross over into India,” Farland said in a cable to Washington.
He cautioned Yahya that the Hindu exodus, if not checked, could lead to a military clash with India. “I said that the continued massive flow of
the refugees remains the most explosive aspect of the East Pakistan situation.”
Yahya did not admit the Hindu repression. He said “he was equally seized with concern over the refugee situation and realized all of its
ramifications and its potential for the direst of developments.” He told Farland that every effort was being made to seal the borders and to expedite
the return of the refugees. He promised to give this matter his continuing attention. He insisted that his information indicated the outflow had
substantially decreased and that many were moving back into East Pakistan.
Yahya’s assessment differed vastly with reports reaching Washington. On 9 June, Irwin painted a bleak picture of the East Pakistan situation. In
a memo to Nixon, he said the people, fearful of army action, were hesitant to return to work, whether in government offices or the private sector.
There was evidence of an increasingly organized insurgency, including guerrilla disruption of transport and commerce as well as intimidation of
those who ventured to cooperate with the martial law administration. Yahya’s political initiatives had thus far failed to draw any significant
response. There was a continued low level of law and order, and a partial breakdown of the local government apparatus, outside major urban
areas where the military had achieved some security.
With no progress in sight in East Pakistan, and India gearing up for war, the Nixon administration sought to use its influence to prevent hostilities
from breaking out. On 11 June, Kissinger met with India’s ambassador to Washington, and cautioned Jha, “If India took unilateral military action,
it would have to mean the end of any assistance on our part. It would turn the issue into an international problem involving China, the Soviet Union
and other great powers, in which the Bengal problem would soon be submerged.”
Defending India’s position, Jha said the presence of six million refugees in most heavily populated states could shift the voting balance for the
communists, especially in West Bengal. “It was a matter in India of its internal stability – there was nothing that the government wanted to do less
than to go to war, but something had to be done.”
When Kissinger asked how the situation could be resolved, Jha replied: “What was needed was a political conversation and a political solution,
which he personally believed were unlikely except on the basis of independence for East Pakistan.” By June, India had become convinced that the
only possible solution to the crisis was the creation of Bangladesh.
As Kissinger and Jha talked in Washington, a furious U.S. chargé d’ affaires in India sent a blunt note to the State Department on 11 June.
Noting that many refugees were still pouring in to India, Stone said, “This should be evidence enough that no matter what noises President Yahya