under President Lyndon B. Johnson when America forced Auyb not to invite China to be involved in the 1965 war. But the Nixon administration
miscalculated India’s resolve and failed to understand what was at stake this time around – an opportunity to eliminate a security threat forever.
U.S. Policy Irritates Britain
On 30 September 1971, looking towards his upcoming conversation with Gandhi in November of that year, Nixon suggested that the United
States and Britain exchange information on their talks with her. It was important to do so, he said, so that “she doesn’t come in here and, frankly,
pull our legs.” Nixon told British Foreign Secretary Sir Alec Douglas-Home that the Indians were preventing a settlement of the crisis. His
comments were in response to a suggestion by the Briton to reach out to the Bengalis for a political solution.
By the time Gandhi embarked upon her trip to Washington, Britain saw the possibility of war in South Asia becoming more real. On 4
November, the day Gandhi met with Nixon in Washington, the British cabinet assessed Gandhi’s remarks in London the previous week, which
painted “pessimistic and almost fatalistic views about the East Pakistan situation.”
Gandhi, according to a top-secret assessment by the British cabinet, thought the only chance for a political settlement lay in discussions between
Yahya and Mujib. Even if such discussions could be arranged, the outcome was highly doubtful, because Mujib no longer commanded the loyalty
of Bangladesh activists. Gandhi told the British foreign secretary that India supported the guerillas because it believed they would turn to China if
New Delhi ignored them.
The British prime minister also “gained the same pessimistic impression from his own discussions with” Gandhi, who appeared convinced that
tensions would inevitably grow worse. She told the Britons that the Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship resulted from India’s growing fear of China.
The news of Nixon’s intended visit to Beijing sharpened India’s fear. Heath told the cabinet “there were grave dangers in the present situation;
forces were operating in both India and Pakistan, which could lead to war.”
Britain’s policy regarding the conflict sharply contrasted with that of the United States, causing irritation in London. On 12 December, the U.S.
ambassador Walter H. Annenberg had an extensive discussion with the British prime minister and the foreign secretary at 10 Downing Street (the
British prime minister’s office) on the India-Pakistan situation. He told the prime minister that the United States was calling for an immediate
meeting of the Security Council to halt further fighting in East Pakistan and to prevent the spread of fighting in the West. America intended to
introduce a resolution to this end and sought British support for it.
The Britons had by then been discussing the situation for some time. Heath said that ever since the Indo-Pak situation worsened, the British
government had endeavored to restrain both countries. Such a course, the premier said, held out more hope than taking positions. For this reason,
the United Kingdom had not thought it right to vote for the U.N. resolutions to retain the possibility of acting directly vis-a-vis both governments
now, or in the future.
Both Heath and Douglas-Home thought there was little possibility of stopping the Indian army short of Dhaka. The immediate problem was to
try to bring about a ceasefire and prevent the massacre of the remainder of the Pakistan army in the East, as well as millions of Biharis, the Urdu-
speaking Muslim immigrants from India who collaborated with the West Pakistanis against the Bengalis. The British leaders said any resolution
calling for withdrawal of Indian troops from East Pakistan would be unrealistic and, in any event, would be vetoed by the Soviet Union. It might be
possible to devise a resolution acceptable in the Security Council. They outlined a ceasefire proposal in the West that would require India and
Pakistan to instruct their military commanders in the East to arrange a ceasefire.
Britain was surprised by America’s push at the United Nations for a resolution calling for a political settlement and the withdrawal of Indian
troops from East Pakistan even after India had almost reached Dhaka. The U.S. mission in Britain described London’s reaction in a telegram to
the State Department on 15 December. A day earlier, Sir Stanley Tomlinson, deputy undersecretary at the British Foreign Office, had summoned
the American ambassador to discuss U.S. and UK policies on India and Pakistan. Making clear that he was expressing British government views,
Tomlinson said British ministers and officials were disappointed and concerned that in recent times, American and British policies were marked by
sharp differences on some important problems.
He said the India-Pakistan situation had raised questions within the British government as to whether the two governments acted based on
different intelligence information and political assessments. Further, Britain felt that it really did not know the basis for the U.S. thinking and the
objectives it was pursuing. He said that some specific aspects of the American policy – and such as attempts to arrange talks between the Bengalis
and Yahya – were puzzling or disturbing to Britain.
Tomlinson said he did not know the extent of U.S. contacts or information vis-a-vis Bangladesh representatives. Based on the information
available to them, British officials were convinced that the Bangladesh leaders would not settle for anything less than complete independence. He
said Britain was not itself advocating Bangladesh independence. A confederal arrangement or any other solution worked out between West and
East Pakistan would be acceptable to London. But a stark reality led Britain to conclude that independence was inevitable. If America assessed
the situation differently, Britain would very much like to know.
Tomlinson noted that British officials had been puzzled by statements by a high U.S. official that America believed that negotiations – which
Washington had been trying to facilitate between Pakistan and the Bangladesh representatives – could have led to positive political results. Britain
wondered whether America had information other than what had been available to London at that time, because the the British officials viewed that
even if such talks could have been arranged, they provided little hope for progress, if at all.
Tomlinson said Britain wanted to learn the background of American thinking on this proposal. Britain’s main objective now was to prevent
massacres of the Pakistani forces and the Biharis in East Pakistan. Britain believed that the only organized force that could prevent such horrors
was the Indian army. Britain had been assured by New Delhi that the Indian forces would strive to minimize the loss of life and ensure humane
treatment. Britain believed it would be a serious mistake to insist that the Indian forces withdraw immediately, even if that were a realistic
possibility. Tomlinson reiterated what the prime minister and the foreign secretary had said previously, i.e., British assessment was that India had no
territorial aims. Despite some equivocation on Azad Kashmir, he said that statements made by Gandhi and Swaran Singh could be taken at face
value. As the two talked, information reached London that America would accept language along the lines proposed by Britain for a Security
Council resolution.
On the diplomatic front, except for China and the United States, no major power openly supported Pakistan’s efforts in East Bengal. Moscow