honors his memory in an independent Bangladesh that he prophesied and supported.
Why did America continue to support Pakistan despite having full knowledge of these atrocities?
Peter Constable, country director of Pakistan at the State Department, told the House Committee on Foreign Affairs in 1973 that when the East
Pakistan tragedy began, America developed a policy that had three objectives: to provide humanitarian aid, to encourage a political settlement and
to prevent war.
Many in the Nixon administration, including Kissinger, blamed the president’s China policy for the disastrous posture. America’s disdain for
India, however, could be traced to the pre-partition time as far back as 1942 – when a U.S. technical mission invited by the Indian government to
investigate India’s industrial resources to recommended production of war materials – came under harsh criticism in the Indian press. America
often faced accusation, even during British rule, that it interfered in Indian politics. President Roosevelt’s personal envoy Colonel Louis Johnson
faced such a charge during the Cripps Mission. Ironically, the Americans consistently had always sought to avoid such accusations. It was
America’s traditional strategy not to be charged with interference, plus Nixon’s personal anti-Indian mindset, that guided the administration not to
press Yahya despite pleas by American diplomats to do so.
India’s involvement in the Bangladesh war was perhaps more fortuitous than preplanned. New Delhi’s war policy evolved gradually, shaped by
events at home and abroad. Until 25 March, the Indians believed their interests were better served by a united Pakistan in which the Bengalis
would be the dominant force. When the Pakistani military cracked down in East Pakistan, India’s estimate of its own best interests shifted in favor
of an independent Bangladesh under a moderate leadership.
India opted to take advantage of the opportunity after it had solidified its position militarily with its treaty with the Soviet Union. Its spectacularly
successful campaign to generate a groundswell of support worldwide for the Bengalis” plight made its task easier. Initially, India showed reluctance
to create Bangladesh by force, despite widespread support for it in parliament. Gandhi’s decision to support the guerrillas was based on her
calculation that if New Delhi did not support them, the insurgents would turn to China to India’s peril. She chose to march on the warpath based
on her conviction that negotiations would not work even if Mujib and Yahya hammered out a deal, because she believed the insurgents were no
longer loyal to the Bengali leader.
Gandhi also suspected Yahya was not really interested in negotiations that would install Mujib in power. Yahya’s moves, she concluded, were
just a smokescreen. Her views were solidified by Yahya’s attempt to hold a farcical election to fill the parliament seats that he had declared vacant.
The formation of a civilian government with discredited right-wing Bengali politician Nurul Amin at its head and Bhutto as his deputy served
another blow to Yahya’s credibility. India had a lingering suspicion of Bhutto, whom the Indians considered the 1965 war architect. New Delhi
was also concerned China could directly intervene in Pakistan’s favor.
Ultimately, India saw the crisis as an opportunity to weaken its main enemy. Pakistan had humiliated India in 1965. New Delhi was determined
this time around not to face a defeat. India figured a weak Pakistan would greatly simplify its defense problem. New Delhi, therefore, covertly
supported the Bangladesh movement, while putting its military on war footing, should the need be. Indian public opinion also sang out the same
hymn on Gandhi’s policy. The Indians felt the effects of the crushing refugee burden, especially in West Bengal. Above all, most Indians saw
Pakistan as a threat that could lead to war again. Why not eliminate that danger when the opportunity knocked on the door?
Despite Yahya’s use of brutal force in East Pakistan, many Bengalis still wanted a peaceful solution. Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed, foreign
minister of Bangladesh government-in-exile in India, was among them. An admittedly pro-Western and right-wing politician, Moshtaque
unequivocally favored strong ties with the United States. He opposed communists, as did a majority of the top Awami League leaders. He had
been widely held as the man who hatched a conspiracy in Kolkata to seek a compromise with Yahya, excluding Sheikh Mujib, a story that gained
wide circulation in Bangladesh soon after the war.
In fact, the contacts with the Americans were initiated by Kazi Zahirul Qaiyum, an Awami League parliament member from Comilla, who
claimed he represented Moshtaque. On 31 July, Qaiyum told a political officer at the consulate general in Kolkata that the Awami League leaders
feared extremist elements would take over the Bangladesh movement if the guerrilla war lasted too long. So, they were interested in a political
settlement and were prepared to back away from their demand for total independence. Qaiyum proposed a meeting of the Awami League,
Pakistan, America and India to strike a deal with Yahya. He stipulated Mujib’s participation in the negotiations was an essential prerequisite.
According to Qaiyum’s statements, it was not just Moshtaque, but the entire Awami League leadership – including Syed Nazrul Islam – that
wanted a political deal with Yahya Khan. Qaiyum told the political officer the Awami League leadership was unanimous in their desire for a
compromise settlement with Pakistan.
Despite making an overture to both British and American diplomats in Kolkata at the initial phase, Tajuddin Ahmad, prime minister of the
provisional government, later distanced himself from a U.S.-blessed deal. By then both the Soviet Union and India, which were initially opposed to
breaking up Pakistan, had come out in favor of the Bengali cause. Because of the initial reluctance of Moscow and Delhi to support Bangladesh,
the Bengali leadership had only London and Washington to turn to after forming the Mujibnagar government. The letter that Syed Nazrul and
Moshtaque jointly wrote to Nixon seeking U.S. recognition of Bangladesh on 24 April was mailed from West Berlin, Germany, on 26 May – not
from India.
According to Qaiyum, the cabinet decided that any agreement reached between Mujib and Yahya would be acceptable to it, provided it was
arranged through the “proper channels.” By the proper channels, Qaiyum meant the U.S. government’s participation in arrangements leading to a
pact. The cabinet opposed any deal negotiated via the Soviets, such as the Tashkent Declaration.
The government-in-exile wanted Moshtaque to visit the United States, along with three or four other Bangladesh leaders to discuss ways with
U.S. officials to solve their problems. Qaiyum personally favored total independence. But he and most other Bangladesh leaders were willing to
accept some sort of a confederation. He said the cabinet members “believe that Mujib’s life is more valuable than independence.”
When the State Department sought input from the embassy in Pakistan on granting Moshtaque a visa to visit Washington, Farland opposed the
idea, saying such a step would inevitably raise concerns in Pakistan about America’s good faith in not encouraging the separatist movement. The
State Department had sought the U.S. Embassy’s idea on the suggestion put forward by Qaiyum that Moshtaque be granted a visa to visit
Washington to meet with the U.S. officials there.
Moshtaque met with the political officer in Kolkata on 28 September for 90 minutes. He had been looking for a way to contact the United
States, but was unsure how. When TIME correspondent Dan Coggin interviewed him on 26 September, he asked him how to get in touch with