people are savages.”
He said the United Nations would die “and we cannot have a stable world if we allow one member of the United Nations to cannibalize another.
Cannibalize, that’s the word, I should have thought of it earlier. You see that really puts it to the Indians. It has, the connotation is savages. To
cannibalize, and that’s what the sons-of-bitches are up to.”
Kissinger later told Nixon that Bhutto had declined to give Niazi’s ceasefire proposal to the Indians in New York, according to a memorandum
sent by the national security adviser to the president on 15 December 1971. “Bhutto is apparently being careful to sidestep the onus for the
surrender of East Pakistan,” Kissinger commented.
The latest Indian reports indicated that Dhaka was receiving heavy artillery fire, and three Indian columns had advanced within a few miles of the
city where they were preparing for an attack. He said the Indians were being tough on the transfer of East Pakistan governmental functions to a
new civilian government. The Indians submitted their own draft that included the following: “Recognizes that simultaneously with the ceasefire in
East Pakistan power shall be transferred to the representatives of the majority party elected in December 1970.”
The Pakistanis, meanwhile, had shown a new turn of attitude. They felt that, since East Pakistan was lost, a U.N. resolution legitimizing the
Indian seizure might be unacceptable. Bhutto’s greatest concern was a ceasefire in the West, where heavy fighting continued in Kashmir, but the
principal Pakistani drive appeared to have been blunted. One Indian reserve division was airlifted from the Kolkata area to an undetermined
location on the western front.
Kissinger said a Chinese delivery of additional MIG-19s to West Pakistan might be underway. An undetermined number of MIGs were spotted
flying in the direction of an airfield that had been used in the past as a base for onward flight to Pakistan. He also told Nixon that Pakistan’s U.N.
representative said China would make “an important military move” on 15 December, but no evidence of Chinese troop movements was visible.
Pakistan’s high hopes would remain unfulfilled.
However, since late November, several Muslim countries – including Turkey, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Libya and Egypt – have sent, or were
planning to send, military equipment to Pakistan, including jet fighters and spare parts for Pakistani aircraft. But there was no firm evidence to
corroborate that such equipment had actually been transferred. The CIA reported that a squadron of American-origin Jordanian F-104s was
delivered to Pakistan on 13 December, despite an American embargo on military supplies to both India and Pakistan.
Kissinger told Nixon that the carrier task force, which was transiting the Straits of Malacca, should arrive at a point near the center of the base
of the Bay of Bengal on 15 December in the evening. “Rumors about this move are already widespread in the area where they are being combined
with stories that the United States is considering military assistance to Pakistan,” he added.
On 16 December at 9:30 a.m., Kissinger called Nixon after East Pakistan had surrendered.
Nixon: “On the India-Pakistan thing, Dacca has surrendered and now the issue is...”
Kissinger: “Now, if in the next 24 hours the Indians don’t agree to a ceasefire in the West we are in for it. Up until now, it could be explained
that the Soviets wanted to wait until Dacca had surrendered.”
Nixon: “Has the proposal been put up in...”
Kissinger: “No, it has been tabled and there will probably be a vote today. And, that will be the test.”
Nixon: “Well, they [the Soviets] will veto it.”
Kissinger: “Well, I don’t know. They aren’t saying anything any more.”
Nixon: “Then under the circumstances, would they just continue the war?”
Kissinger: “There are three possibilities: first, the British proposal carries; second, India-Pakistan ceasefire and third, the Indians continue the
war until they smash the Pakistanis in Kashmir. Now we have had another appeal from the Pakistanis last night. Action is picking up in the West
and they are asking for American planes, but we cannot even consider this. If this isn’t settled by tomorrow night we will know the Russians have
put it to us.”
Nixon: “The one thing I am disappointed about, really teed off at, is that you were unable to get out that Indian cabinet meeting thing. We have
got to get it out.”
Kissinger: “We will do it.”
Nixon: “I know there are a lot of pro-Indian people in the State and who are trying to delay this. But I want it. We ought to be pressing the
Indians every day. Now that Dacca has fallen, we have got to get that ambassador in here and tell him the president is outraged about what he has
done using our television and radio facilities to do it.” Nixon referred to Jha’s interviews with the U.S. media.
Implementing Nixon’s instructions, on 16 December Sisco summoned Jha to the State Department. Nixon had told Sisco to warn the Indians
that since East Pakistan had fallen, continued fighting would “have the most drastic consequences on U.S.-Indian relations.” By the time he met
Jha, Sisco had seen press reports that India had already proposed a ceasefire on the Western front. So, instead of conveying Nixon’s warning,
Sisco requested Jha to confirm the proposed ceasefire.
In the morning of 17 December, Farland saw Yahya to urge him to accept India’s ceasefire offer. The general said he already had indicated his
willingness to do so by accepting the General Assembly resolution ten days earlier. He saw no need to reiterate that position. Upon the
ambassador’s further urging, Yahya agreed to consider formally responding to India’s proposal. Before leaving the president’s house, Farland told
Yahya that if he rejected the offer, America would need to evacuate its nonessential citizens from Pakistan, a hint that Washington anticipated the
conflict to escalate. At 3 p.m., Pakistan’s foreign secretary informed Farland that Yahya would publicly accept the offer, bringing East Pakistan’s
nine-month long crisis to an end, but not exactly the way he had wished.