Sisco: “I have asked myself why the Pakistanis haven’t already moved into the United Nations. It would seem to be very attractive to them,
particularly since they are the weaker power and there is a possibility that the United Nations could dampen the immediate military situation. But,
to be a reality, the Security Council would have to defuse the situation and would immediately get into the question of political accommodation. If
Yahya is not able to move toward Mujib directly, why should he not use the United Nations as a facade?”
Kissinger: “Unless he doesn’t want to do it at all.”
Sisco: “I agree. He has three options: Do it directly with Mujib; do it through the United Nations; don’t do it at all. If East and West Pakistan
can’t get together, the United States can live with an independent East Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “We don’t give a damn.”
Sisco: “However, Yahya, by going to the United Nations, will have internationalized the situation which he has maintained is an internal matter.
In these circumstances, he would be forced to deal with Mujib.”
Kissinger: “Does anyone seriously believe India wants a reconciliation between East and West Pakistan?”
Sisco: “I believe India would be willing to go along if Mujib were restored to power by peaceful means. India doesn’t want war. If Mujib were
back in power, he would organize an East Pakistan government and it wouldn’t be long before it was a separate entity or independent. However,
Mujib, in a confederal tie with West Pakistan, would have as much fly-paper attraction for the West Bengalis as would an independent East
Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “You say that a chance of reconciliation exists more under Yahya than under Bhutto. Therefore, the four weeks before Yahya turns
over to Bhutto must be used.”
Sisco: “I say they could be used. If power is turned over to Bhutto, we will have more war in the subcontinent. The Indians have the upper hand
– they will get East Pakistan one way or another. What are our interests? Maybe we can live with a war for three or four weeks. We won’t
become involved, and I don’t think the Russians or Chinese will, either. But we don’t want one power to dominate in the area, and the defeat of
Pakistan would certainly strengthen the Soviet position.”
Kissinger: “You say an opportunity exists to use Yahya to get a reconciliation. But we know that any reconciliation won’t last since Mujib will
go separatist in any event. We tell the Pakistanis ‘let’s have a reconciliation.’ Then we tell the Indians ‘why fight, since you are going to get it
anyway.’ Yahya may say ‘if we’re going to lose anyway, why me? Why not Bhutto?’ ”
Sisco: “Maybe it doesn’t make any difference. If we stay out of it, the situation will evolve by military means rather than peaceful means.”
Kissinger: “That’s a phony. Everyone is for peaceful means, but do you honestly believe there is any chance of getting India to desist militarily? If
the situation were reversed and the Pakistani troops were moving into India, the New York Times , Washington Post and the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee would be committing mass hara-kari , and there would be marches on Washington. When you say we should work for a
peaceful settlement, are we going to help India grab what they want? Maybe we should, but don’t say we have the choice of peace or war.”
Sisco: “But India has the upper hand – they are stronger than Pakistan. I have not put this in terms of choosing.”
Kissinger: “What do you recommend we do?”
Sisco: “We should do nothing for the moment.”
Kissinger: “The president, the secretary of state and I have told the Indians there will be consequences if they start war.”
Packard: “But what can we do? I don’t see that we have any effective leverage on India.”
Kissinger: “We can cut off aid. We can move diplomatically.”
Packard: “Fine – we should, but with what likelihood of success? We don’t know. One alternative would be to back up the Pakistanis, but we
have to evaluate the chance of success and the price of failure.”
Kissinger: “We don’t have to back up the Pakistanis. It’s not outrageous to ask that Yahya be given four weeks to try to adjust the political
situation in East Pakistan. What is India doing other than pressing an attack on East Pakistan with a view to settling the hash of West Pakistan?”
Following the meeting, the Nixon administration intensified diplomatic efforts to avoid an all-out war. Through a secret channel, Kissinger told
Farland that America would send a strong note to Gandhi for India’s failure to respond to the U.S. proposal to withdraw troops from the border.
Gandhi, before she went to Washington early November, told Heath that India had reservations. Washington also contacted Germany, asking
Chancellor Willy Brandt to express his concern to India over the escalating tensions. In addition, Beam was asked to convey to the Russians,
America’s concern.
“We will continue to follow the situation very closely and you can assure Yahya that the president is personally involved in all aspects of the
problem. Please keep me informed via this channel of any additional steps that you believe should be considered here,” Kissinger told Farland.
The same day, Rogers summoned Pakistan’s ambassador to urge Islamabad not to begin a war, noting he had earlier given the same message to
India. The secretary said he had just returned from a long meeting with Nixon, who felt very strongly on the “need for maximum restraint,” a
message that apparently came a little too late. India’s plan was obvious when the top Indian officials, including Gandhi and Swaran Singh,
repeatedly dismissed America’s proposal for a troop withdrawal, but Washington was so deeply engaged in its own strategy that it read little in it.
Rasgotra, during his meeting with Rogers on 24 November, said he offered no suggestions when the secretary said America would take it seriously
if war broke out. The Indian envoy admitted that India and Pakistan were giving two different versions of the situation, but defended New Delhi,
saying it was India that informed America of the situation “as it saw it”. Rasgotra denied the facts of an article published on 25 November in The
New York Times, saying that reporter Sydney H. Schanberg had seen the Indian forces crossing borders into East Pakistan. He acknowledged
that skirmishes had taken place but insisted that India had no interest in precipitating a war – a statement that Washington had, by then, no reason
to accept at its face value.