form of a carrier and other units from the Seventh Fleet, America sought to stop “a Soviet stooge, supported by Soviet arms” from overrunning an
ally.
Nixon believed that China could help restrain India. “I tell you a movement of even some Chinese toward that border could scare those
goddamn Indians to death.”
Kissinger agreed: “As soon as we have made the decision here, we can then talk to the Chinese.”
U.S. Betrayed Pakistan, China Charges
On 10 December, Kissinger and George H.W. Bush, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, met with the Chinese permanent representative
in New York. After giving the Chinese an account of Nixon’s message to Brezhnev and the ceasefire idea, Kissinger encouraged China to join the
war. “If the People’s Republic were to consider the situation on the Indian subcontinent a threat to its security, and if it took measures to protect its
security, the United States would oppose efforts of others to interfere with the People’s Republic.”
He said Washington’s immediate goal was to stop West Pakistan’s destruction. “We are afraid that if nothing is done to stop it, East Pakistan
will become a Bhutan and West Pakistan will become a Nepal. And, India with the Soviet help would be free to turn its energies elsewhere,” an
allusion to Southeast Asia.
Huang Hua, the Chinese permanent representative to the United Nations, apparently took Kissinger’s hint in an unintended way. He responded:
“We are prepared for attacks on the east, west, north, and south. We are prepared to engage in guerrilla warfare once again with millet and rifle,
and we are prepared to begin our construction over again, after that eventuality. And, the private attitude adopted by Brezhnev which we see now,
in which he talks about so-called political negotiations is in fact direct and obvious intervention in the internal affairs of a sovereign country and
something we feel is completely unacceptable, is inadmissible.”
He then added: “We feel that the struggle waged by the people in Pakistan is a just struggle and, therefore, it is bound to have the support of the
Chinese people and the people of the world.
Kissinger: “We want to preserve the army in West Pakistan so that it is better able to fight if the situation rises again. We are also prepared to
attempt to assemble a maximum amount of pressure in order to deter India.
“We want to keep the pressure on India, both militarily and politically. We have no interest in political negotiations between Pakistani leaders
and East Pakistani leaders as such. The only interest that we possibly have is to get the Soviet agreement to a united Pakistan. We have no interest
in an agreement between Bangladesh and Pakistan.
“We are prepared also to consider simply a ceasefire. We are prepared also to follow your course in the U.N, which most of my colleagues
would be delighted to do and then Pakistan would be destroyed. If we followed your course of insisting on ceasefire and withdrawal and do
nothing then Pakistan will be destroyed, and many people in America will be delighted. If you and Pakistan want this then we will do it. That is no
problem for us. That is the easiest course for us.”
Kissinger continued: “It is our judgment, with great sorrow, that the Pakistan army in two weeks will disintegrate in the West as it has
disintegrated in the East. If we are wrong about this, we are wrong about everything. What do you think of ceasefire without political negotiations?
The only reason we want political negotiations at all is to preserve East Pakistan, not to weaken it.”
Huang: “Why should we not condemn India for its aggression against East Pakistan? Why should there not be a demand for the resolution
already passed in the General Assembly which calls for withdrawal?”
Kissinger: “We are not saying we accept the occupation of East Pakistan; we don’t have to accept that. But this would be a resolution for a
ceasefire only. And the Arabs would not accept the occupation of their territory even though there is a ceasefire.”
Kissinger added: “When I asked for this meeting, I did so to suggest Chinese military help, to be quite honest. That’s what I had in mind, not to
discuss with you how to defeat Pakistan. What is going to happen is that the Pakistani commander in East Pakistan, independent of anything we
did, has asked the U.N. to arrange a ceasefire in East Pakistan.”
Huang promised to transmit immediately Kissinger’s message to Beijing.
Kissinger: “We are looking for a way to protect what is left of Pakistan. We will not recognize Bangladesh. We will not negotiate with
Bangladesh. We will not encourage talks between Pakistan and Bangladesh.”
Huang wanted to know if Bush recently met with anybody from Bangladesh. His question stemmed from a story that appeared in the U.S.
media saying Bush had met with a Bengali delegation in New York.
Three weeks earlier, Bush explained, Justice Abu Syeed Chowdhury asked for an appointment in his capacity as a judge in Pakistan. He had his
staff do a background check on the man. Chowdhury then made a personal call, and brought along three men. When their group started
mentioning Bangladesh in the conversation, Bush cut them off, pointing out that Chowdhury was supposed to be seeing him as a judge. He told
Chowdhury’s team that he was barred from discussing Bangladesh matters with them.
Huang: “I am clear now.”
Kissinger: “In any event, no matter what you read, no one is authorized to talk to Bangladesh. We don’t recognize Bangladesh and will not
recognize it.”
Huang said he would immediately send this message to Chou Enlai.
Kissinger had expected China to join the war after India moved its soldiers into East Pakistan. During a visit to China in June 1972, he raised
this point during his discussion with Chou En-lai, noting that Nixon had risked a major confrontation with the Soviet Union to save West Pakistan
and hoped China would come to Pakistan’s aid.
“When I mentioned that we had expected military moves by the People’s Republic of China, Chou was somewhat defensive, pointing out that
poor Pakistani military strategy had crumpled East Pakistan before any outside help would have done any good. He noted that Yahya had
dispersed his forces too thinly; and he revealed that two divisions of Chinese military equipment had been lost without a fight,” Kissinger reported
to Nixon in a memo on 27 June 1972.