As for the Soviet involvement with the Bengali guerrillas, Dobrynin said, “We do not like to be involved in such things.” Dobrynin’s assurance
later proved to be something other than what Moscow actually had in mind.
While Moscow and Washington discussed global politics, New Delhi became concerned about America’s stance on South Asia. On 7
September, Saunders asked Kissinger how to respond to a query from India’s External Affairs minister about how the United States would react if
China attacked India. Singh was told by Kissinger in New Delhi that India “could be reassured concerning continued U.S. support against China.”
But upon his return from New Delhi, Kissinger told Jha “that if China intervened as the result of an Indo-Pakistan confrontation, the U.S.
reaction could not be assured.” Singh was surprised at the apparent change and told Keating, “We would definitely like to know where it now
stands.”
Saunders opposed a formal reply to Singh. He suggested instructing Keating to reply that there was no ground for confusion. America had often
expressed its interest in India’s independence and its consequent concern over an unprovoked Chinese attack. But if India started a war, obviously
the situation would be different.
On 29 September 1971, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko met with Nixon in the Oval Office. He assured that the Soviet Union did not
want this crisis to develop into a full-blown war, which could have serious consequences on the Nixon-Brezhnev summit scheduled for the
following year. He told the American president that Gandhi had assured the Soviet government she would do nothing to precipitate a clash with
Pakistan.
Gromyko’s assurance, however, proved to be an attempt by Moscow to let India achieve its goal without provoking Nixon, which could have
adversely affected the planned superpower summit the following year. Just a few months before the India-Pakistan war broke out, the Soviet
Union decided to side with New Delhi, especially after the signing of the Indo-Soviet pact. As a result, when America raised the South Asian issue
with Gromyko to urge Moscow to restrain India, the Soviet foreign minister retorted that the country that should be restrained first of all was
Pakistan, at least according to the conclusion which the Soviet government had come to on the basis of its observations.
Nixon, however, took Gromyko’s assurance at its face value, and simply observed that Moscow and Washington would need to keep in close
touch with each other on the South Asian situation.
Nixon had reason to accept Russia’s statement as genuine. The U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union, Jacob Beam, told the State Department
that the Russians had kept doors open for cordial ties with Pakistan even after signing the peace treaty with New Delhi. His source of information
was Pakistan’s ambassador to the Soviet Union. Beam met with Pakistan’s envoy Jamsheed Marker before Pakistan’s Foreign Secretary Sultan
Khan’s scheduled visit to Moscow.
Marker told the U.S. ambassador that he did not believe the Soviets had deliberately killed the “spirit of Tashkent. But the support of India
offered greater rewards in enhancing the expansion of Soviet influence and circumscribing the Chinese,” Beam reported in a telegram in September
1971. “Actually, the day-to-day Soviet-Pakistani relations continued normal and the Soviets were still interested in aiding development projects.”
Another sign of Moscow’s willingness to keep Pakistan in good humor came from the fact that the Russians had made all arrangements for its
foreign secretary’s visit, including his stay at Sovietskaya Hotel as an official visitor. “The Soviets have been most cooperative in making
arrangements, including appointments with Gromyko,” Marker told the U.S. ambassador.
In early November, Nixon requested Kosygin to urge India to agree to talks with Pakistan for mutual withdrawal of forces. Kosygin’s reply to
Nixon’s letter was delivered to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow on 3 December. It was transmitted to the State Department from Moscow the same
day. Kosygin said the withdrawal was “scarcely feasible.” He stressed the importance of a political solution and put the onus for such a solution on
Pakistan.
As the full-scale war broke out in South Asia, Nixon sent yet another letter to Brezhnev on 6 December, expressing his “profound concern
about the deepening gravity of the situation in the Indian subcontinent.”
“Whatever one’s view of the causes of the present conflict, the objective fact now is that Indian military forces are being used in an effort to
impose political demands and to dismember the sovereign state of Pakistan. It is also a fact that your government has aligned itself with this Indian
policy,” the U.S. president complained to the Soviet leader.
He warned Brezhnev that Soviet support for India ran “counter to the recent encouraging trend in international relations to which the mutual
endeavors of our two governments have been making such a major contribution,” a reference to the US-Soviet understanding on the Middle East.
Nixon urged Brezhnev to restrain New Delhi from dismembering Pakistan. “I must state frankly that it would be illusory to think that if India can
somehow achieve its objectives by military action the issue will be closed. An ‘accomplished fact’ brought about in this way would long complicate
the international situation and undermine the confidence that we and you have worked so hard to establish. It could not help but have an adverse
effect on a whole range of other issues.”
Brezhnev replied: “The Soviet leaders, already for a prolonged time and not once, have drawn the attention of the president to a dangerous
situation developing in the Hindostan peninsula as a result of the actions of the Pakistani government against the population of East Pakistan. While
applying efforts to prevent an armed conflict between Pakistan and India, we at the same time were firmly convinced – and so frankly stated to the
president – that of crucial importance in this matter would be a political settlement in East Pakistan on the basis of respect for the will of its
population as clearly expressed in the December 1970 elections. Although the American side did not object in principle to the approach above,
we, it must be said frankly, did not receive the impression that the United States acted actively enough and precisely in the same direction that we
were acting, i.e. towards removing the main source of tension in relations between Pakistan and India.”
“In view of all the circumstances,” the Soviet leader continued, “which led to the present conflict, to demand a ceasefire without demanding, as
an organic connection with that question, that the people of East Pakistan in the name of its elected representatives be given an opportunity to
decide its destiny for themselves – would be both unrealistic and unjust with respect to that people, and would not eliminate the causes which led
to the conflict.”
Kissinger called Nixon shortly after receiving the Soviet message. He said the message proposed a Security Council resolution, calling for a
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities, but made no provision for the withdrawal of troops. Kissinger viewed the references in the message to East
Pakistan rather than Bangladesh as a positive sign. He characterized the proposed resolution as unacceptable but “at least a move.”
Nixon said, “Just tell them, sorry; no withdrawal, no deal.”