Muazzam Ali, who owned the Pakistan Press International news agency, was among those who wanted Bizenjo to go to Dhaka. He said he
could send a message across to Dhaka using one of his telex machines that was still working. Bizenjo requested him to send a telex message to
Mujib. The next day, Muazzam Ali brought Mujib’s reply that he would be pleased if Bizenjo could come to Dhaka. When Bizenjo was at the
Karachi airport to depart for Dhaka, his party chief Wali Khan arrived unexpectedly from London. Everybody pressed him to go to Dhaka with
Bizenjo. Wali Khan instantly agreed.
Bizenjo and Wali Khan came to Dhaka on 13 March. From the airport they went straight to the residence of Ahmadul and Laila Kabir, their
political colleagues and owners of the Daily Sangbad newspaper.
When they met with Mujib the next day, Bizenjo straightaway asked Mujib whether he wanted to make a unilateral declaration of
independence. Mujib became very emotional. He asked: “Who is telling whom not to break up Pakistan? You, who were associated with the
Congress, telling me, who was a hardcore Muslim Leaguer and rendered sacrifices for the creation of Pakistan? What an irony!”
They urged Mujib to meet with Yahya Khan and find a way out to ensure the transfer of power to him. Mujib replied Yahya and his colleagues.
would not give him power, even if that meant Pakistan’s break-up. He finally agreed to meet Yahya and asked them to stay in Dhaka as long as
the talks lasted.
Yahya Khan arrived in Dhaka on 15 March. He invited Wali Khan and Bizenjo to meet him at the Government House. They told Yahya that
Mujib opposed secession, but demanded power be transferred to him. Yahya asked Bizenjo and Wali Khan to remain in Dhaka while the talks
continued.
Mujib kept them abreast of the proceedings every day. Initially, the talks went on rather smoothly. Then Yahya Khan invited all the West
Pakistani political leaders to Dhaka and summoned his economic adviser M.M. Ahmed. Upon arrival in Dhaka, Bhutto asked the West Pakistanis
to forge a common position. Wali Khan and Bizenjo rejected his suggestion.
Talks with Yahya proceeded then on a new trajectory. Initially, he said he could transfer power if the conditions of Legal Framework Order
were met. Mujib suggested that two assemblies – one consisting of members elected from West Pakistan and the other from East Pakistan – be
convened to prepare their separate draft constitutions, followed by a joint session of the two to draft a federal constitution. Yahya insisted on
convening one assembly. Bizenjo proposed five assemblies or constitutional committees, one for each province to prepare five draft constitutions.
Yahya showed a slight inclination toward that suggestion. However, when Wali Khan and Bizenjo met Mujib separately that night, he told them
the general’s mood was shifting fast and becoming unpredictable. Mujib said he would no longer ask for convening of one assembly or two
assemblies. He would demand immediate transfer of power and lifting of martial law. The core issue was the lifting of martial law and transfer of
power to his party.
They conveyed to Yahya Khan Mujib’s demand to lift martial law and hand over power to him. When they cautioned Yahya against inviting
Pakistan’s disintegration by sticking to technicalities, the general replied if Mujib did not behave his army knew how to shoot their way through.
When the two met Mujib on 24 March, he broke the alarming news, saying the army would move in the next two days. He advised them to
leave Dhaka. Stunned and speechless, they left Mujib’s house.
The Americans remained convinced till the end that Mujib did not want to break Pakistan. He would have possibly opted for a confederation if
given an option even in November. Sisco also believed India would have accepted a peaceful solution if Mujib were given power. India did not
want war. The Americans blamed Bhutto for the collapse of the Dhaka talks.
The Nixon administration’s initial policy after the crackdown was based on its concern about the stability of the region, which was geopolitically
significant in terms of the Soviet Union and China. India was of potentially greater significance than Pakistan. Therefore, in formulating U.S. policy,
the relative preeminence of American interests in India was an underlying factor in the decisions that Washington made. As a result, on an
operational level, America wanted to keep close relationship with India and reasonable relations with West Pakistan, while avoiding steps that
could irreparably damage a yet-undefined future relationship with East Pakistan. Three major ingredients behind the strategy that America followed
since the civil war started were: restraint, international aid and political accommodation.
Washington advised both Islamabad and New Delhi to exercise restraint to avoid an all-out war. On the Indian side, this reinforced restraint,
although contingency planning for war continued. America’s counsels were somewhat less successful in Pakistan.
America put considerable effort into lessening India’s refugee burden. Washington considered it to be the most likely cause for war. To this end,
America offered grants and loans to India and actively promoted the U.N. relief effort. On the Pakistani side, Washington promoted an
international relief effort to help the refugees return home. Islamabad initially responded slowly, but later embraced it.
The Nixon administration urged Yahya to move as fast as possible with political accommodation in East Pakistan. Recognizing the complex and
sensitive issues involved and the fact that Yahya might have had only limited political flexibility, Washington refrained from attempting to spell out
the details beyond the need to deal with political leaders. However, these efforts bore no meaningful results.
The United States, which initially decided to maintain a hands-off posture in the East Pakistan conflict, got a wake-up call when Archer Blood,
the U.S. consul general in Dhaka, sent a telegram to Washington on 29 March 1971, on the Bengali massacre. He questioned the wisdom of
America’s do-nothing policy ignoring the dire situation on the ground.
The consulate general reported that the army was setting houses on fire and shooting people as they emerged from the burning houses. On 30
March, the mission reported that the army had killed many apparently unarmed students at Dhaka University.
The U.S. Embassy in Islamabad concurred in expressing the consulate’s sense of horror and indignation at the “brutal, ruthless and excessive
use of force by the Pak military,” but opposed any action by Washington, describing the military action as a “constituted” government using force
against citizens accused of flouting its authority
Blood castigated Farland’s contention. He questioned how the martial law administration could describe the freely elected representatives of 73
percent of the voters of East Pakistan as “miscreants.” Ironically, the consul general noted, most of the countryside of East Pakistan apparently
were in the hands of these miscreants.
Blood’s cables infuriated the White House. Nixon recalled Blood from Dhaka and banished him to the State Department’s personnel office.
Blood, who died in 2004 at the age of 81 in Colorado, was honored by his colleagues in 1971 with the Christian A. Herter Award for his
“initiative, integrity, intellectual courage and creative dissent.” The Archer K. Blood American Center Library at the U.S. Embassy in Dhaka