MYTHS AND FACTS  BANGLADESH LIBERATION WAR 

How India, U.S., China, and the U.S.S.R. Shaped the Outcome

MYTHS AND FACTS BANGLADESH LIBERATION WAR HowIndia,U.S,ChinantU.S.R.ShaethOuome 

B.Z. Khasru 

Rupa.Co

Copyright © B.Z. Khasru 2010
Photographs © B.Z. Khasru

Published 2010 by
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd.
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj,
New Delhi 110 002


Sales Centres:

Allahabad Bengaluru Chandigarh Chennai
Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu
Kolkata Mumbai

All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without the prior permission of the publishers.
The author asserts the moral right to be identified
as the author of this work.

Typeset by
Mindways Design
1410 Chiranjiv Tower
43 Nehru Place
New Delhi 110 019

Printed in India by
Rekha Printers Pvt Ltd.
A-102/1, Okhla Industrial Area, Phase-II,
New Delhi 110 020

aco n T osstble

Contents
A Note to the Reader
Preface
People 
1 How America Viewed East Pakistan in 1971: Genesis of U.S. Policy
2 Pakistan in Trouble: Mujib’s Secret Message to America
3 Why the Yahya-Mujib Talks Failed: Did Mujib Want to Break Pakistan?
4 Kissinger’s Diplomacy: Tryst with Failure
5 Blood Telegram: Diplomatic Revolt in East Pakistan
6 Why Nixon Opposed India: The Indo-U.S.-Sino-Soviet Equation
7 Yahya’s Misadventure: Dark Clouds Over Pakistan
8 Did India Plan to Break Pakistan?
9 Did Yahya Want to Hang Mujib?
10 Moshtaque-U.S. Secret Talks: What Really Happened?
11 U.S. Fiasco in East Pakistan: Right Diagnosis, Wrong Medicine
12 U.S. Warns India:Don’t Start War
13 Pakistan Crisis: Superpower Game
14 America Wakes Up, Smells War
15 India Beats War Drum
16 Gandhi Goes to Washington
17 East Pakistan Burns, Yahya Snoozes
18 Agha Khan Formula: Unique Solution Missed?
19 India Begins Blitzkrieg
20 Operation Liberate Dhaka
21 “Balkanize” West Pakistan: Why Gandhi Backed Off
22 Why Niazi Surrendered
23 Bangladesh Wins Freedom: America Faces New Reality 
Declassified Documents
Acronyms
Bibliography
Index

A Note to the Reader
This book resulted from my search for answers to some questions related to the violent military coup in Bangladesh in 1975, a carnage marked by
an unprecedented level of bloodshed in the region’s recent history to bring about a change in government. Since the putsch, which took place three
years after the Bengalis had etched their independence with a river of blood, I have always wondered why it happened, how it happened. Rumors
were abound, but no logical explanation had emerged. Facts appeared twisted to suit the purpose of those who furnished them.
In 1988, I posed some of my questions to professor Myron Weiner, America’s leading authority on Indian political studies at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in Boston, where I was studying journalism at Northeastern University. He offered nothing new, but advised that I would
possibly have a better insight once the State Department declassified some of its secret documents.
Early this decade, I got bits and pieces of information when some of those documents were released, but many of my questions still remained
largely unanswered. My quest continued. Part of what I have uncovered in my research formed the foundation of this book. The rest I intend to
offer to readers soon in another book, which will cover the details of the unsolved mystery behind the coup.
In this book, I have endeavored to explain the mysteries surrounding the war, giving details of events as they unfolded during those fateful days
of 1971. In addition to answering what caused the war and how it was conducted, this book also shows how big powers see global events through
the prism of their national interests, how political leaders blinded by their misguided personal ambitions plunge their people into untold miseries, and
how an inaccurate reading of diplomatic subtleties leads to disastrous policies.
Despite its grounding in the events that shaped the Bangladesh Liberation War, this book narrates a tale that touches America’s foray into the
subcontinent as far back as the early 1940s. It was a time when many people thought Japan would occupy India, many Indians expected Britain’s
defeat in World War II and America sought ways to stop the Indians from falling in love with the hara-kiri nation in an effort to deny Japan access
to India’s huge reservoir of human resources and raw materials for war production.
Right from the start, the Americans labored diligently to forge compatible strategies with the Indians, but their interests often moved in divergent
trajectories, creating an intriguing chapter in the region’s diplomatic history covering last century’s second half. Mistrust and misunderstanding
marked this history, despite meticulous attempts by the actors to fathom each other’s mind and formulate right approaches. For example, a
diplomatic icon no less than Henry Kissinger wondered aloud whether Indira Gandhi played a shell game when the Little Lady told the Big
Americans she was loathe to resort to war to end the East Pakistan crisis. At the opposite end, Sardar Swaran Singh, India’s foreign minister, was
baffled when Kissinger reneged on his promise to stand by New Delhi if China attacked India. To better understand America, Jawaharlal Nehru
dispatched his trusted aide V.K. Krishna Menon to meet with President Dwight Eisenhower to learn what the former NATO supreme commander
thought about India and its premier. Pakistan’s founder Mohammad Ali Jinnah’s failure to properly assess intricacies of Washington workings
resulted in his seeking a whopping one billion dollar aid, and his emissary M.A.H. Ispahani’s utter disappointment when President Harry Truman
promised a meager $25 million.
Broadly speaking, South Asians often viewed America as a country with an imperial design out to exploit them. Still, they courted Yankee
imperialism for money and arms to serve their national interests, which rarely moved in parallel with U.S. objectives.
The Americans downgraded South Asia in its entirety to a region bereft of economic potential. They, however, put it on the top as an
unmatched strategic asset to combat communism. To them, losing India to communism meant surrendering entire Asia, which would constitute the
most serious and threatening blow to America’s security and global prominence. Washington, which had just inherited the uneasy mantle of world
leadership as the sun set on the British empire, saw a foothold in Pakistan as an essential ingredient in ensuring the West’s continued grip on the
Middle East and its oil, the lifeblood of the West’s economy.
American policymakers, however, never succeeded in constructing a rational, effective approach to challenges posed by India and Pakistan.
Washington’s initial attempt to keep the Indians from the clutches of an imperial Japan put itself on the wrong side of the Indian equation. Thanks
to India’s “extremely reactionary and self-seeking” industrialists, as Sir Girja Shankar Bajpai, British India’s agent general in Washington, put it, the
United States got branded as Yankee imperialism seeking to replace British imperialism. Soon after Britain’s departure, India and America
collided. Nehru charged that Washington sought to undermine him to advance its own foreign policy aims. Nehru’s daughter – Indira Gandhi, a
major player in the Bangladesh Liberation War – found the Yankee policies even more abhorrent, thanks to Nixon-Kissinger ruffling her feathers.
Similar to America’s strategic goal, the Soviet Union’s most important purpose to have South Asia in its fold was to ensure that the subcontinent
not be used by any power against any country. From their global strategic point of view, the Russians attached enormous value to Pakistan to gain
greater control over world affairs, and to strengthen their power to fight the West and China. Moscow’s eye on South Asia was linked with the
czarist grand vision to gain access to the warm water ports for global domination. Moscow considered America and China as potential threats to
its interests in South Asia. The Soviet Union viewed the fight for influence in the region as a zero-sum game: to curb Chinese and U.S. influence,
Soviet influence must expand. To this end, the Soviet Union urged India to take diplomatic and economic decisions to help reduce American
influence in South Asia. Russia perceived that the hold over South Asia, the Persian Gulf as well as Iran and Turkey was vital for its strategic
interests. So, it courted India as a reliable partner. India, for its part, found Moscow as a neutralizer against China.
China’s policy during the Bangladesh Liberation War was guided mainly by its adversarial relations with India. Beijing accused India of
interfering in Pakistan’s internal affairs, but its real concern was New Delhi’s geopolitical strategy, which China considered hegemonistic. China
also saw India as a Soviet proxy. Yet China backed off from military intervention in support of West Pakistan because Beijing abhorred risking a
major war to bail out a beleaguered friend. China was cowered by the Soviet threat; it simply did not want to overplay its hand.
India, which suffered the trauma of British subjugation, used caution in its approach to Washington right from the beginning, even before Britain
was to lose its most glittering jewel in the crown. India’s founding leaders, who made a tryst with freedom based on their ideological bent of high
moral ground, placed honor over pragmatism. They deliberately maintained a safe distance from the United States, but often sided with those
whom Washington considered enemies. America resented seeing both Nehru and Gandhi on the Red lap.
Pakistan, which resulted from a power struggle between two of India's most prominent sons, found itself preoccupied with the fight for survival

since its birth. Its quest for allies premised on one cardinal factor – to fend off its archrival, India. So, Pakistan’s rulers tied the knot with America,
but they never succeeded in explaining this alliance to their countrymen to win their support. Pakistan’s main issue in 1971 boiled down to the
power relationship between the two wings. Sheikh Mujib wanted full autonomy. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto simply pursued his misguided dream to rule
Pakistan. Yahya Khan vowed not to preside over Pakistan’s demise. Pakistan’s military unwittingly invited an end to their country by using brutal
force in Dhaka and subsequently terrorizing East Pakistan’s entire population. The generals miscalculated their ability to put down the rebellion.
Yahya Khan erred gravely in reading India’s intention. He blundered by ignoring America’s advice to move quickly toward a political solution.
Despite Mujib’s firm resolve on autonomy – and possible separation if he did not get his way – Kissinger termed his posture as a “negotiating
ploy”. Evidence of his intentions, however, were apparent in approaches Mujib had made to the United States and other diplomats, urging them to
help avoid a civil war if he unilaterally declared independence. Pakistan’s uncertain situation had forced America to walk a very narrow tightrope.
America realized the crisis “could over time have far-reaching implications” for U.S. interests in South Asia. Richard Nixon’s aides had advocated
a “more neutral stance toward” Mujib “as a hedge against the day when we might have to deal with an independent East Pakistan”. They
considered Mujib friendly toward the United States. Nixon, however, did not see Mujib the way his advisers did. “Not yet-correct,” the president
wrote on the margin of a memorandum Kissinger had sent to him, describing Mujib as pro-American. Nixon advised against taking “any position
which encourages secession”. Discouraged by America, Mujib backed off from full independence. He feared a unilateral declaration of
independence would certainly invite a direct confrontation with Yahya’s military – too great a risk for him to face without America’s backing. But
he remained steadfast on maximum autonomy.
As Jinnah once wielded his sword of the two-nation theory to carve out a place for Muslims in undivided India, exactly the same way Mujib
sought to use his six-point plan to establish the rights of the Bengalis in united Pakistan. Neither met with success, but both made history. Had the
Congress Party and Nehru conceded Jinnah’s demands, Pakistan would have remained just a fanciful dream in some Muslim minds. Likewise, had
Pakistan’s military and Bhutto accepted Mujib’s six points, Bangladesh would not have seen the daylight. By rejecting the Cabinet Mission plan,
the Congress Party threw Jinnah over the edge into his unsought dreamland – Pakistan. By committing the massacre in Dhaka, the Pakistanis
propelled the Bengalis into writing their independence with blood, and Mujib found himself in his unexpected homeland – Bangladesh. 
B.Z. Khasru
New York
31 August 2010

Preface
On 28 February 1971, at 9 a.m., U.S. Ambassador Joseph Farland stepped out of his car in front of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s house in Dhaka.
The Bengali leader, basking in the glory of his landslide victory in Pakistan’s first general election, greeted the envoy at his car and escorted him
into his residence.
During an hour-long conversation, Mujib urged Farland to exert maximum influence with “those who would use force of arms to keep” the
Bengalis in a colonial status. Farland had expected Mujib to raise the issue of East Pakistan’s recognition as an independent nation, but he did not.
Farland had met President Yahya Khan on 25 February. Yahya told the envoy that many in West Pakistan suspected that America supported
East Pakistan’s independence. Yahya’s intelligence told him Farland had met Mujib when he visited Dhaka in January. Farland protested he did
not.
Based on intelligence reports, America concluded early March that unless a compromise formula was found, secession by the Bengalis or
separation of the two wings by mutual consent had become real possibilities. But Washington’s ability to influence the course of these events was
very limited. Moreover, the United States decided a unified Pakistan served its interests better. So, its objective was to promote an orderly
transition from a military regime to an effective parliamentary system that would adopt foreign and domestic policies in line with U.S. aims.
Pakistan’s uncertain internal situation forced Washington to walk a narrow tightrope. Washington faced a decision whether to take a more
neutral stance toward Mujib as a hedge against the day when it might have to deal with an independent East Pakistan. A realistic assessment
argued for adjusting America’s posture toward Mujib, whom Nixon’s aides considered pro-American. But Nixon doubted Mujib’s pro-American
credentials. He advised his advisers against supporting East Pakistan’s independence. His advisers, accordingly, adopted a do-nothing-now
posture toward East Pakistan.
But soon America realized the Bengalis were marching on a road toward independence. What was needed to keep at least a vestige of
Pakistan’s unity was a solution that “would give something to Bhutto, something to Mujib and something to Yahya and the army”.
One such solution was to form a confederation. Under such a scenario, Zulfiquar Ali Bhutto would become West Pakistan’s prime minister.
Mujib would lead Bangladesh. Yahya would hold the confederate presidency, while the military would receive its sustenance from both the wings.
But this solution posed a big problem in foreign affairs. Mujib and Bhutto were diametrically opposite in their views on relations to India. Mujib
favored warm ties with New Delhi, but Bhutto’s eyes were fixed on Kashmir. On top of all this, Yahya considered East Pakistan’s autonomy as a
half step towards full independence. But America saw no other feasible alternative.
However, a ray of hope emerged when Mujib backed off from a unilateral declaration of independence of East Pakistan on 7 March. Despite
an open rift with West Pakistan, Mujib apparently kept the possibility of remaining within one Pakistan under a loose federation. Or so, at least the
Americans thought. Mujib wanted to work out with Yahya some political deal to avoid bloodshed, satisfy Bengali aspirations and preserve some
vestige of a link with Pakistan. He sought America’s help to bring about a solution.
Despite their reluctance to support East Pakistan’s independence, the Americans had begun seriously thinking that soon they might have to deal
with a new South Asian nation. Based on this assumption, they started examining what they would face if East Pakistan separated from West
Pakistan. An independent East Pakistan would face formidable economic and political problems. Its leaders would be hard pressed to satisfy
people’s aspirations. A new West Pakistan, on the other side, would continue to be hostile toward India, creating trouble for its security and
economic progress, because of excessive defense expenditures.
To deal with these contending forces, the Americans outlined three alternative options but agreed that unless and until separation was certain,
any shift in their position would be against America’s continuing interest. They were concerned that their encouragement of East Pakistan’s
separatism would quickly get back to West Pakistan and deepen suspicions among the West Pakistanis that Washington wanted to split their
country.
Washington felt that Yahya was doing his best to bring Mujib and Bhutto closer. Yahya knew very well when he postponed the parliamentary
session that his move could provoke a backlash in East Pakistan. He figured the alternative to the postponement would be even worse. His two
main options were to postpone the session and risk an immediate confrontation with East Pakistan, or to hold the session and risk an immediate
fight with his army.
Yahya figured he would inevitably provoke a confrontation with the East Pakistanis in a few months because he would eventually have to reject
an autonomy constitution. So, he could not compromise with Mujib or move closer to Bhutto without jeopardizing his own power base and risking
his ouster by hardline military elements. In short, Yahya decided to risk a confrontation with East Pakistan in the slight hope that if he pushed all the
parties to the brink, a compromise might evolve from their coming to grips with the consequences of dividing Pakistan. Given the sentiment within
West Pakistan’s political-military establishment, he saw no other realistic choice.
To the Americans, Pakistan’s major political figures represented a cocktail of ideologies and characters. Yahya, Mujib and Bhutto possessed
different ideological outlooks. Yahya, whose power base was the military and the economic elite who opposed any compromise with Bhutto to
avoid an “equitable distribution of wealth”, was fairly conservative. Bhutto, a leftist and populist, did not want to accommodate East Pakistan
because he wanted to control a strong central government. Yahya and Bhutto, however, had one thing in common – both opposed Mujib, who
remained steadfast on his autonomy plan.
The key to resolution of the autonomy issue was Yahya Khan. He had accepted the need to work with Mujib, but this decision was doubtless
predicated on a belief that the West Pakistanis would be well-represented by centrists who could work with the Awami League and protect West
Pakistani interests. Bhutto had destroyed this belief.
Mujib’s action confused the Americans, who initially felt that the Bengali leader had possibly slammed the door on the East-West compromise
by dumping Yahya’s planned conference. However, they were not entirely sure what Mujib actually wanted as he kept the door open for
negotiations.

As Mujib stepped up the political pressure, Yahya put his military machine into action. Washington received reports of troop movement from
Wast Pakistan to East, with indications that the military wanted to strike against the East Pakistan leaders. Washington had ruled out an attack, but
now that assumption seemed less and less true. The Central Intelligence Agency’s latest report warned of a violent reaction from the Bengalis if
Islamabad cracked down.
Under the circumstances, Yahya apparently had only two options – either one would further weaken Pakistan’s already fragile unity. If he
acquiesced in Mujib’s step, he would forfeit his martial law powers, at least in the East, and would be hard pressed to retain them in the West. If
the president or the military generals decided “to resist Mujib’s action by force, East Pakistan would be engulfed in a struggle between the military
and the Bengali nationalists, the outcome of which can only be eventual independence of Bengal and the breaking of all ties with West Pakistan –
unless, as seems unlikely in the long run, the army can successfully contain a rebellion,” American officials concluded.
Yahya found himself between a rock and hard place not only in East Pakistan but also in West, with Bhutto demanding power be given to the
majority parties in each wing. Bhutto’s speech in Karachi calling for power transfer, in fact, might have triggered Mujib’s action. Bhutto had
decided that his chances of getting power in West Pakistan were best enhanced by a split of Pakistan – total or nearly so. However, Bhutto had
less opportunity to act than Mujib because the army was strong in the West and could probably contain a rebellion. The events cast further doubt
on Pakistan’s continued unity. Yahya’s response would be the most important determining factor.
Yahya did not have much faith in the parliamentary system, nor did he hold Pakistan’s politicians, especially Bhutto, in high esteem. He had
decided early on against handing over power to Mujib under a constitution based on the Awami League’s six-point program. He smelled
Pakistan’s demise in it.
Mujib was unwilling to divide Pakistan. This explains why he did not prepare a contingency plan to face Yahya’s impending military action. He
never expected the kind of brutality that Yahya unleashed in East Pakistan. His political experience had taught him a crackdown, even if it
happened, would be ephemeral, as happened after Ayub’s coup in 1958 and Yahya’s take-over in 1969. The chain of events in East Pakistan in
1971 closely resembled the pattern of 1969. Everything looked to him exactly the same as two years ago. The imposition of martial law, ban on
political activity and arrests of political leaders as well as shooting protesting students had become staples of Pakistan’s politics.
On 3 March 1971, Mujib told an Associated Press correspondent in Dhaka that he was “willing to share power with Bhutto, each to serve as
prime minister in his region, to keep Pakistan together,” according to the U.S. Intelligence Bulletin, Indo-Pakistani Crisis: Chronology of
Events.
Another account of Mujib’s pledge to Pakistan’s unity came from Iqbal F. Quadir, a retired vice admiral who was Pakistan’s naval attache in
Paris in 1971. A West European diplomat told Quadir that Mujib sent a message to Yahya on 11 March, saying he opposed Pakistan’s partition
and wanted to discuss possible solutions with the president.
Mujib passed the message through the unnamed diplomat, who was then consul general in Dhaka. He passed it on to Yahya in the manner
Mujib had requested. Quadir learned about this in 1978 in Karachi, where the diplomat was then consul general, Quadir wrote in an article in
February 2003 in the Pakistan Defense Journal .
Air Marshal Asghar Khan, former chief of Pakistan’s air force, painted another picture. He asserted that Mujib had anticipated the crackdown,
an assertion corroborated by another West Pakistani politician, Mir Ghaus Bakhsh Bizenjo, who was present in East Pakistan during the Mujib-
Yahya talks. Bizenjo, an Awami League ally, was advised by Mujib on 24 March to leave Dhaka, after the Bengali leader had learned about the
impending military action.
Asghar Khan’s statements only reinforced the view that Mujib had expected his arrest to be only a passing phase as it had been previously and
that he would be even more popular with the Bengalis once he got out of the prison. Victory would be ultimately his – and his people’s – as the
outcome of the election showed. Mujib might have been misled by Yahya’s disinformation campaign, too. In the morning of 25 March, when the
preparations for the crackdown were in progress, Radio Pakistan reported Yahya Khan had agreed “in principle” to hand over power to the
elected representatives in East Pakistan and had conceded the Awami League’s three other demands. Mujib was to meet again with Yahya in the
afternoon, but that meeting was canceled.
The final account of Mujib’s unwillingness to break Pakistan came from Prince Sadruddin Agha Khan, the U.N. high commissioner for the
refugees. On 29 November 1971, he told a State Department official that Mujib might not want independent Bangladesh. “Even today, he wants a
unified Pakistan,” Sadruddin told Joseph Sisco, assistant secretary of state. Sadruddin’s view was based on his long meetings with A.K. Brohi,
Mujib’s defense counsel in the sedition trial in 1971. Mujib, true to his pledge to the Bengalis, wanted their emancipation based on his six-point
program, which envisaged East Pakistan’s maximum autonomy in a confederal Pakistan, but not an independent Bangladesh.
The events in Dhaka during the fateful days of March 1971 surprised not only Mujib but also many Americans, including Kissinger, who were
unclear why the talks had collapsed. The Americans thought Mujib and Yahya had reached a tentative deal, providing for an immediate
establishment of provincial governments, temporary continuation of the central government under Yahya and the drafting of a constitution. The new
constitution would outline the division of power between the central government and the provinces, with the central government keeping control of
defense, foreign affairs and currency only.
A version of what caused the breakdown came from Council Muslim League President Mumtaz Daultana. On 29 March, three days after the
military started Operation Searchlight in Dhaka, Hobart Luppi, the U.S. consul general in Karachi, talked with Daultana at his residence. Daultana,
who was in East Pakistan during Yahya’s visit, spoke at length on the Mujib-Yahya talks.
He said Mujib’s demands were pretty much as those Yahya had spelled out in his address to the nation on 26 March, except that Yahya did not
detail Mujib’s views on an interim central government. Mujib wanted Yahya to remain president with no political government at the central level.
Mujib was not “particularly concerned” about the six points, and was willing to accept an interim arrangement based on the 1962 constitution.
However, he envisaged that the president would allow the Awami League to exercise full control over East Pakistan affairs, while Yahya would
coordinate inter-provincial affairs of the West wing.
On his “two-assembly” proposal, Mujib was rather vague whether he envisaged two separate assemblies or two subcommittees of the National
Assembly. Daultana pressed Mujib to let the full assembly meet to sanction the interim arrangements, but Mujib refused, saying his supporters
would not tolerate his sitting in the same room with Bhutto.
Daultana also tried to persuade Mujib to let the leaders of the small parties work on a solution to put him in power at the centre. Mujib said they

could try, but he doubted the West Pakistani establishment – as represented by Yahya and Bhutto – would ever permit the Bengalis to rule
Pakistan.
Mujib was infuriated by the president’s choice of advisers for the negotiations in Dhaka – Justice A.R. Cornelius, Yahya’s law minister, General
S.G.M.M. Pirzada, Yahya’s chief of staff, and M.M. Ahmed, Yahya’s economic adviser, whom Mujib considered a representative of the anti-
Bengali West Pakistani establishment.
In a conversation with Mujib alone, Daultana had asked him if he genuinely wanted Pakistan to remain one. He told Mujib that some 40
MNAs-elect in West Pakistan were prepared to work with the Bengali leader toward a constitutional settlement that would permit the Awami
League majority to take power at the center and to enjoy maximum provincial autonomy in the East wing. If, however, Mujib wanted separation,
Daultana and his friends needed to know so that they could work to prevent a bloody rupture. Mujib replied that while he was under great
pressure to declare an independent Bangladesh, he wanted to maintain Pakistan. Daultana accepted Mujib’s response as sincere.
Daultana concluded from his conversations with Mujib that the Awami League leader was unshakably persuaded the West Pakistanis would
never permit a Bengali to assume power through democratic means. He was convinced the recent moves by Yahya and Bhutto, such as the
postponement of the National Assembly, were additional steps in a historical process of conspiracy against the Bengalis.
As a result of these suspicions, Mujib’s goal in the negotiations with Yahya appeared to be the achievement of de jure control in East Pakistan
under an interim arrangement. If he achieved this, Mujib believed he could then negotiate on an equal basis with West Pakistan over permanent
constitutional arrangements. Daultana surmised Mujib would ultimately have sought a confederal arrangement.
Daultana’s account indicated Yahya had reassessed his position after Mujib’s election victory. There were two possible explanations of why
Mujib agreed to keep Yahya as president. He probably wanted to entice Yahya to hand over power peacefully or Yahya himself had bargained
for it.
Yahya, who remained mostly silent until his death in 1980, refused to accept the responsibility for the East Pakistan debacle and put the blame
squarely on Bhutto. He made a 57-page affidavit before his death to set the record straight for the future generations. Yahya scrutinized each typed
page in May 1978 at his house in Rawalpindi, made a few corrections and then signed the document, declaring it to be all true. It was released in
2005.
Yahya, however, never explained how Bhutto, who was not in power before the crackdown, could be blamed for the setback. Yahya’s claim
rather implied he was conceding he made a big mistake when he listened to Bhutto and decided not to hand over power to Mujib; it was perhaps a
general’s vain attempt to absolve himself of the responsibility of his own action.
He termed Mujib a patriot, but said that some leftists in the Awami League instigated him – a theory that got currency in West Pakistan,
although it is hardly conceivable that given Mujib’s towering personality, his resolve could have been shaken by a small group in his party. By
calling Mujib a patriot in his journal, Yahya contradicted himself, too, because he told the Americans that he considered Mujib a traitor.
Contradicting Bhutto’s claim that General Tikka Khan merely carried out the orders of the high command, Yahya denied he ever ordered
Mujib’s arrest. He said Tikka issued the order to capture Mujib dead or alive, a claim hard to accept at its face value, because the Pakistani army
hierarchy was unlikely to permit a provincial governor or a regional commander to act on his own on such a major issue.
According to Yahya, Mujib was prepared to change his six-point demand, if necessary – an assertion supported by Mumtaz Daultana. Yahya
claimed that in the end he wanted to leave power in the hands of the Awami League, a decision he probably made after realizing that India would
defeat Pakistan in the ensuing war. In fact, he did tell Farland through Sultan Khan, Pakistan’s foreign secretary, that he had authorized Bhutto to
introduce a U.N. resolution for a compromise with the Awami League within the framework of one Pakistan. Yahya confirmed it to the U.S.
ambassador when Kissinger wanted to verify the resolution Bhutto had introduced in the Security Council two days before the surrender in Dhaka.
Bhutto gave an account of what happened in Dhaka in an interview with Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci. In mid-March 1971, Yahya told Bhutto
about his upcoming trip to Dhaka and asked if he wanted to go, too. Bhutto replied if Mujib was willing talk to him, he would. After Yahya began
talks with Mujib, he sent a telegram to tell Bhutto that Mujib would talk with him. Bhutto came to Dhaka on 19 March.
He met Mujib the next day together with Yahya. He got irritated when Mujib complained that so many people died in the hurricane in 1970 in
East Pakistan, but no West Pakistani politician bothered to show up, an indirect jab at Bhutto.
When Bhutto asked how was he responsible for the hurricane, Mujib got up and said he had to go to a funeral. Bhutto got up, too, to escort him
to the anteroom, although Mujib didn’t want him to. In the anteroom, there were three people: Yahya’s aide-de-camp, his military secretary, and
his political aide, General Ghulam Umar. Mujib asked them to leave and then told Bhutto he should take West Pakistan and Mujib would take
East. Bhutto said he didn’t intend to dismember Pakistan. Bhutto learned about Mujib’s arrest at 8 a.m. on 26 March. Although Bhutto did not
acknowledge any advance knowledge of the military crackdown, he did endorse it.
Yet another account of the Mujib-Yahya talks came from Bizenjo, who was elected to the Pakistan National Assembly in 1970 on a National
Awami Party ticket from West Pakistan.
As the situation deteriorated with each passing day in March 1971, Yahya Khan expressed his intention to meet with Sheikh Mujib to discuss
matters, but Mujib was reluctant. Some of Bizenjo’s friends and colleagues in Karachi, who had been watching the unfolding events with deep
concern, asked him to go to Dhaka to try to persuade Mujib to meet with Yahya and have a frank and forthright talk on the situation.
East Pakistan was heading for the point beyond redemption. Mujib was not expressly opposed to negotiations, but the irony of the situation
consisted in an amalgam of several crisscrossing factors. Punjab’s traditional power elite had already decided to call it quits and get rid of the
Bengalis rather than let them assume power by virtue of their majority in the National Assembly.
Bizenjo cited an example of the cynicism that marked the West Pakistani rulers” mindset. He went to see Yahya Khan in 1970 to discuss certain
points relating to holding elections in Baluchistan based on the one-manone-vote principle. During the conversation when the East Pakistan issue
came up, the general said: “Sooner or later, East Pakistan will have to be amputated. And, if at all that is to happen, why let them suck our blood
for two or three more years?”
Because of Yahya Khan’s alarming remarks the previous year, Bizenjo was reluctant to visit Dhaka. He told his friends and colleagues that
Mujib was the most popular national hero of Bengal. “If you can think of a way I can establish contact with him, then I may take the chance of
going to Dhaka.”

