under President Lyndon B. Johnson when America forced Auyb not to invite China to be involved in the 1965 war. But the Nixon administration
miscalculated India’s resolve and failed to understand what was at stake this time around – an opportunity to eliminate a security threat forever.
U.S. Policy Irritates Britain
On 30 September 1971, looking towards his upcoming conversation with Gandhi in November of that year, Nixon suggested that the United
States and Britain exchange information on their talks with her. It was important to do so, he said, so that “she doesn’t come in here and, frankly,
pull our legs.” Nixon told British Foreign Secretary Sir Alec Douglas-Home that the Indians were preventing a settlement of the crisis. His
comments were in response to a suggestion by the Briton to reach out to the Bengalis for a political solution.
By the time Gandhi embarked upon her trip to Washington, Britain saw the possibility of war in South Asia becoming more real. On 4
November, the day Gandhi met with Nixon in Washington, the British cabinet assessed Gandhi’s remarks in London the previous week, which
painted “pessimistic and almost fatalistic views about the East Pakistan situation.”
Gandhi, according to a top-secret assessment by the British cabinet, thought the only chance for a political settlement lay in discussions between
Yahya and Mujib. Even if such discussions could be arranged, the outcome was highly doubtful, because Mujib no longer commanded the loyalty
of Bangladesh activists. Gandhi told the British foreign secretary that India supported the guerillas because it believed they would turn to China if
New Delhi ignored them.
The British prime minister also “gained the same pessimistic impression from his own discussions with” Gandhi, who appeared convinced that
tensions would inevitably grow worse. She told the Britons that the Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship resulted from India’s growing fear of China.
The news of Nixon’s intended visit to Beijing sharpened India’s fear. Heath told the cabinet “there were grave dangers in the present situation;
forces were operating in both India and Pakistan, which could lead to war.”
Britain’s policy regarding the conflict sharply contrasted with that of the United States, causing irritation in London. On 12 December, the U.S.
ambassador Walter H. Annenberg had an extensive discussion with the British prime minister and the foreign secretary at 10 Downing Street (the
British prime minister’s office) on the India-Pakistan situation. He told the prime minister that the United States was calling for an immediate
meeting of the Security Council to halt further fighting in East Pakistan and to prevent the spread of fighting in the West. America intended to
introduce a resolution to this end and sought British support for it.
The Britons had by then been discussing the situation for some time. Heath said that ever since the Indo-Pak situation worsened, the British
government had endeavored to restrain both countries. Such a course, the premier said, held out more hope than taking positions. For this reason,
the United Kingdom had not thought it right to vote for the U.N. resolutions to retain the possibility of acting directly vis-a-vis both governments
now, or in the future.
Both Heath and Douglas-Home thought there was little possibility of stopping the Indian army short of Dhaka. The immediate problem was to
try to bring about a ceasefire and prevent the massacre of the remainder of the Pakistan army in the East, as well as millions of Biharis, the Urdu-
speaking Muslim immigrants from India who collaborated with the West Pakistanis against the Bengalis. The British leaders said any resolution
calling for withdrawal of Indian troops from East Pakistan would be unrealistic and, in any event, would be vetoed by the Soviet Union. It might be
possible to devise a resolution acceptable in the Security Council. They outlined a ceasefire proposal in the West that would require India and
Pakistan to instruct their military commanders in the East to arrange a ceasefire.
Britain was surprised by America’s push at the United Nations for a resolution calling for a political settlement and the withdrawal of Indian
troops from East Pakistan even after India had almost reached Dhaka. The U.S. mission in Britain described London’s reaction in a telegram to
the State Department on 15 December. A day earlier, Sir Stanley Tomlinson, deputy undersecretary at the British Foreign Office, had summoned
the American ambassador to discuss U.S. and UK policies on India and Pakistan. Making clear that he was expressing British government views,
Tomlinson said British ministers and officials were disappointed and concerned that in recent times, American and British policies were marked by
sharp differences on some important problems.
He said the India-Pakistan situation had raised questions within the British government as to whether the two governments acted based on
different intelligence information and political assessments. Further, Britain felt that it really did not know the basis for the U.S. thinking and the
objectives it was pursuing. He said that some specific aspects of the American policy – and such as attempts to arrange talks between the Bengalis
and Yahya – were puzzling or disturbing to Britain.
Tomlinson said he did not know the extent of U.S. contacts or information vis-a-vis Bangladesh representatives. Based on the information
available to them, British officials were convinced that the Bangladesh leaders would not settle for anything less than complete independence. He
said Britain was not itself advocating Bangladesh independence. A confederal arrangement or any other solution worked out between West and
East Pakistan would be acceptable to London. But a stark reality led Britain to conclude that independence was inevitable. If America assessed
the situation differently, Britain would very much like to know.
Tomlinson noted that British officials had been puzzled by statements by a high U.S. official that America believed that negotiations – which
Washington had been trying to facilitate between Pakistan and the Bangladesh representatives – could have led to positive political results. Britain
wondered whether America had information other than what had been available to London at that time, because the the British officials viewed that
even if such talks could have been arranged, they provided little hope for progress, if at all.
Tomlinson said Britain wanted to learn the background of American thinking on this proposal. Britain’s main objective now was to prevent
massacres of the Pakistani forces and the Biharis in East Pakistan. Britain believed that the only organized force that could prevent such horrors
was the Indian army. Britain had been assured by New Delhi that the Indian forces would strive to minimize the loss of life and ensure humane
treatment. Britain believed it would be a serious mistake to insist that the Indian forces withdraw immediately, even if that were a realistic
possibility. Tomlinson reiterated what the prime minister and the foreign secretary had said previously, i.e., British assessment was that India had no
territorial aims. Despite some equivocation on Azad Kashmir, he said that statements made by Gandhi and Swaran Singh could be taken at face
value. As the two talked, information reached London that America would accept language along the lines proposed by Britain for a Security
Council resolution.
On the diplomatic front, except for China and the United States, no major power openly supported Pakistan’s efforts in East Bengal. Moscow

firmly opposed the military crackdown; its choice was undoubtedly heavily influenced by India. It wanted a political settlement and probably
doubted that a prolonged conflict would serve Soviet interests. Moscow, which welcomed partition of British India because it created more
opportunities for communist infiltration in South Asia, had concluded the odds favored a separatist solution; Islamabad had little chance of imposing
its will on East Bengal in any lasting and effective way.
China’s policy was mainly guided by its adversarial relations with India. Beijing accused India of interfering in Pakistan’s affairs, but its unspoken
concern was New Delhi’s geopolitical strategy, which China considered hegemonistic. A Chinese military intervention in support of West Pakistan
was unlikely, because Beijing abhorred risking a major war to bail out a beleaguered friend. China was cowered by the Soviet threat. It, however,
would have faced a dilemma if a communist group took control of East Bengal and sought Beijing’s help, a scenario that, fortunately, the Chinese
leadership never had to confront.
China, however, created trouble for Bangladesh through proxies, Swaran Singh told Kissinger in 1974. “You are aware that the Naxalites”
headquarters are not very far from Bangladesh. There is contact between them and extremist elements in Bangladesh. I am sorry to say that there
have been some political killings in Bangladesh, which are traceable to them,” India’s foreign minister said.
As for India, Singh said, New Delhi’s relations with Dhaka were just right. “We have a correct relationship with Bangladesh. India had 300,000
soldiers in Bangladesh when the ceasefire took place. By 15 March 1972, all Indian soldiers had been withdrawn. Bangladesh was pleading with
us to leave them there. We said that we did not want an Indian army involved in maintaining law and order in Bangladesh. We told them that we
didn’t want influence there. Even in these recent talks in New Delhi, we played a friendly, sober, cooperative, mature role. The talks went best
when the three foreign ministers were alone. We did not try to influence the Bangladesh foreign minister at all.”

14 
America Wakes Up, Smells War
aced with a fast deteriorating situation in East Pakistan and the possibility of a protracted crisis, Washington began rethinking its strategy
towards the end of July. On 30 July, the Senior Review Group decided to reverse its previous do-nothing policy, and recommend a do-
something strategy. The Americans felt they needed to get things moving to avoid an unfavourable outcome. Among those present at the
panel meeting were Kissinger, Williams, Helms, and Irwin.
“Our basic feeling is that we should do something, and we recommend some movement along the lines of the scenario we have prepared. We
think we should try further with the Pakistanis to seek some restraint on the military activity and persuade them to take steps to reduce the flow of
refugees and move toward some form of political accommodation in East Pakistan. We should also try to counsel restraint on India in connection
with some of the things they are doing,” Irwin said.
CIA chief Helms said India was doing something in the military field to keep everyone stirred up. “We don’t think they are preparing for a
physical attack, but the indicators keep flashing. This is all designed to keep the pot boiling.”
Irwin suggested that the United States speak to the British and the Soviets. “We can talk with the British about a joint or separate but
concurrent approaches to the two states, and to the Soviets about getting an assessment of the situation.”
Helms asked whether anyone had thought of involving the Shah of Iran to work with Pakistan. “He might be able to help us; at least, it’s worth
considering since we seem to be out of gas with Pakistan.”
Kissinger took exception to Helms” last statement and said, “We’re not out of gas with Yahya. I think he will do a lot of things that are
reasonable if we concentrate on the refugee problem. One thing he will not do is talk to the Awami League, at least not as an institution. He might
talk to some Awami League leaders as individuals.”
But Irwin, the under secretary of state, reminded that Farland had indicated Yahya might talk to the Awami League.
Kissinger at this point wanted to know what the Indians were after. He asked, “Do they want a political accommodation or do they want to split
off East Pakistan?”
Irwin replied, “It’s impossible to know. They would probably prefer to split off East Pakistan.”
Kissinger asked if it was possible to ask the Pakistan army to withdraw to its barracks when India was supporting guerrilla activity in the
country.
Irwin said: “I don’t think so, but we might work toward this. If conditions improve, this might be our goal.”
Williams, the USAID deputy director, interjected that he wouldn’t want to take the army out of its role of maintaining security. “You can take
them out of the civil administration, though – out of the Government House – without insisting that they return to their barracks.”
Turning to the military activity from India, Kissinger said the cross-border operations depended on India. “You could put the greatest civilian
government in the world in East Pakistan and if the Indians want to continue the cross-border operations, they will.”
Irwin agreed, but wondered how to stop the cross-border operations. “If we can do it by direct pressure on India, fine. If that is not possible,
one way to help would be to start some form of political accommodation in East Pakistan.”
Indeed, without political accommodation, India and Pakistan were headed for war, cautioned a 12 July National Security Council staff report on
the prospects of an armed conflict in South Asia. The danger of a new war “remains real,” if no progress was made towards finding a political
solution. Moreoever, if the refugee repatriation did not start by September or October of that year, chances for hostilities “will increase.”
The study outlined how things might shape up going forward. Indian military forces might attack East Pakistan to seize and hold part of the area,
at a minimum, and to drive out the West Pakistani forces, at the most. Alternatively, India could step up more direct support for a major insurgent
effort to seize and hold a portion of East Pakistan. Pakistan could also initiate a war by attacking guerrilla camps in India. It could also stir up
trouble in Kashmir, leading to a full-scale war.
The report concluded that U.S. interests would be best served by an early end to the conflict and by negotiations among all parties, leading to a
withdrawal of Indian troops and an overall political settlement.
The Washington Special Action Group later that day discussed the report and agreed that “a possible India-Pakistan conflict seemed likely.” So
it decided to develop a scenario for U.S. approaches to both the Soviet Union and China before and after the outbreak of hostilities, while
stressing the need to tell China that Washington wanted to keep Pakistan unified.
Kissinger outlined the overall U.S. objectives for the panel. “We have an overall interest in preventing hostilities. We do not want to be forced to
choose between 800 million Chinese and 600 million Indians and Bengalis. We don’t want India in the Soviet camp, even though the Indians may
be driving themselves there deliberately through the creation of a phony crisis.”
He then asked two questions: what the United States could do to minimize the danger of an outbreak of war, and what it could do if war broke
out. “We need to consider what we would say to the Soviets and to the Chinese and how we could cooperate with the Soviets to prevent a war,”
Kissinger said.
India Activates Airfields For War
When Kissinger asked whether the panel thought India would attack Pakistan, both Helms and Sisco ruled out such a possibility.
“My reaction is that in no circumstances will the Pakistanis initiate hostilities in the West. If the Indian objective is to achieve a Bangladesh that
they can work with, they will continue to support the liberation movement,” Sisco added.

Moorer, Joint Chiefs chairman, revealed that India had already started activating some airfields near West Pakistan.
Helms reported that China was not reinforcing its troops and that it would be difficult for Beijing to do so, because the terrain was bad and
China lacked the necessary equipment. He also noted that China did reinforce its troops in 1962 when it fought India, and the United States knew
about it ahead of time. This time around, Washington would also know about China’s reinforcement in advance.
Irwin predicted three things that could prompt India to move militarily against Pakistan: some military incident; a famine in East Pakistan,
resulting in a wave of new refugees crossing in to India; or Mujib’s execution.
Despite America’s grim assessment, Yahya remained defiant. On
18 August Kissinger told Nixon that the Pakistani president was “committed to preventing the Bengali independence,” but things had shifted in East
Pakistan as well as in India.
“In East Pakistan, a serious insurgency movement is now under way in the countryside and is beginning to penetrate the major cities. This has
been fed by the Indians in terms of logistics, training and some arms, but basically reflects a strong Bengali will to resist the West Pakistanis. This,
in turn, provokes an army response, which stimulates further the refugee flow.”
India’s position had changed since the military crackdown in March of the same year. “The Indians before March preferred a united Pakistan
when they thought the Bengalis might play a dominant role, but now that they judge this is no longer possible they would like to see an independent
Bangladesh as soon as possible. The problem with their policy is that they may be able through their support for the guerrillas to do enough to
stalemate a political settlement in East Pakistan but not enough to produce independence.”
Kissinger advised Nixon that the only strategy for the U.S. to follow in this situation was to concentrate the world’s attention on averting a
famine as an umbrella under which enough might be done to deprive India of an excuse for intervention. Such a measure would give Yahya a face-
saving way of taking some of the political steps that might be necessary, if he had to rely on political initiatives to restore normalcy, rather than on
military control.
Kissinger told Nixon that a U.S. effort to break Pakistan in the name of self-determination would also have implications for Taiwan and Tibet in
Beijing’s eyes, implying these territories could press on with their right to self-determination. It was important, Kissinger said, that China not feel
that Washington was lining up with India and the Soviet Union against Beijing. He added that for the moment, it was important that America “stay
one step behind the Soviets in India, although over the longer run, we have no interest in writing off 600 million Indians and Bengalis.”
On 19 August, Kissinger wrote to Nixon to comment on Gandhi’s recent letter to the president. In that letter, Gandhi had rejected the idea of
having U.N. observers stationed on both sides of the India-East Pakistan border. She also complained about continued U.S. arms supplies to
Pakistan. Kissinger, in his review, noted with interest the prime minister’s moderate tone in the letter and the timing of its dispatch to Washington.
He said the fact that she dispatched it two days before India signed the friendship pact with the Soviet Union – the day she also accepted an
invitation to visit Washington – was an indication that New Delhi still wanted a balanced relationship, despite its then newly formed special
relationship with Moscow. Gandhi, by no means, was “prepared to write off” the United States.
Kissinger again sent a note to Nixon on 24 August along with a memo he had received from the State Department and a CIA analysis of the
Indo-Soviet treaty. The national security adviser compared the treaty with the one the Soviet Union earlier had signed with Egypt and found that
the Indian pact was weaker on the military aspect. The Indo-Soviet agreement provided for “consultations” in the event of an attack by a third
country, but the Egyptian deal called for the two sides to “concert” their positions.
“This does not add up to the language of a traditional mutual defense or security pact, since there is no specific obligation to assist militarily in
case of a conflict with a third party,” Kissinger explained. “Nevertheless, the impression is left that the Soviets would, if necessary, join in on
India’s side in a conflict involving Pakistan or China.”
By concluding the treaty, the Indians probably felt that they had bought both time and insurance as they confronted the problem of war with
Pakistan. Pressure had been mounting rapidly on Gandhi to “do something” positive about the East Pakistan and the refugee situation. The treaty,
which had met with almost universal acclaim in India, had relieved this pressure to some extent. Moreover, the Indians seemed to feel that the
treaty put both the Pakistanis and the Chinese on notice that India did not stand alone. If Indo-Pak hostilities did break out, the Indians were
probably hoping that the treaty would at least serve to limit the Chinese intervention and perhaps even bring the Soviets indirectly on their side.
Finally, the Indians might hope that the treaty would instill in the West Pakistanis a greater sense of urgency to halt the refugee flow and reach a
political accommodation in East Pakistan.
Kissinger further explained that such consolidation of Indo-Soviet relationship, at the expense of India’s cherished non-alignment position,
indicated that the Indians thought their vital interests were at stake in the present situation. On the other hand, the treaty should have given the
Pakistanis a pause for reflection if they had, for instance, been thinking of punitive raids against the guerrillas in India. Previously, they might have
hoped that China would fully support Pakistan in a war against India, but they must have lost much of that confidence that Beijing would attack
India now that it would mean risking hostilities with the Soviets on their behalf.
China would not miss the point that its growing role in South Asia had been, at least for the moment, countered by the Soviets. At stake would
not only be the Chinese and Soviet positions in South Asia, but in all of Asia. Neither the Soviets nor the Chinese were easily bluffed and they
could rapidly move towards a confrontation, should India and Pakistan go to war, Kissinger warned.
On 25 August, when Kissinger met with the Indian ambassador to Washington, he sounded out a harsher tone over India’s new pact with
Moscow. He told Jha that if India wanted to become an extension of the Soviet foreign policy, then inevitably the American interest in India was
bound to decline and India would have to look to Moscow for the greater part of its economic aid. He could not understand why India would
want to be drawn into the Sino-Soviet rivalry or why it would deliberately antagonize the one country (namely, the U.S.) that had no national
interests in the subcontinent except an independent and healthy India and an independent subcontinent.
Jha, who was governor of the Reserve Bank of India until May 1970, sought to allay Kissinger’s concerns, saying Gandhi was not at all pro-
Soviet. Dinesh Singh, who was India’s foreign minister from February 1969 until June 1970, thought about the pact first. In fact, Jha said privately,
he would not be a bit surprised if Dinesh Singh actually received a payment from the communists for pushing the treaty. At the same time, Jha said
Kaul and Haksar were very much under Soviet influence. In short, Gandhi was under great pressure for both these reasons. The project had been
going along for about a year, and recently Gandhi felt she needed some dramatic foreign policy, so she picked it up. He gave the assurance that
Kissinger could be certain that she did not have her heart in it.

After calming Kissinger’s nerves, Jha turned to the matter of Gandhi’s upcoming visit to Washington. He asked if a military plane could pick up
the Indian premier from New York to Washington, and Kissinger said yes. Could Nixon come to some social function at the Indian Embassy or at
the Blair House marking Gandhi’s visit?
Kissinger said the dinner was absolutely out of the question. Whether the president might call on Gandhi at the Blair House would depend on the
state of relations at that time. Kissinger cautioned it was imperative for India not to do anything that could upset the equilibrium before Gandhi’s
visit. He suggested the Indian press campaign be muted in anticipation of that trip.
By October 1971, American policymakers had started grappling with possible courses of action in case a war indeed engulfed the subcontinent.
For Washington, the major issues were the following:
1. How must America act if Pakistan initiated an attack on India?
2. What would America’s role be if India started a war?
3. How should the United States respond to a Chinese involvement?
4. How should America react if the Soviets came to New Delhi’s aid?
They pondered each scenario and came up with plans of action.
If Pakistan attacked its rival, the main question would be whether the United States should cut off aid to India. In which case, Washington could
use the possible cut-off to press India for negotiation, while using its pressure on Pakistan to stop the fighting.
“If India had attacked Pakistan, we would want to make clear that we would not come to India’s aid in the event of the Chinese provoked
border incidents,” the State Department decided.
If it remained unclear who started the war, it added, “We should consider consulting with India and responding positively to Indian requests for
assistance, if the invasion threatened critical supply lines or occupation of major portions of India.”
If Pakistan attacked India, America “should consult, if asked, under the Air Defence Agreement and be prepared to assist with equipment.” The
Air Defence Agreement was signed in 1963, stipulating American help if Pakistan faced a military threat.
Finally, the State Department opined, if China attacked India, Nixon’s planned trip to Beijing should be postponed.
While the State Department developed America’s possible responses, in the afternoon of 7 October Kissinger held a meeting of the Washington
Special Action Group, which decided to ask the Soviet Union to appeal to India for restraint. The Shah would be requested to make a similar
appeal to Yahya.
During the meeting, Helms told the group that both India and Pakistan continued their military preparations, although their moves still seemed
primarily defensive. In the west, each army had about 200,000 soldiers near the border and they were in a high state of readiness. In Pakistan, the
military had moved to forward positions. India had two infantry divisions and an armored division earmarked for the western front, although all
three were still stationed hundreds of miles from the frontier. The armored division had been alerted for the movement, but it still appeared to be in
central India. If India were about to attack, these units almost certainly would move to the front, but it would take them about a week to take their
positions.
The Pakistanis also had two infantry divisions and an armored division in rear areas. They might hold the armored division in place, about 100
miles from the border, but would bring up the other two if they expected war in a matter of days. In the east, the Indians had over 100,000 troops,
against Pakistan’s 70,000 in East Pakistan. The Indians might want to bring in one more division before launching an attack.
The Pakistanis had their hands full with the guerrillas and were in no shape to start major operations. War seemed most likely to come, as it did
in 1965, from several miscalculations, but out of a deliberate decision by one side or the other. Gandhi could still decide to invade East Pakistan to
end the refugee influx.
Senior Pakistani officials, according to Helms, were convinced that Yahya would launch a preemptive attack in the following few weeks. Yahya
himself had given the British an impression that he was considering such an action, but he had assured the U.S. deputy chief of mission otherwise.
The CIA director speculated that Yahya might be trying to bring Western pressure on India or he might think an attack would help by bringing
international pressure on both sides.
In East Pakistan, the guerrillas had by then become more active as the rains tapered off. Both the Bengalis and the Indians wanted a speedy
solution, even at the risk of war. They wanted to prevent radical leftist elements from taking over the independence movement. America had
reports that up to 100,000 Indian-trained guerrillas would infiltrate into East Pakistan in October and November that year. They would try to seize
parts of northeast East Pakistan to house a provisional government. India would then recognize Bangladesh, a move that would almost certainly
send the Pakistanis to war, Helms predicted.
Johnson had a separate report, indicating that some 40,000 guerrillas would go into East Pakistan by 15 October. He attributed the information
to the U.S. mission in Kolkata, which received its information from Zahirul Qaiyum, an Awami League legislator.
Helms agreed the number would certainly be very large. The Indians believed that snow and bad weather in the north would keep Pakistan from
overrunning Kashmir and would hinder the flow of Chinese aid to the Pakistanis. The guerrillas eventually would succeed in East Pakistan. The civil
administration in East Pakistan failed to cope with enormous social, economic and political problems. In a few areas, the guerrillas had formed their
own administrative structure. The Pakistani government had made little headway in winning over the people in East Pakistan and popular support
for the insurgents seemed to be increasing.
Kissinger asked Moorer, Joint Chiefs chairman, to assess the military situation.
India, Moorer said, had a four-to-one ratio on the ground. “With regard to air forces, the outcome depends in large part on who preempts.” He
added, “The Indians can’t compete with the Pakistani pilots.” The naval forces did not amount to much. The Indians would undoubtedly try to
blockade East Pakistan and probably could do so. The Pakistani army would give a good account of itself but would fail on the logistics problem.
Eventually, the Indian army would gain a superior position because of its sheer advantage in size. They had large numbers on the ground, but then
they might consider it necessary to keep five or six divisions on the Chinese border. Moorer said the main factor was that neither side could fight a
war of attrition. They would quickly run out of supplies in four to six weeks, and India would prevail because of superior numbers.
Johnson added, “This is especially true in East Pakistan, where they will have a numerical advantage of regular forces, plus the support of the

Mukti Bahini.”
Kissinger then turned to what the Soviet Union was doing, recalling Gromyko’s claim during the previous week that the Russians were
restraining the Indians. Were they doing this?
Helms replied, “All our evidence indicates this is true.”
Kissinger then asked, “In what way?”
Helms replied, “Madam Gandhi gave the Soviets a whole list of things she wanted. She asked them to arrange for Mujibur to be the go-
between.”
“Kissinger: “The Indians have a great ability for determining the impossible and then demanding it.”
Johnson: “The Soviets were quite firm in telling the Indian representatives who went to Moscow that they would not support Bangladesh. The
Soviets don’t want hostilities, if they can be avoided.”
Kissinger: “When I was in India recently, I formed the opinion that if the Indians were prepared to accept a slow evolution in Pakistan, we could
work effectively with them, and they would eventually get most of what they want. But they keep lumping all these things together – the refugee
problem, independence for Bangladesh, Pakistani forces on their borders. In their convoluted minds, they really believe they can give Pakistan a
powerful blow from which it won’t recover and solve everything at once. If they would cooperate with us we could work with them on 90 percent
of their problems, like releasing Mujibur or attaining some degree of autonomy for Bangladesh, and these steps would lead eventually to their
getting it all.”
Van Hollen: “The Indians don’t have complete control over the Mukti Bahini. They couldn’t stop them all if they wanted to.”
Kissinger turned to Saunders and said, “Weren’t you with me when I talked with the [Indian] army chief of staff? He was so cocky, he thought
he could defeat everyone in sight, all at the same time. We can’t ask them to shut off the guerrillas. It will get us nowhere.”
Van Hollen offered, “We could ask them to try to curb the guerrillas.”
Kissinger shot down the idea, saying, “No, that’s a nonstarter. We can’t ask them to cut off aid to the guerrillas. It’s an internal affair.”
Helms: “When you fatten up the guerrillas they become a different force. They aren’t the guerrillas any longer.”
Kissinger: “Yahya is a slow learner. He is very deliberate, but if you force him to make a decision, his Moslem instinct may assert itself, and
perhaps he will start taking rapid action.”
Moorer: “If the Indians really want to punish the Pakistanis, they may be ready to go all the way to a break to do it.”
America’s efforts to undertake intensified relief efforts to allow Yahya an avenue for a peaceful solution in East Pakistan was highly ineffective
because this strategy underestimated India’s resolve to use military force. America’s active diplomacy – instead of Kissinger’s decision to stay one
step behind – could have helped Yahya open up his eyes and see his ruin in East Pakistan, leading him to develop pragmatic policies that could
result in an entirely different outcome than that which actually happened. Kissinger also failed to realize the depth of India’s historical distrust of
America. Given the divergent interests of India and the United States and their often-acrimonious ties, one would be hard-pressed to imagine
Gandhi could put her full faith and confidence in Nixon to come to her rescue in a real crisis.

15 
India Beats War Drum
y September of that year, both India and Pakistan started preparing for a possible war. New Delhi informed Washington that time was
running out for a peaceful solution and India might act by the year end to bring the crisis to an end.
To the Indians, it had become quite evident that the Mukti Bahini, on their own and even after their training in India, would be unable to
face a pitched battle with the Pakistan army. New Delhi could ill-afford to prolong the war by proxy indefinitely because of the fear of a possible
escalation and takeover by the leftists.
In the meantime, Pakistan also started preparing its armada. To the Americans, signals coming from South Asia clearly indicated a looming war.
On 16 September, Saunders and Hoskinson wrote to Kissinger that both India and Pakistan had started taking increased military preparedness.
“In some cases, these surpass those made before the war in 1965. Forces on both sides are now at a high state of alert, and other related
measures have been taken against the contingency of the outbreak of war.”
The most worrisome report, according to intelligence estimates, was that some units of India’s armored division and an independent armored
brigade had begun moving towards the West Pakistan border, opposite Lahore. This move was reportedly intended to warn Pakistan that New
Delhi was ready to face any Pakistani incursion and to discourage any thoughts Islamabad might have had that it could successfully mount a
preemptive strike against India.
However, the analysts wrote, the Pakistanis could interpret the move as an indication of India’s plan to attack Pakistan, and Islamabad could
show some drastic reaction, perhaps along the ceasefire line in Kashmir.
India also stepped up the pace on the political front. It played a guiding role in forming a multiparty Bangladesh “National Liberation Front”,
which was to function as an overall steering committee. The front included, among others, pro-Moscow communists, who were brought in at
Indian and Soviet insistence. At least, the front broadened the base of the Bangladesh movement and strengthened the leftist hardliners against the
pro-West moderates.
In a related move, India’s foreign secretary publicly said India would recognize Bangladesh “very soon”. Gandhi’s major foreign policy advisers,
including Kaul, privately held the view that war was inevitable.
India was coordinating with the Soviets to bring pressure to bear on Pakistan. Gromyko, for instance, had sternly warned Sultan Khan,
Pakistan’s foreign secretary, to refrain from hostilities, but offered no solution to Pakistan’s problems.
Gandhi went to Moscow towards September end, possibly to assess Soviet reactions and support.
The American intelligence had difficulty to say exactly what the situation added up to. Based on statements by India, American diplomats
assessed that it was not actually preparing to begin a direct attack on either East or West Pakistan. They interpreted the military moves taken by
India as defensive measures against the possibility of an attack by Pakistan. They also believed India’s actions were part of its plan to increase
significantly its support to the insurgents, perhaps even involving Indian “volunteers,” but not necessarily geared towards a general war.
India’s strategy, according to this assumption, involved an attempt to capture some of the more isolated border areas in northwest East Pakistan
and establish the Bangladesh government there. America thought that it was the right time to begin preparing for the likely Pakistani reaction by
moving armor up to the Western front if the operation in the East were to begin in early October. The rains in East Pakistan would end soon. The
area would be more conducive to military operations by early October. It appeared that the level of tension and the danger of war, at least by
accident, had increased another notch in the recent weeks. War might not yet be the most likely outcome, but a grave sense of inevitability hovered
over the subcontinent, influencing actions on both sides. Under these conditions and with tensions running so high, events could gain a momentum
of their own, leading to a war that no one really wanted but all were willing to fight out of fear of losing, if they did not mobilize and go on the
offensive.
Such assumption changed quickly, however. By October, the Americans started to foresee a possible war in South Asia, a realisation that
prompted Washington to leap into action. On 8 October, the State Department sent a telegram to the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan, expressing deep
concern over increasing risks of war over East Pakistan. Johnson instructed the ambassador in New Delhi to seek an immediate meeting with
Gandhi to tell the Indian premier that “we are not convinced that intensified guerrilla activity will achieve results compatible with India’s interests.”
He told the U.S. envoy to strongly urge India to immediately reduce the risks of war by restraining cross-border operations by the Mukti Bahini.
“Should such cross-border operations lead to a conflict with Pakistan, this would have serious effect on US-India relations,” he cautioned.
At the same time, Johnson told the U.S. charge in Pakistan to seek an urgent meeting with Yahya to tell him that “any military action initiated by
Pakistan directed against India would have an adverse effect upon our relationship”.
“You should make clear to Yahya that we continue to believe that the only long-term resolution of the current danger can be found through
progress toward a political solution and accommodation in East Pakistan,” Johnson told the envoy.
While Johnson sent notes to U.S. posts about heightened risks of war, Yahya wrote to Nixon, alerting him of “a warlike situation between
Pakistan and India”. “All available evidence indicates that Indian Armed Forces have been put in a state of readiness and moved to forward
positions for offensive action at a short notice against our frontiers in both the wings,” Yahya wrote. “An armed conflict between the two countries
is likely to erupt, if it is not brought under control immediately.”
Yahya was quick to add that the Russians told the Pakistanis the previous month in Moscow that India would not start a conflict because the
Soviets were exercising restraining influence on India. “Unfortunately, the facts are quite different. The bulk of the Indian forces have moved in
operational positions against our borders after the signing of Indo-Soviet Treaty and there has also been a marked increase in shelling and raids on
our territory since then. Apparently, the Indians are either not amenable to the Soviet advice or are deliberately misleading them.”
He indicated that Pakistan would seek a Security Council meeting to discuss the issue and sought America’s help “for a constructive decision

and positive action by it”. He, however, postponed the idea of a U.N. meeting after the Americans told Pakistan that “a discussion in the Security
Council might generate a good deal of emotion, fail to achieve anything constructive, and thus serve to further polarize the situation. There was the
additional concern that India would broaden the discussion to include the entire range of problems affecting relations between India and Pakistan.”
Jha Gives Kissinger Ultimatum
On 8 October, Jha gave Kissinger an ultimatum during a meeting, which followed a conversation between the two some weeks earlier when
Kissinger had mentioned that a year’s interval was needed for a political settlement in Pakistan. Jha told Kissinger that they simply did not have the
luxury of a year – India would be forced into some military action by year-end. The ten million refugees in West Bengal would break India’s
political cohesion; they were all Bengalis and did not leave West Bengal. In West Bengal, they would tip the power balance totally in a Maoist
direction. Finally, the huge financial costs would be more likely to cause bankruptcy than a war.
Kissinger responded with a dire warning: “Have no misunderstanding: If you start a war we will cut off all economic aid and you must include
that in your cost calculation.” He said that if the constant harassment of the president in the Indian press and the constant playing with America’s
political opponents did not cease, the ambassador could not expect a very forthcoming attitude on the part of the United States.
Jha, in his typical manner, put all the blame at the footsteps of the pro-Soviet group in New Delhi for all the problems hounding Indo-American
relations. He told Kissinger that the pro-Soviet axis in India was currently in some difficulty, because apparently the Soviet Union had given the
strongest warnings against unilateral Indian actions against Pakistan. New Delhi believed Moscow seemed to be participating in delaying
maneuvers.
Jha’s remarks sounded alarm bells in Washington. The State Department asked the U.S. ambassador to meet immediately with Gandhi to
propose that both India and Pakistan pull back forces from the borders. When Keating sought an appointment with Gandhi, he was told that the
prime minister could not immediately meet with him as she was quite occupied. The envoy then met with the External Affairs minister on 12
October. Swaran Singh told Keating that the insurgency existed deep within East Pakistan and the significance of cross-border activities were
being easily exaggerated. He said New Delhi could not order to “shoot down the East Bengalis entering or departing India.” Singh confirmed that
India did not anticipate a huge infiltration by Mukti Bahini. On the U.S. proposal to pull out forces, he remained vague. In the event Pakistan did
withdraw its troops, he said, India could reconsider the situation based on the circumstances at such time.
When Keating began speaking of how Indo-U.S. relations would suffer if the guerrilla operations in East Pakistan escalated into a war, Singh
interrupted him. Singh repeated the scenario and asked Keating if he understood correctly that if an armed conflict took place because of Pakistani
incursions against India in retaliation for successful guerrilla activity in East Pakistan, Indo-U.S. relations would be adversely affected and it also
would be injurious to US-Pak relations.
“I replied, large cross-border activities, supported by the Indian army, which resulted in a military conflict with Pakistan, would be injurious to
Indo-U.S. relations. If Pakistan were to attack India, I was convinced U.S.-Pak relations similarly would be seriously affected,” Keating said in a
telegram to the State Department. He told Singh that Washington was delivering the same warning to Islamabad. America also urged Pakistan to
move rapidly towards a political settlement with the Bengalis.
Keating’s remarks provoked Singh. He told Keating – who was by then at the tail-end of his posting in India – that he wanted to take the
opportunity to give the envoy a perspective about the Bangladesh situation. Singh said the hard core of the freedom fighters was formed by trained
former Bengali military and police personnel of about 45,000. The highly motivated and embittered East Bengali youth were participating in the
insurgency in large numbers. If out of some 9.5 million refugees only one percent, or 95,000, were highly motivated activists, the number was a
reasonable enough figure of insurgents; add to that the former Bengali police and military who would join them
Singh said the insurgents were reasonably well-equipped with weapons taken upon defection or otherwise liberated from the Pakistan army, as
well as with weaponry purchased in Europe by a fairly large number of well-to-do Bengalis living abroad. Singh stated that India could not stop
these activities; it had tried to explain basic realities and greatly resented the natural process of the growing Bengali resistance being interpreted by
the United States as bolstered from India.
He urged the United States to consider the profound, alienated attitudes of the Bengalis as shown by the defections of well-placed Pakistani
diplomats, the most recent one being the Pakistani ambassador in Buenos Aires. History knows no parallel and the situation shows even hard-eyed
diplomats taking decisions. India’s impression was that such psychological factors were not appreciated in Washington, which was blinded by the
Pakistani military regime’s charisma. History would show that the United States had the greatest responsibility in the present situation since its
support for Pakistan had contributed to the reinforcement and continuation of Pakistan’s military repression.
He told the ambassador that America should “exercise its immense influence with Yahya to bring him to reality.” Continuing the U.S. support to
the Yahya regime would only deepen the rift between East and West Pakistan and make the struggle in East Pakistan more bitter. It would kill a
negotiated deal. Singh said the recent statement of Bangladesh authorities dismissing a compromise was an indirect repudiation of his statement.
Singh had told an All India Congress Committee meeting that “Bangladesh might be realized within the framework of Pakistan, autonomy, or
independence.”
When Keating attempted to verify whether the freedom fighters would go into East Pakistan in large numbers beginning in October, as the
intelligence reports from Washington indicated, Singh provided more than a diplomatic answer. The Mukti Bahini, he said, did not take India or its
army into confidence and “has never consulted us.” The Mukti Bahini had its own tactics, he added, stressing that India refused to believe that the
freedom fighters who were on “the Indian border in such large numbers prepared to march openly into East Pakistan”.
Singh assured Keating, “India will never attack Pakistani positions and will never commit any incursions against Pakistan territory. If Pakistan
starts war, India will defend itself with every possible means available.”
On 15 October, Rogers sent a telegram to the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi in the light of the responses from India and Pakistan regarding
pulling back soldiers from their respective borders. In his note, the secretary of state conveyed to India Yahya’s assurance that Pakistan would not
initiate war. Yahya accepted in principle the U.S. proposal and suggested the military chiefs of the two countries meet to work out the details.
Rogers told the embassy to elicit India’s response to Yahya’s suggestion. He also sent a note to the U.S. mission in Moscow to brief Gromyko
about the U.S. withdrawal idea.

The next day, the U.S. charge met with India’s foreign secretary and made a presentation based on Rogers” instructions. Kaul responded by
reiterating Singh’s pledge that India would not wage war with Pakistan. He, however, said India viewed Pakistan’s recent military moves as a
threat to attack India, despite Yahya’s promise to the contrary. So, India could not accept America’s proposal for a mutual withdrawal of forces
until such a threat had been removed.
In Moscow, meanwhile, the U.S. ambassador met with Gromyko on 18 October to urge the Soviet Union to support the U.S. withdrawal
proposal. Ambassador Jacob Beam told the Soviet foreign minister that Yahya had accepted the proposal, but Singh had gone no further than to
state that if Pakistan withdrew then India would reconsider the situation. Beam asked Gromyko to encourage India to accept the plan.
Gromyko said India and Pakistan had both indicated they would not initiate hostilities, but the conclusion drawn in Moscow was that while
India’s assurance could be trusted, Yahya’s could not. Gromyko did not agree to support the withdrawal proposal. He argued that separating the
troops was a good idea but not a solution, and urged America to join the Russians in finding a political settlement.

Yahya Begins Worrying About War
In Pakistan, Yahya started worrying about facing war. On 19 October, the deputy chief of Pakistan’s embassy in Washington, delivered a letter to
the White House from Yahya to brief Nixon about the latest situation in the subcontinent. “In an already tense situation, India’s land, sea and air
forces have been brought to a state of confrontation against Pakistan’s frontiers in both the wings,” the general wrote. He said India had amassed
seven divisions against West Pakistan and put additional forces in a state of readiness to move to forward positions at a short notice. Nearly eight
divisions had encircled East Pakistan. Substantial forward moves had taken place from the rear to the forward positions. In addition, the
deployment of Indian forces on the Sino-Indian borders had been rearranged so that they could be simultaneously used in an offensive against
Pakistan.
“Our concern is all the more grave since India has shown no inclination to give up its policy of instigating and assisting armed infiltration into East
Pakistan. It continues to support, train and launch rebels and insurgents who seek the dismemberment and destruction of Pakistan. I am
constrained to say that if this state of affairs continues it may lead to dangerous consequences: a situation which we in Pakistan – and I am sure all
the friends of Pakistan and India, particularly, the United States – would wish to avoid,” Yahya wrote. He urged Nixon to take up this matter in his
talks with Gandhi during her forthcoming visit to Washington in November.
Yahya’s assessment was confirmed by the U.S. intelligence. The CIA told the White House on 19 October that all Indian armed forces had
been placed on full alert. Nearly twenty-six squadrons, including supersonic airplanes, were positioned against Pakistan. There was a virtual
combat air ring around East Pakistan for offensive purposes. The Indian navy had been put to a state of war-preparedness with sixty percent of its
forces deployed against the coasts of West Pakistan. The remaining strength of the Indian navy was positioned to move against the East Pakistan
shores. The inevitable conclusion that one could draw from this offensive posture was that it was pointed in the direction of conflict – and not of
peace.
On 20 October, the consulate general in Dhaka sent a dispatch to Washington, assessing the guerrilla war in East Pakistan, showing a
widespread escalation. The “insurgency has increased in tempo and geographic scope in last three months,” the consulate said. Still the liberation
fighters were unable to challenge the Pakistan army in urban areas, but showing increasing capability to carry out ambushes and hit-and-run attacks
in certain areas, while limited-to-minor sabotage elsewhere.
The American diplomats in Dhaka also noted that Islamabad’s efforts to reduce popular support by “civilization” and the general amnesty had
been unsuccessful, except for possibly among the middle class in cities. The insurgency’s future course would depend heavily on the Indian
support, the tenacity of Islamabad, and the quality of the Bengali leadership, whether Mujib or the other emerging leader.
The consulate general felt that the Mukti Bahini was now sufficiently established in many areas and had enough cohesion to sustain itself even if
India cut down its support. Continued Indian support would inevitably further extend the Mukti Bahini operational range. Still, in the foreseeable
future, the freedom fighters were “not likely to present a dangerous threat to the Pakistani army, despite probable increases in numbers and scope
of activity.” In contrast with the situation in Vietnam, the telegram added, the insurgency did “not possess redoubt in which it can concentrate
masses of supplies and weapons, nor are there protected trails through which large quantities of heavy equipment can reach them from an easily
accessible seaport.”
For many months to come, the consulate incorrectly predicted that the Pakistani army would certainly retain an advantage in equipment and
training. On the other hand, even at the present activity level, the Mukti Bahini was a serious thorn in the army’s side.
“We have no means of an accurate assessment of army casualties, but indications are that figure may run as high as 10 to 12 killed daily, with a
corresponding number of wounded.” While not in itself crippling to the Pakistani army contingent in East Pakistan, these figures over an extended
period could create serious morale problem among the troops far from home, living among unfriendly people and in difficult and wearing climate,
the consulate observed.
The Dhaka mission also sensed that the military authorities in East Pakistan were obviously concerned. Precautions were being taken to protect
vulnerable points in the city. Brick walls with rifle or machine-gun ports were being constructed around the airport, electric power stations and
other strategic points, while sandbagged strong points were set up at many places along principal streets. Security checkpoints were being
maintained along main roads, and occasionally set up unexpectedly at other places. Several pillboxes and fortifications had been installed along the
northern rim of the Gulshan residential area in Dhaka.
Giving his take on the political dynamic, the consul general told Washington that “while we still believe that Sheikh Mujib, released and allowed
freedom of action, could assert control over the Mukti Bahini and use it as a disciplined instrument of his policy, longer he is restrained more likely
we consider it that a new leadership will emerge from among the Mukti Bahini, which, tempered by fighting and action-orientation, might one day
challenge both Mujib and the old Awami League leadership for the primacy in the independent or largely autonomous East Bengal.”
Whether such an eventual leadership would be oriented towards the right or left was impossible to predict, Consul General Herbert D. Spivack
concluded.
On 22 October, the State Department cautioned Nixon of a strong possibility of war. “We have no information that either side intends to take

the initiative at this time,” but a possible indicator of the level of tensions would be whether Gandhi began her three-week international tour on 24
October.
Rogers said the mutual withdrawal of troops, as proposed by Washington, appeared unlikely to be accepted by India. So he was
recommending that Yahya unilaterally make a limited pullback “as a signal to the Indians of his desire to de-escalate and reduce tensions. We
believe he might be willing to do this without jeopardizing his military position in order to put the onus on the Indians to take a reciprocal action.”
India was in no mood to reciprocate even if Yahya made such a unilateral gesture. In India, things rather started to look more warlike and the
Indian officials were busy with something remote from pulling out troops. On 22 October, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Nikolai Firyubin visited
New Delhi for five days. Marshal Pavel Kutakhov, deputy defense minister and chief of staff of the Soviet Air Force, arrived on 28 October with a
delegation. Kutakhov conveyed a Soviet willingness to discuss an emergency military supply program for India. Moscow had already promised to
aid India if Pakistan attacked.
As the Soviet officials toured India, Hoskinson and Saunders briefed Nixon on their visits.
“From all indications, the Soviets appear to be keeping an unusually close watch on the situation in South Asia,” they wrote. “If nothing else, this
is a graphic demonstration of the consultation clause in the new ‘friendship’ treaty. It also would seem to reflect Soviet concern that the Indo-Pak
military confrontation could blow up into full-scale fighting. By visibly demonstrating their support for India, the Soviets may hope to deter the
Pakistanis from taking any rash action.”
In Pakistan, Yahya received a friendly message from Washington. On 2 November, Farland met with the general in Islamabad to convey the
message of a unilateral pullback as Irwin suggested. Yahya agreed to withdraw military units as a first step towards defusing the explosive situation.
A relieved Farland reported back to Washington, “Yahya didn’t hesitate at all, saying spontaneously, ‘Of course, I will. Now this doesn’t mean
that I would pull the troops back into the barracks, but I will gladly promise to make the first move back from a forward military position.’ ”
At that time, Yahya appeared more flexible than ever before, telling Farland, “What I want your government to know is that in order to bring
normalcy back to the subcontinent, I will do anything within my power short of simply turning Pakistan over to India.”
When Kissinger briefed Nixon, he described Yahya’s decision as “significant,” and noted that while delivering the message, the Pakistani
ambassador emphasized the risk that Yahya took to accept the unilateral withdrawal idea. “He would be taking a concrete step on the basis of an
oral statement,” Kissinger wrote, adding that Gandhi could later disavow her promise to reciprocate on a pretext such as saying the situation had
changed.
“If India attacked, he would be vulnerable to charges of jeopardizing Pakistan’s security. Despite this risk, he has sent this reply because of his
trust in you,” Kissinger told Nixon, underscoring the depth of the administration’s friendship with the general.
Gandhi, who showed courage and sound judgement in handling the crisis in the face of extreme domestic pressure and external threat, voiced
reservations about the pull-back idea during a meeting with Prime Minister Heath in London before her departure for Washington to meet with
Nixon. She also did not rule out using force to resolve the East Pakistan problem. Her wait was now for the right time and right pretext to strike.

