6 
Why Nixon Opposed India:
The Indo-U.S.-Sino-Soviet Equation
hile Washington decided to keep its hands off the East Pakistan situation after the dark night of March 1971, things started heating up
elsewhere. India reacted sharply within a few days, with some 400 parliament members signing a petition demanding New Delhi
recognize an independent East Pakistan.
On 31 March 1971, Gandhi introduced a strongly worded resolution in parliament. Adopted by both houses – the Lok Sabha and the Rajya
Sabha – the resolution expressed a “deep anguish and grave concern at recent developments in East Bengal.” It alleged that “a massive attack by
the armed forces – dispatched from West Pakistan – had been unleashed against the entire people of East Bengal to suppress their urges and
aspirations for freedom and prosperity.”
On 3 April, Soviet President Nikolai Podgorny sent a letter to Yahya Khan appealing for a political settlement of East Pakistan’s problem.
Russia publicly appealed to Yahya to quickly end the repression in East Pakistan. On 20 April, Podgorny wrote to Yahya Khan again, criticizing
the military crackdown and supporting India’s demand for a political settlement in East Pakistan.
Islamabad replied to Moscow that the situation was under control and normal routines were being restored. Yahya Khan, in a terse message on
6 April, told Podgorny that supporting interference in internal affairs of a country negates the U.N. Charter. He asked the Soviet Union to use its
influence to stop New Delhi from “meddling in Pakistan’s internal affairs.”
The United States voiced its concern on 2 April for the human suffering in East Pakistan and stressed the need for multinational assistance, but
refrained from putting pressure on Yahya. Nixon was worried that Asia’s power balance would be upset if Pakistan were weakened. To some
extent, he was also anxious not to hurt his efforts to develop closer relations with China. Yahya, after all, was Nixon’s China link. America wanted
a stable Asia, and China’s support, for its planned withdrawal from Vietnam.
U.N. Secretary General U Thant asked Pakistan to allow relief agencies to act in East Pakistan while recognizing that the situation was
Pakistan’s internal matter. In a statement to the press on 19 May by Department of State spokesperson Charles Bray, the United States
welcomed the appeal issued by U Thant for assistance to help support East Pakistani refugees in India. Yahya firmly refused any outside
intervention because he mistakenly believed that his counter-insurgency move was sufficient to re-establish control over the rebels.
Going against existing global current, China put itself squarely behind Yahya, the communist giant’s strong ally. On 13 April, Beijing expressed
support for Yahya’s move to regain stability in East Pakistan. Chinese Premier Chou En-lai assured Yahya that should India attack Pakistan,
taking advantage of its domestic woes, China stood ready to help its ally safeguard its “state sovereignty” and national independence. From April
onwards, China gave Pakistan economic and military aid in line with its statement of support. China, however, quietly pressed Pakistan to settle the
dispute before India’s military intervention.
Chou En-lai wrote to Yahya on 12 April, “Your Excellency and leaders of various quarters in Pakistan have done lot of useful work to uphold
unification of Pakistan and to prevent it from moving towards split. We believe that through wise consultations and efforts of Your Excellency and
leaders of various quarters in Pakistan, situation in Pakistan will certainly be restored to normal. In our opinion, unification of Pakistan and unity of
people of East and West Pakistan are basic guarantees for Pakistan to attain prosperity and strength. Here, it is most important to differentiate
broad masses of the people from a handful of persons who want to sabotage unification of Pakistan. As genuine friend[s] of Pakistan, we would
like to present these views for Your Excellency’s reference. At the same time, we have noted that of late the Indian government has been carrying
out gross interference in internal affairs of Pakistan by exploiting internal problems of your country. And the Soviet Union and [the] United States
are doing the same one after other. The Chinese press is carrying reports to expose such unreasonable interference and has published Your
Excellency’s letter of reply to Podgorny. The Chinese government holds that what is happening in Pakistan at present is purely an internal affair of
Pakistan, which can only be settled by Pakistan people themselves and which brooks no foreign interference whatsoever. Your Excellency may
rest assured that should Indian expansionists dare to launch aggression against Pakistan, the Chinese government and people, will, as always, firmly
support Pakistan government and people in their just struggle to safeguard state sovereignty and national independence.”
Nehru Wants Great Indian Empire
China’s opposition to Bangladesh stemmed from its strategic thinking and disdain for what it perceived was New Delhi’s ambition to create a
“Mother India”. China, which has nearly intractable border disputes with its neighbor, believed that J.N. Nehru, India’s towering independence
leader and first prime minister, envisioned a greater India, encompassing the entire South and Southeast Asia. His daughter – Indira Gandhi, India’s
prime minister during the Bangladesh Liberation War – was made of the same mould.
“It is also a great pity that the daughter has also taken as her legacy the philosophy of her father embodied in his book, Discovery of India,”
China’s premier told Nixon and Kissinger in March 1972 in Beijing.
Chou said Nehru “was thinking of a great Indian empire – Malaysia, Ceylon, etc. It would probably also include our Tibet. When he was writing
that book he was in a British prison, but one reserved for gentlemen in Darjeeling. Nehru told me himself that the prison was in Sikkim, facing the
Himalayan mountains. At the time, I hadn’t read the book, but my colleague Chen Yi had, and called it to my attention . He said it was precisely
the spirit of India which was embodied.” Marshall Chen Yi, vice premier, had died of cancer before this Nixon-Chou meeting took place.
Indeed, China’s hostility towards India ranked only a little lower than that for the Soviet Union. The Chinese did not fear India per se; they
worried, however, that Moscow could use India to encircle China, a fear that provoked Beijing to consistently support Pakistan’s conservative
military regimes and its opposition to Bangladesh, where one would rather expect an ideological affinity.

“Since the ceasefire has gone into effect between India and Pakistan, we have carefully assessed subsequent Soviet actions and we are
convinced that they intend to continue their efforts to encircle the People’s Republic,” Chou En-lai told Kissinger, after Pakistan lost the 1971 war,
according to a memorandum of the Kissinger-Chou talks in the Chinese capital on 3 January 1972. “We say this based on a number of factors.
Included among those factors are their repeatedly announced support for Bangladesh and their offer to move advisers and assistance into East
Pakistan.”
Because both New Delhi and Moscow had long-standing disputes with Beijing, China figured its interests would be better served by continuing
to have Pakistan interposed between the Soviet Union and India. Should West Pakistan cease to exist, China would be surrounded by unfriendly
neighbors. On the other hand, continuing rivalry between Pakistan and India over East Pakistan would divert New Delhi’s attention away from her
border with China. Thus, West Pakistan’s survival was important to the communist giant.
But China’s performance during the war dealt a crushing blow to its prestige in South Asia, especially amongst the pro-Chinese elements in the
subcontinent. According to a CIA report, some unnamed leftist members of the Pakistan People’s Party admitted the day Bhutto assumed
presidency that “their image has been damaged by China’s failure to come to the aid of Pakistan.” Bhutto himself told the U.S. ambassador in
Pakistan that unlike the United States, “China had not fulfilled its obligation to Pakistan, and he saw no need to visit Peking in the near future to
discuss Pakistan’s new situation.”
China’s opposition to Bangladesh continued even after Dhaka fell. China, which itself was kept out of the United Nations by the United States
for more than two decades, blocked Bangladesh’s entry into the world forum in an attempt to nudge Sheikh Mujib to free the Pakistani war
prisoners. It was not until Mujib’s fall in 1975 that China recognized Bangladesh. China’s ambassador to Pakistan, Chang Tong, told Sidney
Sober, deputy chief of the U.S. mission in Islamabad, on 6 November 1973, that Bangladesh “had no legal basis for trying those prisoners, and,
indeed, their return was called for by ‘justice and principle.’ ”
Such a step would help improve relations among the South Asian countries, pave the way for Bangladesh’s entry into the world organization and
China’s recognition of Bangladesh, the Chinese said. He urged America to push the Bengalis to stop the war crimes trials. In short, China walked
the standard Pakistani line that the POWs had been fighting on their territory under orders of their own government, so another country could not
legally try them. If they had acted improperly, they would face justice in Pakistan when they returned home.
When Chang sought Sober’s view, the American said the South Asians would benefit more if they looked ahead to “their future relations and
needs rather than continue to look backward to the tragic events of 1971; but apparently there were deep feelings and domestic compulsions,
which had been impelling the Bangladesh government to insist on the trials.” Chang dismissed the theory of popular pressure on Mujib for the trials.
Bangladesh, he argued, stood only to gain by giving up the trials, because not only would such a step lead to better relations with Pakistan but also
would loosen the Indian and Soviet grip on Dhaka.
Only after Bangladesh signed the Simla agreement and agreed to release the POWs did China soften its position. On 14 April 1974, China’s
Vice Foreign Minister Ch’iao Kuan-hua told Kissinger that the tripartite pact among India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, was “a good thing”.
Kissinger did not entirely agree with China about how it saw Bangladesh. “We think Bangladesh is not an Indian satellite. When relations are
normal between India and Bangladesh, contradictions between them will emerge. I have also always believed that India will live to regret what it
did in 1971.”
When he then asked whether China intended to establish relations with Bangladesh, Vice Premier Deng Xiao Peng replied during a meeting in
Beijing that “there is no obstacle to that now,” adding “there have always been good relations between the peoples of Bangladesh and China.”
China used pro-Chinese elements to further its interests in the absence of a diplomatic mission during Mujib’s rule. Several fringe Maoist political
groups, which opposed Bangladesh’s liberation with India’s help, conducted armed operations in the country until Mujib was overthrown.
Kissinger had cautioned Nixon about China’s hostile attitude towards the Mujib government after a visit to Beijing. China would “go very slowly
on Bangladesh recognition, but saw advantages in our diplomatic relations so as not to leave the field free to Moscow and New Delhi,” Kissinger
told Nixon, quoting Chou. “In sum, I see no early change in the People’s Republic of China’s policy toward South Asia. The one place that will
bear watching, however, is Bangladesh, where the Chinese might ferment trouble against the present rulers.” China quickly moved to recognize the
regime that came to power after Mujib’s violent overthrow three years later.
China’s support for West Pakistan continued even after the Pakistani troops capitulated in Dhaka in 1971, essentially because of Beijing’s
hostility towards India. When Nixon told Chou En-lai during his trip to China that America would recognize Bangladesh soon, the Chinese premier
said: “We will probably recognize Bangladesh later on. Perhaps, we will be the last one.” He linked China’s recognition to India’s withdrawal of
troops stationed in Bangladesh and the resolution of the Kashmir issue. China also linked the recognition with the war prisoners” release.
Kissinger told Nixon after a visit to China that “Chou agreed with our view that an independent Pakistan should be supported against Indian
pressures, absorbing New Delhi’s energy in the subcontinent so it couldn’t expand into Southeast Asia.” He quoted Chou as saying that New
Delhi was meddling in such areas as Nepal and Sri Lanka. China’s premier also told Kissinger the Indians were putting out feelers for better
relations, which China would ignore.
China’s disdain of Nehru coincided with Nixon’s own. Nixon’s visceral and personal dislike of Nehru dated at least to their first meeting in
1953, when he made a twenty-minute courtesy call on the prime minister. In RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon, published in 1978 , Nixon
wrote: “The least friendly leaders I met on this trip was Nehru,” referring to the visit he undertook as Eisenhower’s vice president. Nixon, however,
consistently protested branding him as anti-Indian.
To be sure, Nixon was not the only one holding an unfavorable view of Nehru. Eisenhower, too, considered India’s long-term leader illogical in
his views. He expressed this opinion on 23 March 1955, in a letter to Secretary of State John Foster Dulles while instructing the American
ambassador to India on how to deal with Nehru.
“In the Indian situation,” Eisenhower wrote, “I am struck by the amount of evidence we have that Nehru seems to be often more swayed by
personality than by logical argument. He seems to be intensely personal in his whole approach, and I have no doubt that the recent meeting in my
office was arranged by Mr. Nehru in order that his trusted lieutenant could give him a personal appraisal of my general attitude toward the world,
India and Nehru himself.”
Eisenhower’s comment followed his 15 March meeting with V.K. Krishna Menon, Nehru’s close friend who later became defense minister.
During this meeting, which Dulles attended, Menon covered various unspecified topics.

Based on his personal assessment of Nehru, Eisenhower advised Dulles to “urge our new ambassador there to do everything possible to win the
personal confidence and friendship of Nehru. I think he should study thoroughly any methods and practices that have apparently been successful in
the past, and we, on our part, should avoid putting chores on our ambassador that would almost compel him to show an unsympathetic attitude
toward the premier. It seems to me that Cooper should be particularly fitted to do this. He has a charming wife and between them we might build
up a very much better position.” John Cooper was then America’s ambassador to India.
Overall, India and the United States have had strained relations since the British era. The Indians had been suspicious of America’s motives at
least since the 1940s – when Britain ruled the subcontinent. Sir Girja Shankar Bajpai, India’s agent general in Washington, explained the reason to
Wallace Murray, Roosevelt’s political affairs adviser, on 24 April 1942. Bajpai made the comment while discussing why the Indian press was
hostile to a U.S. technical mission, headed by Colonel Louis Johnson, sent to explore India’s industrial resources, to recommend the production of
essential war materials.
He said India’s “extremely reactionary and self-seeking” industrialists had first spread rumors to discredit the mission before its arrival, saying
“that American imperialism was endeavoring to replace British imperialism in India.” While they realized the Congress Party’s economic policies
would hurt their interests, these industrialists still supported Congress, hoping to be able to influence its leaders after it came to power to increase
tariff barriers in an independent India. An open-door policy giving the Americans an easy entry to India would be contrary to their interests.
Following the cue of the business leaders, the Indian media jumped on the bandwagon and launched an anti-American campaign, accusing the
United States of intervening in the Cripps negotiations on India’s self-rule. Bajpai said that although Nehru and other Congress leaders welcomed
Roosevelt’s personal envoy Johnson’s assistance during their talks with Cripps, they were careful enough to “avoid any charge by the opposition
that the course of the negotiations was being dictated by” the Yankees.
Giving an insight into how Congress worked, Bajpai then explained why the Cripps mission had failed. “To my question as to whether he
believed the full reason that had been set forth by the various Indian groups for the rejection of the British offer, Sir Girja replied almost
emphatically in the negative,” Murray recorded in a memorandum. “Girja said he felt the reasons were ‘complete window-dressing’ and that the
real reasons were unstated.”
Although Nehru and Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, a Congress Working Committee member in 1942, personally sought a successful settlement
with Cripps, the committee itself “had other ideas and successfully blocked the negotiations. Once the Congress Party was unwilling to fall in line, it
was a foregone conclusion that the proposals would be turned down by the other parties.”
Apparently, the talks collapsed because Britain refused to grant India self-rule as demanded by Congress. But Congress might not have
accepted the plan even if London had granted self-rule. Bajpai said that some Congress members reasoned that if Britain lost the war and Japan
occupied India, the Indians could negotiate a much better deal with the Japanese. Why then accept the Cripps proposals?
The Americans, however, blamed the British for the failure, saying the refusal indicated that His Majesty’s government was insincere in its
promise to grant independence to India after the war. America wanted to be friendly with the Indians to neutralize their sympathy for Japan.
Washington was worried that a chaotic India, with its vast population and natural resources essential to the successful operation of the war, would
fall prey to Japan. This fear prompted Roosevelt in March 1942 to give a detailed outline of how the Americans developed their form of
government and to propose that Britain arrange an orderly and peaceful transfer of power and let the Indians build their political system as the
United States did. Both the Cripps and the Cabinet Mission proposals incorporated elements of Roosevelt’s ideas.
KGB Spoils Gandhi With Lavish Vacation
In subsequent years, America saw many reasons to go against India, especially against Nehru. First, as the Americans saw it, Nehru put India right
within Soviet orbit after Washington had bonded with Pakistan to fight communism. As a result, while Nehru condemned the Anglo-French
invasion of Egypt, he kept silent when the Soviet Union crushed the Hungarian uprising. On top of this, India had opposed a U.N. resolution calling
for free elections in Hungary and the withdrawal of Russian troops.
Indira Gandhi, who held fond memories of her first visit to Moscow in 1953 when she was lavishly treated by her hosts in an apparent bid to
please her father, adopted a similar foreign policy line and criticized America’s Vietnam policy. That only served to infuriate Nixon.
Gandhi was overwhelmed by the attention lavished on her by the Soviet spy agency. ”Everybody – the Russians – have been so sweet to me . .
. I am being treated like everybody’s only daughter. I shall be horribly spoilt by the time I leave. Nobody has ever been so nice to me,” she wrote
to Nehru, unaware that the entire extravaganza was arranged by the KGB, which also surrounded her with handsome, attentive male admirers, a
fact she excluded from her letter, according to The Mitrokhin Archive II: The KGB and the World, a collection of notes made secretly by KGB
archivist, Major Vasili Mitrokhin, over thirty years.
Two years later, she accompanied her father on his first official visit to the Soviet Union. Like Nehru, she was visibly impressed by the apparent
successes of Soviet planning and economic modernization, exhibited to them in carefully stage-managed visits of Russian factories. During the trip,
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev presented her with a mink coat, which would become one of the favorite items in her wardrobe. Only a few
years earlier, she herself had criticized the female Indian ambassador in Moscow for accepting a similar gift, according to an account by
Christopher Andrew, a British historian who compiled The Mitrokhin Archive.
To be sure, America’s opposition to India was not monolithic. An examination of its diplomatic history indicates that a succession of U.S.
administrations have had a long tradition of pursuing policies that often went against the advice of their own diplomats in the field. America’s
domestic politics – and an incumbent president’s personal agenda – often fed into such contradictions. Frequently, America willingly supported
repressive regimes in a clandestine manner, to avoid charges of interference in the domestic and sovereign affairs of those countries. In many cases,
America also shied away from getting involved to avoid risking failures for itself.
Washington, for example, balked when Johnson urged Roosevelt to help the Cripps mission and thus strengthen India’s defense against the
Japanese in the Second World War. “The hour has arrived when we should consider a replotting of our policy in this section of the world,”
Johnson had suggested, advocating the United States distance itself from Britain on Indian issues. “Association with the British is found to
adversely affect the morale of our own officers.”
But Secretary of State Cordell Hull saw it in an entirely different manner. “An unsuccessful attempt to solve the problem along the lines you

suggest would, if we were to judge by the results of the Cripps mission, further alienate the Indian leaders and the parties from the British and
cause disturbances among the various communities,” Hull told Johnson, dismissing his proposal. “On balance, I incline to the view that at the
present moment the risks in the unsuccessful effort to solve the problem outweigh the advantages that might be obtained if a satisfactory solution
could be found.”
Some thirty years after the Cripps mission, Washington again ignored the advice of its diplomats on the ground. Annoyed by their opposition to
Washington’s policy toward the Bengalis, Nixon transferred Consul General Archer Blood from Dhaka in 1971 and banished him to a nondescript
position in Washington.
Added to the often-acrimonious Indo-U.S. history were Nehru’s own troubles with America. In 1955, Nehru accused the United States of
attempting to undermine his government and policies. He complained that America subsidized Indian newspapers and publishers that produced
articles and books promoting U.S. foreign policy, which often ran against Nehru’s own.
“It has been clear to me since coming here that deepest disagreements between United States and the government of India lie in our foreign
policy and the assumptions upon which our policy is based,” Cooper wrote to the State Department on 25 March 1955, explaining the cause of
Nehru’s displeasure with Washington. “I suspect that what may be really troubling Nehru and the government of India is the thought that American
officials in India are trying to convince Indians of correctness of American foreign policy and desirability of its support, which by implication
suggests rejection of Nehru’s foreign policy.”
Besides the subsidy by the United States Information Service, the Americans were perhaps involved in other intelligence gathering activities,
which Cooper was not fully informed about. He protested this practice in the same telegram: “It is possible that the basic question of freedom of
the United States to state and interpret persuasively within India, U.S. foreign policy may have to be discussed with Pillai and Nehru. If I am to be
in the strongest position to advance our views on this basic question, then I must for my own information be fully informed on any operations by the
official agencies of United States other than the USIS.”
N.R. Pillai, secretary general of the India’s foreign office, specifically said the USIS paid Pratap , an Urdu language newspaper in New Delhi,
for publishing materials supplied by the American information agency. He also told Cooper that the U.S. consul general in Bombay, William
Turner, either paid, or promised to pay, The People newspaper.
“Nehru believed that if these charges are true, the United States is purposely trying to undermine him in India before Indian people,” Pillai told
the ambassador, who denied all the allegations, saying America “did not subsidize any Indian publication or individual.”
Pillai, citing the British practice of keeping secret agencies in India without the knowledge of their own diplomats, insisted that America might be
conducting clandestine operations without telling the ambassador or his colleagues about them. Two decades later, Swaran Singh raised exactly the
same charge with Nixon’s Secretary of State Rogers, to support Gandhi’s allegations that the CIA sought to undermine her government.
To cool down the explosive situation, Thomas E. Flanagan, chief public affairs officer at the embassy, called for “prudence” and “restraint,”
given the lingering climate of Indian suspicion and the close scrutiny of the USIS operations would likely come under in the future. He saw little to
be gained by distributing anything that Nehru or his colleagues could view as critical of the prime minister himself.
Nehru Saga Colors Nixon’s Policy
Nixon’s impressions of India under Nehru continued to color his views decades later when Nehru’s daughter, Indira Gandhi, became India’s
leader. Nixon told Kissinger after Gandhi’s first official visit to Washington in 1971 that India’s future potential was dim, due to its state-controlled
economy. On 2 September 1969, at a meeting of his top foreign policy aides in the Western White House in California, Nixon outlined his goals
and reiterated his government’s position: “In the Pakistan/India situation, for example, Pakistan comes out way ahead in terms of likely progress,
partly because India is headed down the road toward becoming a socialist state.”
In 1970, India irritated Nixon by closing down five USIS cultural centers across India after accusing the Americans of using the facilities to
engage in intelligence gathering and meddling in domestic affairs. Despite Swaran Singh’s explanation that India’s decision to close the centers was
part of overall efforts to establish a uniform policy regarding such posts–and was not directed against the United States – Nixon ordered the State
Department to be tough on India.
In a note to Kissinger on 7 March 1970, he instructed his aide to “tell Sisco I’d like to take a stronger line on this. Not to object to the closing,
but to accept it and close some other facilities, which may ‘irritate’ them a bit.”
Kaul, who had been with the foreign office since India’s Independence, himself confirmed that personal animosity between Gandhi and Nixon
contributed to the souring of Indo-U.S. relations. “The prime minister hopes for good relations with the United States,” Kaul told Nixon’s
successor, Gerald Ford, on 21 August 1974, in the White House. “She knows that in the past there were personal and other problems, and hopes
that won’t interfere with our relations now.”
Contrasting the bitter Indo-U.S. ties, the Americans had developed a personal liking for both Ayub and Yahya. “Yahya is tough, direct and with
a good sense of humor. He talks in a very clipped way, is a splendid product of Sandhurst and affects a sort of social naivete but is probably much
more complicated than this,” Kissinger described in a memorandum, summarizing Nixon’s conversation with the general at the White House on 25
October 1970.
During that meeting, Nixon expressed America’s desire to establish contacts with China. The administration had been looking for an opening
with China since at least a year earlier. Yahya said he had once been told to establish secret links and had communicated it to the Chinese, who
wanted to know if this meant America was considering a hotline to Beijing similar to that with Moscow. Nixon said, no, that was not what he
meant. He said he was willing to send ambassadors, and Yahya said he would explain this to the Chinese.
Did Yahya’s help motivate Nixon to stand solidly behind the general during the East Pakistan crisis?
There is no doubt that both Kissinger and Nixon highly appreciated Yahya’s help in their secret mission to China. In a letter to Yahya on 26 July
1971, Kissinger expressed his deep gratitude. Nixon’s obsession with his China rapprochement policy might have played a role in his South Asian
strategy, but the president and Kissinger both were guided more by their geopolitical vision than by moral hazards. Anxious to woo China, they
greatly appreciated Yahya’s contribution to their efforts rather than castigating him for starting a reign of terror in his country.

“I have so many reasons to thank you that it is difficult to know where to begin,” Kissinger wrote. “First of all, there is the vital role that you
played in establishing communications between us and the People’s Republic of China. Your initiative and discretion made possible the reliable and
secure contacts that led to my visit and the president’s forthcoming trip.”
Giving the message a personal touch, he added: “Then, the skill, tact, and efficiency with which your officials carried out my secret mission were
nothing short of brilliant. I hope you will pass on my deep appreciation, and that of the president, to all those who realized this venture, including
some of your closest advisers, the military personnel who paved our way to and from the airport, and the captain and crew of your airplane. My
colleagues and I were greatly moved by the historic nature of our flight and the care and warmth with which we were treated as we crossed some
of the world’s highest mountains.” Again “Mr President, the deepest thanks go to you who led and orchestrated the entire enterprise. I shall always
remember your generosity in our talks on July 8 when you insisted on setting aside the massive problems that your country faces and concentrating
instead on my visit to Peking. In addition, I enjoyed, and profited from, my too brief stay in Pakistan itself, the conversations we had, and the
gracious Pakistani hospitality.”
Nixon himself lauded Yahya’s contribution in a hand-written personal letter on 7 August 1971, in which he said: “I have already expressed my
official appreciation for your assistance in arranging our contacts with the People’s Republic of China. Through this personal note I want you to
know that without your personal assistance this profound breakthrough in relations between the United States of America and the People’s
Republic of China would never have been accomplished.”
In general, America’s policy towards South Asia, at least since the pre-Kennedy era, followed a standard pattern. Since the 1950s, American
policy had been shaped by its perception that economic and social progress would produce stable democracies in recently de-colonized countries
and help check communism in the third world. According to this theory, it is only the military – because of its disciplined organization – could offer
the best chances at maintaining stability in newly independent countries, which often lacked strong political institutions.
“The United States objectives, especially with respect to India and Pakistan and generally with respect to other countries of South Asia, is to
enhance the security of the United States,” concluded a report by James S. Lay Jr, executive secretary at the State Department, to the National
Security Council. The report, issued on 5 January 1951 and titled, “The Position of the United States with Respect to South Asia” , also said: “The
loss of India to the communist orbit would mean that for all practical purposes all of Asia will have been lost; this would constitute a most serious
and threatening blow to the security of the United States . . .”
As part of this strategy to check communism, since the 1950s the United States had pursued essentially three policy objectives in South Asia:
stable, strong governments friendly towards the United States in its fight against communism; greater cooperation among South Asian countries to
wage a common front against communism; and the improvement of the region’s basic economies.
Said a National Security Council report issued on 10 January 1957: “The political stake of the United States in the independence and integrity of
the countries of South Asia, as well as in their stability and peaceful progress, is very large. If India or Pakistan came under communist influence,
chain-reaction effects, going as far as Western Europe, would result. Serious political instability in either or both of these large nations would
significantly increase communist influence in the area or, alternatively, might lead to hostilities in South Asia. Either turn of events could engage great
power interests to the point of threatening world peace.
It continued: “It remains necessary, therefore, to employ the limited means at our disposal as effectively as possible in South Asia. This will
require policies developed country by country, but it will also continue to involve us in intraregional issues and we shall probably find it increasingly
necessary that we seek to resolve, or at least to keep under control, the local controversies that bulk so importantly in the political life of the
subcontinent.”
This document followed an intelligence analysis released on 15 March 1955, which predicted probable developments in Pakistan over the next
several years, with an emphasis on its economic prospects and likely political stability. It followed more than two years of recurrent political crises
and takeover of political power in Pakistan by a small group of British-trained administrators and military leaders centering around Governor
General Ghulam Mohammed and his two principal associates, General Iskander Mirza and General Ayub Khan. The Pakistani regime favored a
strong central government, economic development through austerity measures and foreign aid, and close alignment with the United States.
The intelligence report said: “We believe that the present regime will remain in power at least through 1955 and probably considerably longer.
Its firm control of the armed forces will almost certainly enable it to discourage, or if need be defeat, any attempt to challenge it, and it is unlikely to
allow itself to be ousted by political maneuvering or legal challenges to its authority. Although East Pakistani provincialism will continue to pose
serious problems, we do not believe that separatism will become a major threat.”
At least for several years, however, the regime would probably be handicapped by a lack of organized political and popular support and, even
more importantly, by the thinness of its top leadership. Moreover, within the ruling group there were differences of view which could become
serious. Ghulam Mohammed was seriously ill at that time and his death, while not expected to automatically lead to the regime’s fall, was expected
to severely test Mirza and Ayub’s ability to keep their associates in line and their opponents under control. The eventuality was seen as a probable
compulsion for them to rely more openly on the armed forces.
The report concluded: “Should Mirza and Ayub, in turn, be removed from the scene, a many-sided struggle would probably follow. This might
give rise to another, basically similar, authoritarian regime or it might result in serious internal disorganization and perhaps a weakening of Pakistan’s
present alignment with the United States.
“Under the present or any similar regime, Pakistan will almost certainly continue to cultivate close ties with the United States, if only because of
Pakistan’s urgent need for U.S. economic assistance and its desire for U.S. military and diplomatic support to strengthen its position against India.
Pakistan’s present regime will probably cooperate with U.S. efforts in the further development of anti-communist defense arrangements in both the
Middle East and Southeast Asia. It is not likely, however, to commit any more than token forces outside the Pakistan territory unless its armed
forces are considerably strengthened, its economy improved and its fear of India greatly reduced. In the event of a general war, Pakistan would
recognize that its interest and obligations lay with the West, but unless directly threatened, it would probably seek specific Western protection
before overtly departing from nonbelligerence.”
Pakistan’s strong military was among the reasons why American policymakers sought an alliance with Islamabad. Admiral Arthur Radford,
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, revealed his preference during a Joint Chiefs discussion in 14 January 1955, after a trip to Pakistan. He had
stayed with Governor General Mohammed Ali in Karachi, but hardly saw him, because the Pakistani leader was ill. Mirza, the admiral understood,

was the No. 2 strongman, but he thought the best man was still Ayub.
John D. Jernegan, deputy secretary of state for the Near East, offered a different viewpoint. He did not know Mirza, but said State Department
specialists thought that Mirza, who definitely expected to be prime minister one day, was more competent than Ayub.
The admiral replied that such might very well be, but as far as honesty and directness were concerned, Mirza was no match for Ayub. Further
discussion prompted the admiral to recount that during the recent government crisis in Pakistan involving Prime Minister Mohammed Ali, Ghulam
Mohammad wanted to name Ayub as prime minister, but Ayub himself persuaded the governor general to keep Ali in place. Jernegan said that
both Ayub and Mirza had persuaded the governor general to keep Ali.
Commenting further, Radford said that “Ali was not the man we would want to have stay in ...” He emphasized that Pakistan was a potential ally
of great importance and that from the military point of view, it had “a trained armed force which no other friendly power can match, not even the
Turks.”
Nixon explained his rationale for supporting Pakistan against India during a conversation with Rogers on 24 November 1971. He compared
India’s move into East Pakistan with North Vietnam’s support for South Vietnam, because New Delhi denied that it was actively aiding the Bengali
insurgents, as did Hanoi. Nixon, however, was convinced that “the Indians are going to win” and that “Pakistan will eventually disintegrate.”
“They want Pakistan to disintegrate,” Nixon said, referring to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. “Despite what she says that’s what she wants,
there’s no question about that. Now under those circumstances, it seems to me that the fact that Yahya has been more decent to us than she has
been; clearly apart from that, I think that our policy wherever we can should definitely be tilted toward Pakistan, and not toward India. I think India
is more at fault.”
Nixon Sees Strong India Will Hurt U.S. Interests
America’s strategy contained an element of curbing India’s regional influence. Nixon feared that if India broke Pakistan and emerged as South
Asia’s most dominant power, it would have an adverse effect on America’s interests. Nixon and Kissinger were also wary of another brewing
threat from the Soviet military and its moral support for India. An Indian victory would only boost India’s prestige and tip the global power
balance, away from America and in Moscow’s favor. To prevent such an outcome, with their frantic efforts, combined with scarcely veiled threats,
they sought to stop Pakistan’s total meltdown, to thwart what they thought was a sinister Indo-Soviet scheme.
On 22 June 1972, Kissinger told the Chinese prime minister that “as far as we are concerned, we would also look with disfavor on an attempt
by India to establish hegemony in that area.” He prefaced his statement by saying that India was pursuing “an aggressive foreign policy”, which in
essence was an extension of the Soviet geopolitical strategy. By way of illustration, Kissinger noted that India had offered to both Indonesia and
Japan, drafts of treaties that were “word for word the same as its own treaties with the Soviet Union”.
He agreed with the Chinese that India’s ability to pursue hegemony in Asia depended to some extent on its ability to gain freedom of action on
the subcontinent. “We believe that the strategy of India is to do to West Pakistan what it has already done to East Pakistan by disintegrating it, by
bringing about the secession of Northwest Frontier and Baluchistan.”
He recalled that when Gandhi visited Washington in 1971 she did not talk much about East Pakistan. Instead she talked about the betrayal
involved in West Pakistan – the inclusion of Baluchistan and the Northwest Frontier in the Islamic nation. Therefore, the problem was whether it
was possible to save West Pakistan and thus absorb some of India’s energies on the subcontinent rather than free them all for expansion. “I’m
saying this cold-bloodedly; it’s our analysis,” Kissinger said.
To some extent, Nixon’s steps in 1971 followed a familiar path treaded by previous U.S. administrations. In 1965, for example, when the
Johnson administration dealt with the war between India and Pakistan, it simply decided to cut off military aid to both nations. Nixon did exactly
the same six years later. The only difference between 1965 and 1971 was that in Johnson’s time, Pakistan succumbed to U.S. pressure when the
president asked Ayub not to encourage China to get involved in that war. On the other hand, when Nixon urged Gandhi not to interfere in East
Pakistan, she simply ignored him.
Nixon also carried forward the Eisenhower administration views that America’s interests were better served “by a unified Pakistan.” When
Yahya told the U.S. ambassador in 1971 that he worried Pakistan’s two wings might split up, Farland reassured him that America continued to
support Pakistan’s unity.
“I recalled that I had carefully explained to him during our first meeting that it was the policy of the United States to respect the unity and
integrity of Pakistan, and that I had publicly reiterated this policy on every occasion,” the ambassador informed the State Department in a cable on
1 February 1971.
Farland told Yahya that any propaganda to the contrary had been spread by those who disliked better ties between the United States and
Pakistan. He asserted that whatever rumor that the United States was covertly attempting to divide the two wings “was not only false and
fallacious, but that it was contrary to the most elementary political or military judgments.”
“Further, to believe that the United States sought or desired another underdeveloped country in Southeast Asia could be deemed ludicrous were
it not for the fact that such a posture had been given credence in the press and unfortunately was believed in many places of high political
importance,” Farland also told Yahya.
Farland’s assurance was merely a renewal of a strong commitment Nixon had made a year earlier, when Yahya visited Washington in October
1970. At that time, Nixon told him, “Nobody has occupied the White House who is friendlier to Pakistan.”
All the key U.S. officials – Nixon, Kissinger, and Rogers – blamed India for the war to justify their support for Pakistan. Rogers told a National
Security Council meeting on 6 December 1971, that “the conflict was obviously the result of a carefully worked out plan designed by the Indians
some time ago.” Kissinger added that despite giving an appearance that “the Indians were practising restraint, but it was obvious now that they
moved as early as they could.” India had waited for the monsoon to be over, the passes from China to be closed by snow and the Bengali
guerrillas to be trained before making the move. “All was completed as Prime Minister Gandhi traveled abroad,” Kissinger said. Nixon summed
up: “The Indians had long wanted to hurt Pakistan. Their interests involved Kashmir more than East Pakistan.”
Nixon continued his hard-line policy towards India even after the war had ended as part of his decision to punish Gandhi for her anti-U.S.

statements, especially on the Vietnam issue. On 24 June 1972, he instructed his former Treasury Secretary John Connally, who was sent on a
diplomatic mission by the president after he quit his cabinet post, to be tough in his talks in New Delhi.
“I would like to emphasize that it is essential that you take the strongest stand on this issue and would like to reemphasize the importance I
attach to your maintaining the toughest and most aloof demeanor during your Indian leg in the face of these Indian attacks,” Nixon advised his
emissary. “The Indian press is suggesting that your visit to Delhi is associated with an effort by me to admit past mistakes in our policy towards
India as part of an apologetic move to re-establish better relations. Thus, it is essential that you not contribute to this impression, which can only
invite further Indian insolence. It is also essential to our strategy vis-à-vis Hanoi and other countries that we in no way contribute to the impression
that we are buttering up a state, which has been in the forefront of vitriolic attack against my recent Vietnam decisions. You should make it very
clear from the outset that the United States cannot accept continuing anti-U.S. attacks whether they involve the conflict in Southeast Asia or some
other aspects of U.S. policy. I know I can count on you to ensure that this climate is clearly established during your stay in India.”
The Nixon White House saw the South Asian crisis from a much wider perspective, as revealed in a 9 December 1971 conversation between
the president and his aide. In the Oval Office meeting, Kissinger repeated his warning of the dangers he saw if India dismembered Pakistan: The
impact of a U.S. ally’s dismemberment would “be severe in Iran, in Indonesia and in the Middle East.”
Referring to the ongoing war between India and Pakistan, he said “there is no good deal possible any more at this stage. And, if the Russians
want to press it to a brutal conclusion, we’re going to lose.” He saw possibilities, however, in the “conciliatory” letter from Brezhnev. The Soviets
wanted a Middle East settlement, a European security conference, trade with the United States, and a summit meeting. Also, the Russians possibly
did not want to push the United States and China closer together.
“So we are not without assets,” Kissinger added.
To scare the Indo-Soviet axis, Kissinger told Nixon that America could “warn the Russians and the Indians that ... Kennedy made a
commitment to Pakistan against aggression from India.” “Secondly,” he added, “we should move that helicopter ship and some escort into the Bay
of Bengal,” ostensibly to evacuate the Americans. He was not, at this point, recommending introduction of the carrier. “From the Chinese angle, I
would like to move the carrier. From the public opinion angle, what the press and television would do to us if an American carrier showed up
there.”
Nixon asked: “Can’t the carrier be there for the purpose of evacuation?”
Kissinger: “But against whom are we going to use the planes? Are we going to shoot our way in?”
Nixon asked what good it would do to move a helicopter ship into the area.
Kissinger said it would be “a token that something else will come afterward.” He also recommended letting “the Jordanians move some of their
planes. And I’d get the Indian Ambassador in and demand assurances that India doesn’t want to annex territory.”
Kissinger again highlighted the differing approaches to the crisis adopted by the State Department and the White House. The department, he
said, “would propose a ceasefire in the West in return for in effect our recognition of Bangladesh.” Such an approach would constitute “a total
collapse” and “it would hurt us with the Chinese.”
Nixon, however, saw the need to take into account the situation’s “realities.” “Pakistan’s partition was a fact,” he said. “You see those people
welcoming the Indian troops when they come in.” “Why then,” he asked, “are we going through all of this agony?”
Kissinger replied: “We are going through this agony to prevent the West Pakistan army from being destroyed. And secondly, to retain our
Chinese arm. And thirdly, to prevent a complete collapse of the world’s psychological balance of power, which will be produced if a combination
of the Soviet Union and the Soviet armed client state can tackle a not insignificant country without anybody doing anything.”
Kissinger felt that if the United States would “put enough chips into the pot” it could persuade the Soviets “for their own reasons, for the other
considerations, to call a halt to it.”
Nixon asked: “What are we going to ask the Russians to do?” Kissinger: “Ceasefire, negotiation and subsequent withdrawal.” He added:. “But
we’d have to clear it with Yahya first.”
Nixon: “Ceasefire and negotiation on what basis.”
Kissinger: “Between the Awami League and Islamabad.” He added “on the basis of the December 1970 election,” and “within the framework
of a united Pakistan.” Withdrawal, he said, would occur after the negotiations.
When Nixon asked what the United States could do to influence the outcome, Kissinger replied: “I would keep open the possibility that we’ll
pour arms into Pakistan.” If the Soviet Union could ship arms to India, Kissinger said, why should the United States not do the same to Pakistan?
“I don’t understand the theory of noninvolvement,” he said. “I don’t see where we will be as a country. I have to tell you honestly I consider this
our Rhineland.” He warned: “If the Russians come out of it totally cocky, we may have a Middle East war in the spring.”
But Nixon was concerned about the implications of taking a hard line. “We have to know what we are jeopardizing,” he said.
Kissinger responded: “You are jeopardizing your relationship with the Soviets, but that is also your card, your willingness to jeopardize it.” Not
to play that card, Kissinger suggested, would be to concede the Soviet Union a dangerous victory.
Nixon said opponents of his South Asian policy worried about jeopardizing Indo-U.S. relations.
Kissinger: “You could argue that it will help us in the long term with the Indians.”
Nixon: “I don’t give a damn about the Indians.”
Kissinger later sought to smooth out the rough edges of Indo-U.S. relations caused by America’s support for Pakistan. On 15 April 1974, he
told Swaran Singh, “Whatever our views in 1971 were, now that Bangladesh is independent we want it to be stable. In any case, our position in
1971 had nothing to do with India or Bangladesh. It was affected by our opening to China and our relationship with the USSR.”
Singh had a different issue on his mind. “We also have information that the Chinese are keen to come to Bangladesh soon. We assume that they
will use the internal situation for their own advantage.” he told Kissinger.
Kissinger: “I have the same impression. They talk in terms of the closeness of the Bangladesh and the Chinese people.”
Singh: “They have some people who will be quite active there. They will use their presence there to generate anti-Indian acts. But we will have
to live with that problem. We are neighbors of China, and there is nothing we can do with the fact that they are there and will be active in their own

neighborhood. In any case, American and Indian interests and objectives are the same.”
Kissinger: “Yes. They are parallel. We want a stable, progressive and democratic Bangladesh. There is no need for us to fight again the
problems of two years ago. They had nothing to do with Bangladesh.”
Nixon and Kissinger obviously also believed that the Soviet Union, with its then newly signed friendship treaty with India, was well entrenched in
New Delhi; an even-handed policy not tilted towards Pakistan would not have changed the basic fact of the Soviet arms aid to India. On the
contrary, a pro-Indian policy would have antagonized both Islamabad and Beijing. Thus, apparently afraid that the president’s Beijing mission
might be jeopardized, the administration favored Pakistan over India.
However, Nixon’s desire to forge a relationship with China – an apparent objective Kissinger had outlined to the president’s foreign policy team
before the war – possibly had little direct impact on America’s support for Pakistan in 1971. Kissinger himself dismissed the notion that Pakistan
received continued U.S. military aid because it helped Washington build ties with China. When Saunders asked on 17 July whether Kissinger
agreed the State Department should not link military assistance with the China policy, the national security adviser replied in the affirmative.
An opportunity for America to warm up to China had existed at least since General Ayub Khan became Pakistan’s president and his foreign
minister, Z.A. Bhutto, wooed Beijing to play the China card to extract more concessions from Washington.
During a conversation on 18 September 1964, with Walter P. McConaughy, then the U.S. ambassador to Pakistan, Ayub suggested that “some
U.S.-Chinese communist relations would have to be established.” When the envoy replied that there would first have to be some changes made in
China, Ayub “heartily concurred, but noted there would need to be some adjustments of view in Washington, also.”
From the Chinese side, Beijing had extended an olive branch to Washington as far back as in 1965. Chou En-lai had asked Ayub Khan, when
he visited Beijing in March of that year, to give a message to Washington that the communist nation would not “provoke war with the United
States” unless America bombed China first. But because Ayub’s visit to the United States had been postponed, China worried its message was
probably not delivered. Foreign Minister Ch’en Yi thus asked the British Embassy in Beijing if it would pass on the message.
The British Embassy sent two messages to London on 31 May and 1 June 1965. Copies of the telegrams were sent to William P. Bundy,
assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs in the Johnson administration, with a 2 June cover note by Michael N.F. Stewart, a minister at
the British Embassy in China. Stewart asked London whether the United States would object if the British charge told the Chinese that the British
had delivered the message to Washington. No reply to this note had ever been found.
Ayub told the U.S. ambassador during a meeting on 18 September 1965, that “some useful information and some Pak leverage on Chinese
communists might be developed out of Pak associations with Chinese communists.” He made the remark when McConaughy chided Pakistan for
warming up to China.
America, then, not only opposed direct contacts with Beijing, but also put pressure on Pakistan not to forge strong ties with China because the
communist giant supported Vietnam. Not only that, America pressed Ayub to remove his Yankee-baiting foreign minister, Bhutto, the architect of
Sino-Pak amity, from his cabinet. Ironically, it was Bhutto whom Nixon later courted to make America’s opening to China. Soon after Nixon was
elected president in November 1968, Dr. Glenn Olds, who became the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations Economic and Social Council
under Nixon, traveled to Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia, to meet with Bhutto, who was cordial with Chou En-lai. Olds traveled on Nixon’s behalf to ask
Bhutto to intercede with China. The meeting marked America’s first step in the normalization of relations with China. Olds’ strategy proposed that
Bhutto be the intermediary to Mao through Chou En-lai, wrote Jeff Gates, author of the 2008 book, Guilt By Association , in an article in Salem-
News.com on 18 December 2009.
Yahya’s role as an intermediary between America and China was merely an extension of the trend going back to the Ayub era. The secret
diplomacy, however, assumed greater importance because Nixon was eager to break the barriers of China’s Great Wall.
During the 1971 crisis, Kissinger did emphasize the Nixon administration’s aim to stop war in South Asia, because “we do not want to be
forced to choose between 800 million Chinese and 600 million Indians and Bengalis. We don’t want India in the Soviet camp, even though the
Indians may be driving themselves there deliberately through the creation of a phony crisis.”
However, putting the blame squarely on Nixon’s China overture for the anti-India posture was perhaps an attempt by Kissinger to absolve
himself as well as the administration of the responsibility for pursuing a discredited policy. Kissinger claimed, “Pakistan was our sole channel to
China; once it was closed off it would take months to make alternative arrangements.” But America had already established an alternate channel
via Eastern Europe. The more serious charge against Nixon’s actions was that his pro-Pakistan policy possibly encouraged the war. For instance,
the Indians were infuriated because America failed to protest Mujib’s imprisonment and never openly rebuked Pakistan’s repression in East
Pakistan. A neutral stance by Nixon – rather than branding India as the aggressor – would not necessarily have doomed his China initiative.
Perhaps, it could have reduced Soviet influence in India, which had been America’s principal goal in South Asia since the 1950s. But Nixon’s
policy did just the opposite. Gandhi, who had been lukewarm to the idea of a pact with Moscow, rushed to sign the Indo-Soviet Friendship Treaty
as soon as she learned of Nixon’s secret China plan.

7 
Yahya’s Misadventure:
Dark Clouds Over Pakistan
n 6 April, the day the U.S. consulate general in Dhaka dispatched the dissent cable, the American Embassy in Islamabad also sent a
telegram to Washington, commenting on a letter Yahya had written to Nixon seeking help against India’s possible intervention in East
Pakistan.
Yahya’s letter followed a plea by Pakistan’s Foreign Secretary Sultan Khan for a public statement by America against any attempt to
“internationalize” the East Pakistan issue.
Farland, the U.S. ambassador in Pakistan, had recommended that Washington accommodate Khan’s request. But he no longer saw any need
for such a statement because of India’s assurance that it would not interfere in East Pakistan. “I will not press our recommendation further,”
Farland wrote on 10 April, noting that India’s assurance had made his earlier suggestion, mute.
India gave the assurance when the U.S. ambassador to India, Kenneth Keating, met with Foreign Secretary T.N. Kaul. On 2 April, Keating
told Washington that Kaul had assured him India did not intend to interfere in Pakistan’s internal affairs. Keating had also reviewed Indian military
dispositions and concluded the Indian army was not oriented against East Pakistan.
Keating opposed the initiative proposed by Yahya – to issue a public warning against India: “Given Indian military dispositions and positive
statements of responsible Indian officials I believe there should be no question of démarche to the government of India along lines suggested by
President Yahya in his last letter.”
Despite Farland’s decision to go back on the earlier recommendation, he still wanted Washington to let New Delhi know about its opposition to
India’s possible interference in Pakistan, but privately.
“Since our position against intervention has been made clear to [the government of India], we have, in effect, already, albeit privately, responded
to Yahya’s request,” he wrote. “Nonetheless, given what intelligence sources have reported about covert Indian activity, this mission believes the
department, on an early occasion and at an appropriately high level, should underscore our strong feeling that no outside power should take any
steps that would tend to broaden and escalate the conflict.”
Giving his outlook as to how the situation would evolve, Farland wrote: “As we have previously reported, we do not believe the army over the
long run can hold the East by bayonet against the overwhelming opposition of the Bengalis. I think Yahya’s action against the Awami League is a
self-defeating step.”
Six days after Farland first voiced his concern over the East Pakistan situation, he sent yet another note to Washington, making a comment on a
7 April conversation between Sisco and Pakistan’s Ambassador Agha Hilaly.
Hilaly sounded optimistic about a political solution in East Pakistan. He said Yahya would concede the Awami League’s six-point agenda, with
minor adjustments. Yahya had already reiterated his plan to transfer power to a provincial government in East Pakistan. Hilaly, who speculated the
change would happen in months, did not feel that Mujib’s arrest or the Awami League’s banning would have any substantial effect on the political
outcome in East Pakistan.
Farland’s assessment, however, painted a bleak picture. He wrote that two weeks after Pakistan launched a crackdown, the military controlled
only major cities in East Pakistan. “But the Bengalis still hold major areas, especially in the countryside.” If the resistance continued on to June
when monsoon begins, the military “will face major logistical and operational difficulties.” However, if the resistance crumbled in the next two
months, the military should control the province, at least for the short, and possibly, medium-term.
U.S. Ambassador Doubts Pakistan’s Survival
Over the long term, Farland continued, Pakistan would be unable to hold East Pakistan. In time, renewed resistance would possibly emerge,
“because the breach between the two wings was too deep to permit reconciliation.”
“In short,” he commented, “we believe the Hilaly prognosis, as would be expected, is overly optimistic,” reflecting the official Pakistan
government line rather than the current unclear situation on the ground.
He explained that the operation in East Pakistan had not been a breeze as expected by the Pakistani military leadership. Mujib’s supporters still
held major parts of the countryside.
Farland questioned whether the army’s control extended beyond the cities, and also wondered if the army would succeed in breaking the back
of organized Bengali resistance. For the moment, Awami Leaguers apparently rallied the Bengali nationalists in the western half of East Pakistan.
He expressed doubt that Pakistan could regain of the Bengalis’ loyalty.
“Hilaly was wrong on this fundamental point,” Farland flatly declared.
He said that the events of the past two weeks had left such severe emotional scars that it was hard to conceive that there was anything Pakistan
could do to make most of the Bengalis willing citizens of Pakistan.
“Bengali grievances are now etched in blood,” the ambassador observed.
Even if West Pakistan won the short-term victory, he continued, the Bengali resistance movement was likely to be revived eventually. In the
early stages, such activity might consist of random acts of terror and harassment of the Pakistani troops. However, the movement was likely to gain
momentum. If the Awami League movement crumbled before it consolidated its position on the ground, the resistance movement was likely to pass
on to more radical and left extremist groups, such as the Naxalites in India.

“Our prognosis regarding West Pakistan’s prospects for holding the East remains unchanged from the views expressed previously. Even if the
army is able to crush the current resistance, we continue to believe the military cannot maintain control over the long-term. Regardless of the short-
term developments, in time the West Pakistan military is likely to become bogged down in hopeless morass. Yahya’s military intervention on
March 26, however justified from his standpoint, probably ensures the very thing which the move was designed to prevent – the disintegration of
Pakistan,” Farland predicted.
In Washington, the CIA agreed with Farland’s prognosis about East Pakistan.
During a meeting on 9 April of the Senior Review Group in Washington, when Kissinger asked for a review of the Pakistan situation, CIA
Deputy Director Cushman said the Bengali resistance could turn radical. The Chinese communists – the Naxalites in West Bengal – could take
over. He also said India might arm the Bengalis: “India has publicly stated they favor the Bengalis. Although they deny any intervention, they are
probably sending in arms.”
Kissinger then asked why India would arm the Bengalis. To which Cushman replied: “They think that anything that makes trouble for Pakistan is
in their interests.”
John N. Irwin III, under secretary of state, elaborated on the scenario: “They also fear that, if they don’t intervene, the Naxalites will make
trouble for them.”
Kissinger speculated the trouble in East Pakistan would fuel separatist feelings in West Bengal.
Cushman, for his part, said India would prefer to see an independent Bengali state.
And Irwin, meanwhile, noted that before the trouble started, India had preferred a unified Pakistan.
Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, who became chairman of the Joint Chief after July 1970, then joined the exchange. “I have just come from a
CENTO military meeting and had long conversations with the Pakistani and Iranian military representatives. There is no question in their minds that
the Indians would like to see an independent East Pakistan.”
Kissinger asked if the Pakistani and Iranian military representatives thought Pakistan could win with 30,000 soldiers.
Moorer replied, “Yes.”
Cushman was, however, skeptical and said, “We believe the actions of the West Pakistan army have made the breakup more certain. There is a
psychological rift now and we don’t think they can really bring the country back under West Pakistan control, particularly if the Indians supply
arms.”
Sisco, the assistant secretary of state, shared his recent discussion with Hilaly, who had indicated that Yahya would accept Mujib’s six points
with some modifications.
“If this is true, Yahya will give them substantial autonomy. Our people believe this is too little too late, and that the likelihood of a united country
is not too great,” Sisco said.
Sisco added, “I think it is likely, however, that East Pakistan will end in some form of separatism. Our job is to maintain reasonable relations
with both wings. As we view the subcontinent, in terms of our relative interest, our interest in India is probably greater than our interest in Pakistan,
although not in absolute terms.”
Kissinger wondered why Yahya would resort to military action if he indeed wanted to eventually concede the Awami League’s six points.
David Blee, head of the CIA’s Soviet division, surmised the army had misjudged its ability to quickly subdue East Pakistan.
Before concluding the meeting, Kissinger sought a vote on Sisco’s assessment. “Does everyone agree with this analysis? Is there anyone that
believes West Pakistan can re-establish complete control over the country?” he asked.
No one present there thought so.
The panel then moved on to a closed-door session at a CIA member’s request. Kissinger, Irwin, Moorer, Cushman, Warren Nutter, assistant
defense secretary; Sisco, Blee, and Saunders attended the session.
Cushman told the group the CIA had received a request to provide “unmarked small arms to the ‘freedom fighters’ in East Pakistan.” He said
the intelligence agency had a “secure channel through which it could deliver such weapons, but that his personal opinion was that this operation
would not remain secret much beyond that. He said CIA Director Richard Helms opposed the project. He did not identify who made the request,
but Sisco’s comments later indicated it came from India.
When Kissinger sought the group’s opinion on the idea, Irwin opposed it.
Moorer said it would be “very wrong” to work on both sides of the East Pakistani issue at once.
Kissinger said Nixon “would never approve this project”.
Sisco felt the Indians were testing Washington. It was one thing for America to close its eyes to reports of clandestine Indian support for the
East Pakistani resistance movement but quite another thing to collude with India in this supply.
India’s proposal to arm the guerrillas was intended to stop the leftists from controling the resistance. But Blee doubted the supply of small arms
would achieve that goal. He said the leftists would win out.
Kissinger described Blee’s comment as a serious judgment, which must be taken into consideration when deciding the future course of action.
“If we feel that, under present circumstances, the radicals are likely to take over, that could affect our judgment about the necessity of bringing the
civil war to an end.”
If the United States had been presented with a choice on 25 March, Kissinger continued, it would certainly have urged Yahya against military
action. He said everyone had been taken by surprise when the Mujib-Yahya talks broke down and Yahya turned to military action.
Sisco said America and Yahya both had a big stake in putting in power a moderate leadership in East Pakistan. He privately told Hilaly that
Pakistan had an interest in allowing those whom it had jailed to play a role in establishing a moderate leadership in East Pakistan.
Responding to a question from Kissinger, Sisco said the CIA, much earlier than the State Department, had indicated Yahya might take military
action. State Department officials had been much more inclined to see a negotiated settlement and, therefore, had worried less about this issue
before 25 March.

