Muazzam Ali, who owned the Pakistan Press International news agency, was among those who wanted Bizenjo to go to Dhaka. He said he
could send a message across to Dhaka using one of his telex machines that was still working. Bizenjo requested him to send a telex message to
Mujib. The next day, Muazzam Ali brought Mujib’s reply that he would be pleased if Bizenjo could come to Dhaka. When Bizenjo was at the
Karachi airport to depart for Dhaka, his party chief Wali Khan arrived unexpectedly from London. Everybody pressed him to go to Dhaka with
Bizenjo. Wali Khan instantly agreed.
Bizenjo and Wali Khan came to Dhaka on 13 March. From the airport they went straight to the residence of Ahmadul and Laila Kabir, their
political colleagues and owners of the Daily Sangbad newspaper.
When they met with Mujib the next day, Bizenjo straightaway asked Mujib whether he wanted to make a unilateral declaration of
independence. Mujib became very emotional. He asked: “Who is telling whom not to break up Pakistan? You, who were associated with the
Congress, telling me, who was a hardcore Muslim Leaguer and rendered sacrifices for the creation of Pakistan? What an irony!”
They urged Mujib to meet with Yahya Khan and find a way out to ensure the transfer of power to him. Mujib replied Yahya and his colleagues.
would not give him power, even if that meant Pakistan’s break-up. He finally agreed to meet Yahya and asked them to stay in Dhaka as long as
the talks lasted.
Yahya Khan arrived in Dhaka on 15 March. He invited Wali Khan and Bizenjo to meet him at the Government House. They told Yahya that
Mujib opposed secession, but demanded power be transferred to him. Yahya asked Bizenjo and Wali Khan to remain in Dhaka while the talks
continued.
Mujib kept them abreast of the proceedings every day. Initially, the talks went on rather smoothly. Then Yahya Khan invited all the West
Pakistani political leaders to Dhaka and summoned his economic adviser M.M. Ahmed. Upon arrival in Dhaka, Bhutto asked the West Pakistanis
to forge a common position. Wali Khan and Bizenjo rejected his suggestion.
Talks with Yahya proceeded then on a new trajectory. Initially, he said he could transfer power if the conditions of Legal Framework Order
were met. Mujib suggested that two assemblies – one consisting of members elected from West Pakistan and the other from East Pakistan – be
convened to prepare their separate draft constitutions, followed by a joint session of the two to draft a federal constitution. Yahya insisted on
convening one assembly. Bizenjo proposed five assemblies or constitutional committees, one for each province to prepare five draft constitutions.
Yahya showed a slight inclination toward that suggestion. However, when Wali Khan and Bizenjo met Mujib separately that night, he told them
the general’s mood was shifting fast and becoming unpredictable. Mujib said he would no longer ask for convening of one assembly or two
assemblies. He would demand immediate transfer of power and lifting of martial law. The core issue was the lifting of martial law and transfer of
power to his party.
They conveyed to Yahya Khan Mujib’s demand to lift martial law and hand over power to him. When they cautioned Yahya against inviting
Pakistan’s disintegration by sticking to technicalities, the general replied if Mujib did not behave his army knew how to shoot their way through.
When the two met Mujib on 24 March, he broke the alarming news, saying the army would move in the next two days. He advised them to
leave Dhaka. Stunned and speechless, they left Mujib’s house.
The Americans remained convinced till the end that Mujib did not want to break Pakistan. He would have possibly opted for a confederation if
given an option even in November. Sisco also believed India would have accepted a peaceful solution if Mujib were given power. India did not
want war. The Americans blamed Bhutto for the collapse of the Dhaka talks.
The Nixon administration’s initial policy after the crackdown was based on its concern about the stability of the region, which was geopolitically
significant in terms of the Soviet Union and China. India was of potentially greater significance than Pakistan. Therefore, in formulating U.S. policy,
the relative preeminence of American interests in India was an underlying factor in the decisions that Washington made. As a result, on an
operational level, America wanted to keep close relationship with India and reasonable relations with West Pakistan, while avoiding steps that
could irreparably damage a yet-undefined future relationship with East Pakistan. Three major ingredients behind the strategy that America followed
since the civil war started were: restraint, international aid and political accommodation.
Washington advised both Islamabad and New Delhi to exercise restraint to avoid an all-out war. On the Indian side, this reinforced restraint,
although contingency planning for war continued. America’s counsels were somewhat less successful in Pakistan.
America put considerable effort into lessening India’s refugee burden. Washington considered it to be the most likely cause for war. To this end,
America offered grants and loans to India and actively promoted the U.N. relief effort. On the Pakistani side, Washington promoted an
international relief effort to help the refugees return home. Islamabad initially responded slowly, but later embraced it.
The Nixon administration urged Yahya to move as fast as possible with political accommodation in East Pakistan. Recognizing the complex and
sensitive issues involved and the fact that Yahya might have had only limited political flexibility, Washington refrained from attempting to spell out
the details beyond the need to deal with political leaders. However, these efforts bore no meaningful results.
The United States, which initially decided to maintain a hands-off posture in the East Pakistan conflict, got a wake-up call when Archer Blood,
the U.S. consul general in Dhaka, sent a telegram to Washington on 29 March 1971, on the Bengali massacre. He questioned the wisdom of
America’s do-nothing policy ignoring the dire situation on the ground.
The consulate general reported that the army was setting houses on fire and shooting people as they emerged from the burning houses. On 30
March, the mission reported that the army had killed many apparently unarmed students at Dhaka University.
The U.S. Embassy in Islamabad concurred in expressing the consulate’s sense of horror and indignation at the “brutal, ruthless and excessive
use of force by the Pak military,” but opposed any action by Washington, describing the military action as a “constituted” government using force
against citizens accused of flouting its authority
Blood castigated Farland’s contention. He questioned how the martial law administration could describe the freely elected representatives of 73
percent of the voters of East Pakistan as “miscreants.” Ironically, the consul general noted, most of the countryside of East Pakistan apparently
were in the hands of these miscreants.
Blood’s cables infuriated the White House. Nixon recalled Blood from Dhaka and banished him to the State Department’s personnel office.
Blood, who died in 2004 at the age of 81 in Colorado, was honored by his colleagues in 1971 with the Christian A. Herter Award for his
“initiative, integrity, intellectual courage and creative dissent.” The Archer K. Blood American Center Library at the U.S. Embassy in Dhaka

honors his memory in an independent Bangladesh that he prophesied and supported.
Why did America continue to support Pakistan despite having full knowledge of these atrocities?
Peter Constable, country director of Pakistan at the State Department, told the House Committee on Foreign Affairs in 1973 that when the East
Pakistan tragedy began, America developed a policy that had three objectives: to provide humanitarian aid, to encourage a political settlement and
to prevent war.
Many in the Nixon administration, including Kissinger, blamed the president’s China policy for the disastrous posture. America’s disdain for
India, however, could be traced to the pre-partition time as far back as 1942 – when a U.S. technical mission invited by the Indian government to
investigate India’s industrial resources to recommended production of war materials – came under harsh criticism in the Indian press. America
often faced accusation, even during British rule, that it interfered in Indian politics. President Roosevelt’s personal envoy Colonel Louis Johnson
faced such a charge during the Cripps Mission. Ironically, the Americans consistently had always sought to avoid such accusations. It was
America’s traditional strategy not to be charged with interference, plus Nixon’s personal anti-Indian mindset, that guided the administration not to
press Yahya despite pleas by American diplomats to do so.
India’s involvement in the Bangladesh war was perhaps more fortuitous than preplanned. New Delhi’s war policy evolved gradually, shaped by
events at home and abroad. Until 25 March, the Indians believed their interests were better served by a united Pakistan in which the Bengalis
would be the dominant force. When the Pakistani military cracked down in East Pakistan, India’s estimate of its own best interests shifted in favor
of an independent Bangladesh under a moderate leadership.
India opted to take advantage of the opportunity after it had solidified its position militarily with its treaty with the Soviet Union. Its spectacularly
successful campaign to generate a groundswell of support worldwide for the Bengalis” plight made its task easier. Initially, India showed reluctance
to create Bangladesh by force, despite widespread support for it in parliament. Gandhi’s decision to support the guerrillas was based on her
calculation that if New Delhi did not support them, the insurgents would turn to China to India’s peril. She chose to march on the warpath based
on her conviction that negotiations would not work even if Mujib and Yahya hammered out a deal, because she believed the insurgents were no
longer loyal to the Bengali leader.
Gandhi also suspected Yahya was not really interested in negotiations that would install Mujib in power. Yahya’s moves, she concluded, were
just a smokescreen. Her views were solidified by Yahya’s attempt to hold a farcical election to fill the parliament seats that he had declared vacant.
The formation of a civilian government with discredited right-wing Bengali politician Nurul Amin at its head and Bhutto as his deputy served
another blow to Yahya’s credibility. India had a lingering suspicion of Bhutto, whom the Indians considered the 1965 war architect. New Delhi
was also concerned China could directly intervene in Pakistan’s favor.
Ultimately, India saw the crisis as an opportunity to weaken its main enemy. Pakistan had humiliated India in 1965. New Delhi was determined
this time around not to face a defeat. India figured a weak Pakistan would greatly simplify its defense problem. New Delhi, therefore, covertly
supported the Bangladesh movement, while putting its military on war footing, should the need be. Indian public opinion also sang out the same
hymn on Gandhi’s policy. The Indians felt the effects of the crushing refugee burden, especially in West Bengal. Above all, most Indians saw
Pakistan as a threat that could lead to war again. Why not eliminate that danger when the opportunity knocked on the door?
Despite Yahya’s use of brutal force in East Pakistan, many Bengalis still wanted a peaceful solution. Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed, foreign
minister of Bangladesh government-in-exile in India, was among them. An admittedly pro-Western and right-wing politician, Moshtaque
unequivocally favored strong ties with the United States. He opposed communists, as did a majority of the top Awami League leaders. He had
been widely held as the man who hatched a conspiracy in Kolkata to seek a compromise with Yahya, excluding Sheikh Mujib, a story that gained
wide circulation in Bangladesh soon after the war.
In fact, the contacts with the Americans were initiated by Kazi Zahirul Qaiyum, an Awami League parliament member from Comilla, who
claimed he represented Moshtaque. On 31 July, Qaiyum told a political officer at the consulate general in Kolkata that the Awami League leaders
feared extremist elements would take over the Bangladesh movement if the guerrilla war lasted too long. So, they were interested in a political
settlement and were prepared to back away from their demand for total independence. Qaiyum proposed a meeting of the Awami League,
Pakistan, America and India to strike a deal with Yahya. He stipulated Mujib’s participation in the negotiations was an essential prerequisite.
According to Qaiyum’s statements, it was not just Moshtaque, but the entire Awami League leadership – including Syed Nazrul Islam – that
wanted a political deal with Yahya Khan. Qaiyum told the political officer the Awami League leadership was unanimous in their desire for a
compromise settlement with Pakistan.
Despite making an overture to both British and American diplomats in Kolkata at the initial phase, Tajuddin Ahmad, prime minister of the
provisional government, later distanced himself from a U.S.-blessed deal. By then both the Soviet Union and India, which were initially opposed to
breaking up Pakistan, had come out in favor of the Bengali cause. Because of the initial reluctance of Moscow and Delhi to support Bangladesh,
the Bengali leadership had only London and Washington to turn to after forming the Mujibnagar government. The letter that Syed Nazrul and
Moshtaque jointly wrote to Nixon seeking U.S. recognition of Bangladesh on 24 April was mailed from West Berlin, Germany, on 26 May – not
from India.
According to Qaiyum, the cabinet decided that any agreement reached between Mujib and Yahya would be acceptable to it, provided it was
arranged through the “proper channels.” By the proper channels, Qaiyum meant the U.S. government’s participation in arrangements leading to a
pact. The cabinet opposed any deal negotiated via the Soviets, such as the Tashkent Declaration.
The government-in-exile wanted Moshtaque to visit the United States, along with three or four other Bangladesh leaders to discuss ways with
U.S. officials to solve their problems. Qaiyum personally favored total independence. But he and most other Bangladesh leaders were willing to
accept some sort of a confederation. He said the cabinet members “believe that Mujib’s life is more valuable than independence.”
When the State Department sought input from the embassy in Pakistan on granting Moshtaque a visa to visit Washington, Farland opposed the
idea, saying such a step would inevitably raise concerns in Pakistan about America’s good faith in not encouraging the separatist movement. The
State Department had sought the U.S. Embassy’s idea on the suggestion put forward by Qaiyum that Moshtaque be granted a visa to visit
Washington to meet with the U.S. officials there.
Moshtaque met with the political officer in Kolkata on 28 September for 90 minutes. He had been looking for a way to contact the United
States, but was unsure how. When TIME correspondent Dan Coggin interviewed him on 26 September, he asked him how to get in touch with

Washington. Coggin suggested he contact the U.S. consul general or a political officer in Kolkata. Following Coggin’s advice, Moshtaque asked
Bangladesh High Commissioner M. Hossain Ali to arrange a meeting. Ali called the political counselor to ask if he wished to talk with the foreign
minister. The officer replied he did, if the foreign minister wished to talk to him. Ali said Moshtaque did, and scheduled an evening appointment.
Ali, who had known the political officer through the diplomatic circle, met him at the High Commission. Moshtaque arrived five minutes later. Ali
introduced the officer to Moshtaque, and then left the two alone for an hour’s private talk. He rejoined them for the last thirty minutes.
Moshtaque opened the conversation by asking the American for a precise outline of the U.S. policy vis-a-vis Bangladesh. Moshtaque bluntly
asked: “Why are you killing us?” He blamed America for the East Pakistan events since 25 March because of Washington’s continued support for
Yahya Khan. He, nonetheless, said Bangladesh wanted close ties with the United States and hoped Washington would find it was in its own
interest to help arrange peaceful independence for Bangladesh.
Moshtaque warned the time was running out for America to step in and help avoid a leftist takeover of Bangladesh. He had no desire to talk
directly to Yahya. He requested the U.S. government to speak to Yahya for the Bangladesh government. He asked for an official response to his
requests as soon as possible and expressed a desire to discreetly maintain a direct channel with the political officer. He said he assumed there
would be no other channel. He said he had not authorized any other channel himself, although he knew other well-intentioned Bangladesh leaders
had and might in the future contact U.S. officials in an effort to find out the “mind of the Americans.”
Moshtaque asked the United States to make a fresh effort to push Pakistan to release Mujib. He then presented the officer with a list of
Bangladesh desires. He did not wish to be held accountable for his precise wording because he was inexperienced in diplomacy and must obtain
the cabinet approval for the exact wording later. His list included three principal demands: (a) full independence for Bangladesh; (b) release of
Sheikh Mujib; and (c) after independence, massive long-term economic assistance from America to help reconstruct the nation.
Responding to Moshtaque’s demands, Washington told the consulate general to tell the Bangladesh leaders that the U.S. diplomats had “already
discussed the possibility of such a meeting with President Yahya and he had indicated his interest. The U.S. government is willing to assist in
passing messages back and forth that might lead to a meeting, but we are not interested in playing the transmission belt for ‘demands’ or ‘positions’
of one side or the other.”
Despite their reluctance to get involved directly, the Americans wanted to keep their “options open for contacts with other elements of the
Bangladesh leadership, although this will continue to be controlled from Washington. Hence, while we assume that Moshtaque may remain the
principal channel for future communications, we do not wish to give him the impression that he will necessarily be the only channel. For example,
we obviously might be in touch with the Bangladesh delegation in New York, which presumably was sent to this country for the purpose of
contacting foreign officials, including the United States. Therefore, you may inform Moshtaque at your discretion that we intend to maintain some
contact with the other Bangladesh representatives, if an occasion arises.”
By early October, New Delhi had become fully aware of U.S.-Bangla secret contacts. On 2 October, India’s external affairs minister visited
New York to attend the U.N. General Assembly. When Sisco met with Sardar Swaran Singh, he urged the Indian leader to influence the
Bangladesh officials to start talks with Yahya. Singh replied India lacked influence with Bangladesh. He, however, added this did not mean India
opposed the dialogue.
When Sisco suggested that India initiate talks without insisting upon Mujib’s participation to see what could be accomplished, Singh said the
United States had contacts with the Bengalis and should try to bring about the dialogue on its own. Sisco said Washington would do what it could
with Pakistan to get talks started.
On 21 November, Qaiyum again met with the political officer after a month-long hiatus. He pleaded that the U.S. government press Yahya to
release Mujib, saying unless he was freed communists would take over the Bangladesh leadership. He said that even if Mujib were kept confined
in West Pakistan after his release, the situation would cool down, helping a negotiated solution. Only Mujib had the power to give Yahya a face-
saving exit. He suggested that Yahya hand over power to another general, as Ayub did, and go abroad. Yahya “has no right to destroy both parts
of Pakistan.” Qaiyum warned that time was running out. The Mukti Bahini was increasingly successful with India’s help, and the Bangladesh
leaders expected a military victory in East Pakistan within the next two months.
On 27 November, Qaiyum told the officer that the Bangaldesh cabinet had gone to Delhi at Gandhi’s request. He had recommended to Delhi
that the cabinet members not “sign any thing” in New Delhi unless they first brought it back to Kolkata for general Awami League discussion.
Qaiyum reported that D. P. Dhar, Gandhi’s foreign policy aide, in his latest visit to Kolkata had questioned Moshtaque about his talks with the
United States and called the foreign minister a “traitor.” Moshtaque denied everything, but Dhar said he knew all about the negotiations because
the State Department had told everything to the Indian Embassy in Washington. Qaiyum said he told the Indians the Bangladesh government had
not sold its soul to India and that as an independent government, it could talk with any other government it wished, the political officer reported.
He claimed he heard about the Dhar-Moshtaque exchange and pro tested about it to Syed Nazrul Islam. He said that he – rather than
Moshtaque – had been the one who talked with the U.S. government representatives. If India did not like what he had done, it was just too bad.
He said he and his group in the Awami League did not intend to be dictated to by India. He had threatened to walk out on the Bangladesh
government along with some 43 supporters and go to Pakistan rather than “sell out” to India.
America’s failure to bring about a negotiated settlement was later raised by Moshtaque during a conversation with the U.S. ambassador after
becoming president following Mujib’s overthrow. Making an appeal for America’s support for his new government, Moshtaque told Ambassador
Davis Boster on 20 August 1975, that Washington “must not lose the opportunity today which we had lost in 1971,” according to a telegram the
U.S. Embassy in Dhaka sent to the State Department.
The Awami League’s concern over a possible leftist takeover of the guerrilla movement, its urge to be free from India’s dictation and its resolve
to save Mujib as well as its fear of massive destruction and loss of lives from a war motivated the Bengalis to seek negotiations with Yahya. They
feared an all-out war would reduce East Pakistan to rubble, plunging them into an almost insurmountable task of rebuilding the free country from
ashes. They were frightened out of their minds by other thoughts as well, such as the effect of a prolonged guerrilla war as witnessed in Vietnam or
India annexing part of East Pakistan to resettle the refugees in the border region. They also worried that if India succeeded in slicing East Pakistan
and West Pakistan held a big chunk of Kashmir, they might be caught in diplomatic wranglings between Islamabad and New Delhi in which their
interests would receive a diminished priority. In the end, America’s dilly-dallying in arranging a meeting as well as Yahya’s reluctance to talk with
the Bengali leaders in Kolkata and Mujib, along with India’s ultimate resistance to any direct talks, thwarted the idea that Washington did not

originate but pursued zealously. This fiasco paved the way for India to opt for a military solution.
As the Indian military marched into East Pakistan full throttle, and international efforts to stop the fighting gained momentum at the United
Nations, Gandhi found herself between a rock and hard place. If she advanced her campaign to completely crush the Pakistani military in the West
as she had promised to her cabinet months ago, she would face a potential fight with Washington and Beijing. She would also antagonize Moscow,
which wanted to end the war after capturing Dhaka. If she backed off, her colleagues would give her a hard time and India would lose a rare
opportunity to cripple an archenemy forever.
She explained to her cabinet that if India accepted the U.N. ceasefire proposal after Bangladesh’s liberation, it could avoid further complications
and “might also rule out the current possibility of a Chinese intervention in Ladakh.”
India’s Defense Minister Jagjivan Ram and several other military leaders opposed a ceasefire until India had taken certain unspecified areas of
Kashmir and destroyed “the war mechanism of Pakistan.”
Gandhi overruled the opponents, saying that “for the moment India would not categorically reject” the U.N. ceasefire proposal. India would
accept a ceasefire after the Awami League regime was installed in Dhaka.
Many Indian parliament members, both from her own party as well as the opposition, were unhappy with Gandhi’s decision, apparently
unaware of the international pressure she faced to quickly end the war. They wanted India to capture at least Azad Kashmir and Lahore.
Jagjivan Ram, when criticized for the ceasefire, told parliament the prime minister was “responsible for that”. He, however, refused to go
publicly against her decision. When the members pressed him on capturing Azad Kashmir, he simply responded: “Enough is enough.”
Gandhi’s decision to abruptly halt the campaign short of her desired goal was not a pleasant one to herself, either. “Madame Gandhi said she
couldn’t forgive her father for leaving Baluchistan out of India, because it was in India’s ‘historic sphere,’ ” Kissinger recalled during a conversation
in Washington with the Shah of Iran in1975. If she could not undo her father’s historic mistake, she could at least blunt its effect by turning
Baluchistan into a neutral country, one that would not pose a security threat to India as a united West Pakistan would.
Gandhi’s action resulted from strong pressure put on her by Moscow, which incorrectly perceived Nixon meant business when he dispatched
the naval fleet into the Bay of Bengal. In fact, the United States later took credit for saving West Pakistan from disintegration by sending the
Enterprise, which the Americans believed scared both the Soviet Union and India. The Soviet Union, which came under U.S. pressure to end the
war, told India that it would accept the ceasefire as soon as Bangladesh was liberated. Moscow was “concerned about the possibility of a Chinese
intervention.”
For Pakistan, the end game neared on 14 December, when U.S. consul general in Dhaka, Herbert A. Spivack, received a call from General
A.A.K. Niazi, Pakistan’s Eastern sector commander, to “receive him urgently.” He appeared at the consulate a short time later, along with General
Rao Farman Ali, the military adviser to the governor of East Pakistan. He told Spivack the bombing of Dhaka in the afternoon “had convinced him
that the fighting must be stopped immediately to prevent further bloodshed, even though, he said, his troops were still in good positions and were
not in the danger at the moment”. Farman Ali had in his possession a rough draft proposal he wished the consul general to transmit to New Delhi
so that it could be passed on through Indian channels to the Indian field commander in East Pakistan.
Niazi asked that the U.S. envoy indicate in his transmittal message that the general was prepared to name a representative immediately to
discuss the details of his offer with an Indian counterpart. He hoped the Indian commander would do the same promptly, so that negotiations could
begin at once. Niazi and Farman still wished to avoid using the word “surrender”. Niazi stated he had the full authority to take the stated action.
When Spivack questioned him specifically whether Niazi needed any concurrence by Yahya or anyone else in Islamabad, his reply was definitely
“no.”
Spivack had earlier received a call from East Pakistan Governor A.M. Malik that he and Farman Ali wanted to submit certain ceasefire
proposals. Malik felt a ceasefire was absolutely necessary because the situation had hopelessly worsened. He assured the consul general the
proposals would carry their signatures and would have Yahya’s approval. Shortly afterward, Malik called Spivack again to say he would not
submit the proposals because Niazi had stated talks were taking place between the central government and the U.S. ambassador in Islamabad.
Subsequently, when the State Department received Niazi’s proposal, it immediately asked Farland to see Yahya to ascertain what he wanted
the United States to do. Farland replied Yahya had indicated, through Sultan Khan, that Niazi had the full authority to act along the lines reported
in the telegram from Dhaka.
Yahya authorized passing the proposal to New Delhi and to Bhutto in New York, but the State Department was leery to put itself between
Indian and Pakistani military authorities. So, it directed the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi not to deliver Niazi’s proposal to the Indian government.
Rather, the U.S. Mission at the United Nations was advised to give the message to Bhutto with the suggestion that he pass it on to the Indian
foreign minister in New York or pass it through the U.N. secretary general. Bhutto chose not to give the message to the Indians. After confirming
that Yahya wanted the message delivered, the State Department told the U.S. Mission in New York to deliver the message to the Indian
delegation.
In New Delhi, U.S. Ambassador Kenneth Keating gave Niazi’s proposal to Haksar on 15 December, with a copy to General Sam
Manekshaw, the Indian army chief. In his reply, Manekshaw reiterated his guarantees previously given to Rao Farman Ali, promising to ensure
“safety of all your military and paramilitary forces who surrender to me in Bangladesh”.
Along with the guarantees came Manekshaw’s warning: “I assure you I have no desire to inflict unnecessary casualties on your troops as I abhor
loss of human lives. Should, however, you do not comply with what I have stated, you will leave me with no other alternative but to resume my
offensive with the utmost vigor at 0900 hours Indian standard time on 16 December”.
On 16 December at 2:30 p.m., Gandhi, who had been compared with the Hindu goddess Durga by many Indians, told Lok Sabha that the
Pakistani forces commanded by Niazi had surrendered unconditionally an hour earlier in Dhaka. She hailed Dhaka as “the free capital of a free
country”.
Niazi, who surrendered to Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Aurora, commander of the Eastern sector of the Indian army, remained defiant until
his death. He refused to accept the blame for the surrender, rebuffing the Pakistan war commission’s suggestion that he should have embraced a
hero’s death fighting to the end. He blamed Yahya for the setback.
Niazi claimed he surrendered at the general headquarters’ instruction. Yahya and the other generals told him to surrender because they were

worried India would destroy the entire Pakistani army and break up West Pakistan into pieces, if Islamabad continued fighting. Niazi’s claim
stands to logic. New Delhi, in fact, had planned to crush Pakistan’s army to a point that it ceased to be a military force capable of waging another
war against India ever again. India backed off under Soviet pressure.
Until the end, Yahya hoped outside forces, namely China and the United States, would come to his rescue. Based on false hopes from
Washington and Beijing, he sought to keep the Eastern Command’s morale high. But no one came to save Pakistan at the end.

People
Agha Khan, Prince Sadruddin, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Ahmad, Khandaker Moshtaque, Vice President of the Awami League and Foreign Minister of the Provisional Government of Bangladesh April-
December 1971
Ahmad, M.M., Deputy Chairman of the Economic Planning Commission in Pakistan, Economic Adviser to President Yahya Khan
Ahmed, Aziz, Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan
Ahmed, Tajuddin, General Secretary of the Awami League and Prime Minister of the Provisional Government of Bangladesh, April 1971-January
12, 1972; thereafter Minister of Finance of Bangladesh
Ahmed, Muzaffar, President, National Awami Party, Bangladesh
Ahsan, Vice Admiral Syed Mohammad, Deputy Martial Law Administrator and Commander-in-Chief of the Pakistan Navy until August 1969;
Governor of East Pakistan, August 1969-February 1971
Ali, M. Hossain, Bangladesh Ambassador to the United States from December 1972
Ali, M. Mansoor, Finance Minister, Provisional Government of Bangladesh, 1971
Ali, Muazzam, owner, Pakistan Press Internation
Atherton, Alfred L. Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs from March 1970
Atal, J.K., High commissiner of India to Pakistan
Aurora, Jagjit Singh, Lieutenant General, Commander of the Eastern sector, Indian Army
Bajpai, Girja Shankar, Agent General, British India, 1943
Bajwa, Rehmatullah, Commodore, Special Assistant, President Yahya
Beam, Jacob D., Ambassador to the Soviet Union, March 1969-January 1973
Bhashani, Maulana Abdul Hamid, Leader of the National Awami Party in East Pakistan
Bhutto, Zulfiqar Ali, Chairman of the Pakistan People’s Party; Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Prime Minister, 7 December-19 December
1971; thereafter President, Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Minister of Defense of Pakistan
Bizenjo, Mir Ghaus Bakhsh, NAP MNA, Governor, Baluchistan
Blood, Archer K., Consul General in Dhaka until June 1971
Brezhnev, Leonid Ilyich, General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
Brohi, A.K., Law Mnister, Pakistan, Defense Counsel, Sheikh Mujibur Rahamn
Bush, George H. W., Republican Congressman from Texas until January 1971; Permanent Representative to the United Nations, February 1971-
January 1973
Cargo, William I., Director of the Policy and Coordination Staff, Department of State
Chashi, Mahbubul Alam, Foreign Secretary, Provisional Government of Bangladesh, 1971
Chavan, Yashwantrao B., Indian Minister of the Interior until June 1970; thereafter, Minister of Finance
Chowdhry, Abu Sayeed, President of Bangladesh from 12 January 1972
Chou En-lai, Prime Miniter, China, 1949-1976
Chowdhury, G.W., Adviser to President Yahya Khan, 1969-1971
Cline, Ray S., Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from October 1969
Coggin, Dan, New Delhi Bureau Chief, TIME
Connally, John B., Jr., Secretary of Treasury, February 1971-May 1972
Cornelius, A.R., Law Minister, Pakistan, 1969-1971
Cromer, Earl of, British Ambassador to the United States
Cushman, Lieutenant General Robert E., Jr., USMC, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, May 1969-December 1971
Daultana, Mian Mumtaz, President, Pakistan Council Muslim League
Davies, Rodger P., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs
Davis, Jeanne W., National Security Council staff secretary
Deng Xiao Peng, Vice Prime Minister, China
DePalma, Samuel, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs
Desai, Morarji Ranchhodji, Indian Minister of Finance and Deputy Prime Minister until July 1969
Dhar, D.P., Chairman, Policy Planning, External Affairs Ministry, Inida
Dhar, Manoranjan, Leader, Pakistan National Congress, later Law Minister, Bangladesh
Dobrynin, Anatoly F., Soviet Ambassador to the United States
Douglas-Home, Sir Alec, British Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs from June 1970
Dulles, John Foster, Secretary of State, 1953-1959
Eisenhower, Dwight, D, President, United States, January 1953-January 1961
Etemadi, Nur Ahmed, Prime Minister of Afghanistan until May 1971

Fallaci, Oriana, Italian journalist
Farland, Joseph S., Ambassador to Pakistan, September 1969-April 1972
Firyubin, Nikolai Pavlovich, Deputy Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union
Gandhi, Indira, Prime Minister of India
Gauhar, Altaf, Secretary, Ministry of Information, Pakistan
Giri, Varahagiri Venkata, Vice President of India until 3 May1969; Acting President, May 3-July 29, 1969; President from 20 August 1969
Gordon, Herbert, Consul General in Calcutta
Green, Marshall, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from May 1969; also Chairman, Special Group on Southeast Asia
from May 1970
Greenhill Denis, Permanent Under Secretary, British Foreign Office, 1969-1973
Gromyko, Andrei A., Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union
Haig, General Alexander M., Jr., Senior Military Adviser to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, January 1969-June 1970;
Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, June 1970-January 1973
Haksar, Parmeshwar Narain, Secretary to Prime Minister Gandhi
Haldeman, H.R., White House Chief of Staff
Haq, Ziaul, General, President of Pakistan, 1978-1988
Heath, Edward, British Prime Minister from June 1970
Helms, Richard M., Director of Central Intelligence until February 1973
Paul Marc Henry, U.N. Special Assistant, East Pakistan, 1971
Hilaly, Agha, Pakistani Ambassador to the United States until September 1971
Hildreth, Horace A., U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan, 1953
Hoskinson, Samuel M., member of the National Security Council staff, 1970-1972
Hossian, Kamal, Law and Foreign Minister, Bangladesh, 1972-1975
Hughes, Thomas L., Directory, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, the State Department
Huang Hua, Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of China to the United Nations
Hughes, Thomas L., Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, until August 1969
Hull, Cordell, Secretary of State, 1933-1944
Hunt, John, U.S. Army Major, Analyst, Defense Intelligence Agency
Irwin, John N., II, Under Secretary of State, September 1970-July 1972; thereafter, Deputy Secretary of State
Islam, Syed Nazrul, Acting President of the Provisional Government of Bangladesh, April-December 1971
Jacob, JFR, Major General, Chief of Staff, Indian Army Eastern Command
Jinnah, M. A., Governor General, Pakistan, 1947-1948
Jha, Lakshmi Kant, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India until May 1970; thereafter, Indian Ambassador to the United States
Johnson, Louis, Colonel, Personal Envoy to India, President Roosevelt
Johnson, U. Alexis, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from February 1969
Jonganeel, Dirk, manager, Philips Electric Company Ltd, Karachi, Pakistan, 1971
Kamaruzzaman, A.H.M., Home Minister, Provisional Government of Bangladesh, 1971
Karim, S. A., Foreign Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh until August 1972
Khan Akbar, Major General, Chief, ISI, Pakistan military intelligence unit
Khan, Abdul Hamid, General, Chief of Staff of the Pakistan Army and Deputy Chief Martial Law Administrator
Khan, Asghar, Air Marshal, Chief of Air Force, Pakistan, 1957-1965
Khan, Ayub Mohammad, President of Pakistan until March 1969
Khan, Gul Hassan, Lieutenant General, chief of general staff, Pakistan Army
Khan, Abdul Rahim, Air Chief Marshal, Commander in Chief, Pakistan Air Force, 1969-1972
Khan, Tikka, Lieutenant General, Martial Law Administrator and Governor of East Pakistan, February-September 1971; Commander-in-Chief of
the Pakistan Army from March 1972
Khan, Wali, President, Pakistan National Awami Party
Khan, Yakub, Lieutenant General, Commander, Pakistan Army, Eastern Command
Khan, Z.A., Lieutenant Colonel, Pakistan Army, Comilla Cantonment, 1971
Khar, Ghulam Mustafa, Chief Minister, Punjab and Pakistan People’s Party leader
Kaul, Triloki Nath, Foreign Secretary of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs from February 1969-1972
Keating, Kenneth B., Ambassador to India, May 1969-July 1972
Kellogg, Francis L., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Refugee and Migration Affairs from January 1971; also Chairman of the
Interagency Committee on Pakistani Refugee Relief
Kennedy, Richard T., member of the National Security Council staff, January 1970-January 1972
Kennedy, Ted, U.S. Senator, 1962-2099
Kissinger, Henry A., Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Kosygin, Aleksei N., Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union
Kuznetsov, V.V., First Deputy Foreign Minister, Soviet Union.
Lall, K.B., Secretary, Ministry of Defense, India
Laingen, L. Bruce, Deputy Chief of Mission in Afghanistan until July 1971; thereafter Country Director for Pakistan and Afghanistan, Bureau of
Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State
Laird, Melvin R., Secretary of Defense, January 1969-January 1973
Luppi, Hobart, Consul General in Karachi, Pakistan
Malik, A.M., Special Assistant to President Yahya for Displaced Persons and Relief and Rehabilitation Operations in East Pakistan, July-
September 1971; thereafter Governor of East Pakistan
Matskevich, Vladimir, Agriculture Minister, Soviet Union
Manekshaw, Sam Hormusji Framji Jamshedji, General, Chief of Staff of the Indian Army
McConaughy, Walter P., U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan, 1962-1964
Menon, V.K. Krishna, Defense Minister, India, 1957-1962
Mitchell, John, Attorney General, January 1969-February 1972
Mirza, Iskander, Major General, President, Pakistan, 1958
Moorer, Admiral Thomas H., USN, Chief of Naval Operations until July 1970; thereafter Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Murray Wallace, State Department Adviser to President Roosevelt, 1942
Musharraf, Khalid, Lieutenant Colonel, commander Mukti Bahini, Eastern Sector, Bangladesh
Naas, Charles, Political Counselor at the Embassy in Afghanistan
Nagra, G.S., Major General, Indian Army Eastern Command, GOC, 101 Communication Zone
Nehru, B.K., Ambassador of India to Washington, 1958-1961
Nehru, Jawaharlal, Prime Minister, India, 1947-1964
Newberry, Daniel O., Deputy Chief of Mission in Afghanistan from October 1972
Niazi, AAK, Lieutenant General, Commander, Eastern Sector, Pakistan Army
Nixon, Richard M., President of the United States
Noyes, James H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
Nutter, G. Warren, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
Olds, Glenn, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Economic and Social Council (1969-1971) and President Nixon’s Special Assistant for Policy and
Manpower Development
Osmany, MAG, General, Commander in Chief, Bangladesh Army, 1971-1972
Packard, David, Deputy Secretary of Defense from January 1969
Pickard, Sir Cyril, British High Commissioner in Pakistan
Pirzada, G.M.M., Lieutenant Gen, Shief of Staff, President Yahya Khan Qaiyum, Qazi Zahirul, Member of the Pakistan National Assembly,
Awami League Representative
Podgorny, Nikolai, President, Soviet Union, 1965-1977
Quadir, Iqbal F., retired Vice Admiral, Pakistan Navy
Rahman, Sheikh Mujibur, (Mujib) President of the Awami League; Prime Minister and Minister of Defense of Bangladesh from January 1972
Ram, Jagjivan, Indian Minister of Defense from June 1970
Rasgotra, Maharaja Krishna, Minister for Political Affairs of the Indian Embassy in the United States
Raza, Nawabzada Agha Mohammad, Major General, Pakistani Ambassador to the United States, November 1971-April 1972
Rogers, William P., Secretary of State, January 1969-September 1973
Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State, 1961-1969
Samad, Abdus, Foreign Minister of Bangladesh, December 1971-1973
Saunders, Harold H., member of the National Security Council staff Schneider, David T., Country Director for India, Ceylon, Nepal, and the
Maldive Islands, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, from August 1969
Selden, Armistead, I., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
Singh, Dinesh, Minister of External Affairs of India, February 1969-June 1970
Singh, Moni, president, Communist Party of Bangladesh
Singh, Sardar Swaran, Indian Minister of Defense until June 1970; thereafter, Minister of External Affairs
Sisco, Joseph J., Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until February 1969; thereafter, Assistant Secretary of State for
Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs; also Chairman of the NSC Interdepartmental Group for the Near East and South Asia
Sober, Sidney, Director of the Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State until November
1969, thereafter Deputy Chief of Mission in Pakistan
Sonnenfeldt, Helmut, member of the National Security Council staff, 1969-1972
Spengler, William F., Country Director for Pakistan and Afghanistan, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, July
1970-July 1971
Spivack, Herbert D., Consul General in Dhaka, June 1971-September 1972
Stone, Galen L., Chargé d’Affaires in India from August 1969

Sultan Khan, Mohammad, Foreign Secretary of the Foreign Ministry of Pakistan until April 1972, thereafter Ambassador to the United States
Thant, U, Secretary-General of the United Nations until December 1971
Umar, Ghulam, Major General, Political Adviser, President Yahya Khan, Pakistan
Van Hollen, Christopher, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, May 1969-September 1972; thereafter,
Ambassador to Sri Lanka
Vorontsov, Yuli M., Minister of the Soviet Embassy in the United States Williams, Maurice J., Deputy Administrator, Agency for International
Development; Chairman of Interdepartmental Working Group on East Pakistan Disaster Relief Yahya Khan, Agha Mohammad, General, Chief
Martial Law Administrator, President, Minister of Defense, and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, March 1969-December 1971
Zahir, Mohammad, King of Afghanistan
Zumwalt, Elmo R., Admiral, Chief of Naval Operations

1 
How America Viewed East Pakistan in 1971: Genesis of U.S. Policy
n 1 March 1971, Harold Saunders and Samuel Hoskinson, both members of the U.S. National Security Council staff, prepared a
memorandum for Henry Kissinger, then President Richard Nixon’s national security adviser, to brief him about what was going on in
Pakistan.
“Events in Pakistan today took a major step toward a possible early move by East Pakistan for independence,” they wrote, adding that the
future course of events now depended largely on the decision of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the other Awami League leaders, who had won an
absolute majority in the just concluded parliamentary elections.
It was the day Pakistan’s President General Yahya Khan postponed the scheduled parliament session. The legislature was to frame a
constitution to pave the way for the nation to welcome a new civilian government after suffering from a decade-long military rule. Mujib was to
become prime minister, materialising an aspiration long cherished by the Bengalis, who formed Pakistan’s majority. But Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, whose
party captured the majority seats in West Pakistan, would not concede.
“It is impossible to predict what Mujibur Rahman and the Awami League will do at this point. They are most unlikely, however, to back down
from their six-point program calling for virtual autonomy. It has the strong emotional and popular backing in East Pakistan and is adamantly
opposed by West Pakistani leader Z.A. Bhutto, important elements of the military, and many politically aware West Pakistanis.”
Yahya’s decision to postpone the parliamentary session was in direct response to Bhutto’s demand. Pressure from senior military officers, who
opposed Yahya’s conciliatory overtures to the Bengalis to reach a political solution acceptable to Pakistan’s both wings, also influenced the
president.
It was perhaps an attempt by Yahya to buy Mujib and Bhutto some time to strike a deal, but the violent reaction in East Pakistan – and Mujib’s
subsequent call for a general strike – might have made reconciliation impossible and played into the hands of Yahya’s critics in the military,
according to an analysis made shortly after, on 2 March 1971, by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
“The president now appears to have a fresh mandate to martial law administrators and in doing so ousted the conciliatory governor of East
Pakistan,” the report said, pointing to a potentially ominous development with the 1 March departure of Gov. Admiral S.M. Ahsan, who opposed
the proposal to use repressive measures against the Bengalis. “Since the military hardliners now appear to have gained ascendancy with Yahya, a
resort to repressive efforts to thwart East Pakistani aspirations is a real possibility.”
However, predicted David E. Mark, deputy director of regional research at the State Department, the use of force would not deter the
Bengalis. Rather, it would only strengthen their resolve against West Pakistan, making it even more difficult for a successor moderate government
to rule Pakistan.
“The apparent shift away from attempts at conciliation suggests that Yahya’s hopes for relatively crisis-free transition to civilian rule have been
dashed. Unless the East Pakistanis can be brought to believe that the West wing intends to treat them equitably – a prospect which has become
increasingly unlikely – secession appears inevitable.”
Yahya’s postponement of parliament did not surprise the Americans, including the U.S. ambassador. Ambassador Joseph Farland had met
Yahya on 25 February, when he gave him Nixon’s signed photograph, which the general hugely appreciated. Soon after exchanging pleasantries,
they turned to the matter of Pakistan’s gathering political crisis.
“For the first time in my experience with him,” Farland later reported to Washington, “Yahya was clearly worried about the next steps on the
difficult road towards a representative government.”
The impasse between Mujib and Bhutto about the constitution disheartened Yahya. He held Bhutto in low esteem. He was upset with Mujib’s
attitude. On Mujib’s six-point autonomy plan for East Pakistan, Yahya said he had “twice invited Mujib to confer with him” in Islamabad, “and
Mujib had twice declined.” Yahya confided to Farland that if the Bhutto-Mujib impasse remained unresolved till 3 March, he would defer the
parliament session “for a week or two” or later than that, if needed. Yahya did not indicate what would happen if the impasse continued, but he
spoke, in a tone of despair, of the “blood and chaos” that might ensue.
Farland, for his part, stressed that the long-standing U.S. policy to uphold Pakistan’s integrity “remained precisely as previously confirmed” to
Yahya and Bhutto – the United States supported a unified Pakistan. He also told Yahya he wanted to see Mujib “to make sure that he also
comprehended our concern about Pakistan’s future”. Farland worried his “seeing Mujib at this particularly sensitive juncture would likely be
subject to considerable public misunderstanding” in Pakistan.
Yahya acknowledged that many in West Pakistan suspected that America favoured an independent East Pakistan. He said reports continued to
reach him that the U.S. consul general and USAID officials in Dhaka were giving Awami League contacts such an impression. Yahya’s intelligence
told him that when Farland visited Dhaka last time upon his return from Washington in January, he had met Mujib.
That report was untrue, Farland protested. He told Yahya he had not met Mujib. Yahya himself was convinced America supported one
Pakistan. He assured Farland he would not misunderstand his seeing Mujib in the next few days, which the envoy had planned. On the contrary,
Yahya urged Farland to meet Mujib as soon as possible. Farland decided to leave for East Pakistan the next day and requested the consul general
in Dhaka to seek an early meeting with Mujib.
Yahya was not Pakistan’s first president to suspect America’s complicity with Mujib. During General Ayub Khan’s rule, which was brought to
an end by Yahya in 1969, there were accusations that America supported the military ruler’s opponents, a charge Washington consistently – but
unconvincingly – denied.
On 18 September 1964, U.S. Ambassador Walter P. McConaughy reassured Ayub of America’s steadfast support for his regime. The
American officials “would be fully circumspect in all their contacts to insure that none of their actions or relationships could be plausibly

