by his own people, Sadruddin said he thought Yahya was completely wrong. Only Bhutto and a few generals would really oppose. He saw a
danger that Yahya would accede to Bhutto’s demand and transfer power to him. If the power was transferred to Bhutto in the West wing and to
“stooges” in the East, Yahya would be unable to establish his credibility and the prospect for a unified country would be over.
The Mukti Bahini would fight forever with India’s support against a puppet government in Dhaka. Sadruddin said he had pleaded with Yahya
for many hours to establish his credibility, not by the transfer of power but by starting a dialogue with Mujib. Yahya argued there would be
tremendous unrest in West Pakistan. Sadruddin thought Yahya was definitely exaggerating the possible reaction.
Sadruddin suggested a scenario that might defuse the situation. The first step was for Yahya to show to the Indians and to the rest of the world
that Mujib was alive, and begin a dialogue with him. He must also make sure, perhaps with Chinese and American support, that Bhutto remained
quiet and would not disrupt any negotiations. Simultaneously, India’s friends would put pressure on New Delhi to defuse the border situation, while
actual negotiations with Mujib got under way.
Sadruddin noted that Dhar had told him if there were indications of the slightest progress in a dialogue with Mujib, the situation would be
immediately improved and India might even accept the U.N. secretary general’s good offices or the world organization’s presence. Sadruddin
emphasized that Yahya must ensure that the army recognized that there could be no military solution in East Pakistan and that it must accept a
political solution instead.
Sisco asked whether Mujib could, in fact, settle for substantial autonomy or a confederal link between East and West Pakistan. Sadruddin said
he was convinced that Mujib would go along. Yahya was also convinced, but felt that the army would not accept the end to its privileges in
Pakistan. Yahya’s trump card would be for Brohi to prove that Mujib was innocent. Then he could be rehabilitated as in the aftermath of the
Agartala conspiracy trial, a sedition case brought in early 1968 by the Pakistan government against Sheikh Mujib and thirty-four other military and
civilian Bengali officers. The case was ultimately withdrawn in the face of a massive popular uprising and the accused were released amidst a
popular uprising, which amidst a popular uprising, which eventually led to President Ayub Khan’s downfall.
Sadruddin said Yahya had begun to realize that the military solution was impossible. Yahya’s solution, however, was to put pressure on Gandhi
to give up support of the Mukti Bahini. He believed he could then clean up the Mukti Bahini in a matter of days and transfer power to the elected
representatives. This was unrealistic, he said. Sadruddin was prepared to make any effort to resolve the Pakistani crisis but he did not think he
could succeed, where even China and the United States had failed, to convince Yahya to alter his course. Sadruddin had suggested to Nixon that
he send a personal message proposing that Yahya establish contact with Mujib and publicly show that he was alive.
Sadruddin’s idea, however innovative, came a little too late. Washington realized that India and Pakistan were already on the road to war. As
India and Pakistan started drifting towards a direct clash, Washington sought Russia’s help to prevent a full-scale war. On 23 November, the State
Department asked the U.S. ambassador in Moscow to see Gromyko to express America’s concern about the dangers ahead. The message that
Beam was to convey read in part: “At this critical juncture we hope the U.S.S.R. will make renewed efforts to restrain India and will not further
encourage Indian military actions against East Pakistan by further deliveries of military equipment.”
Gromyko was unavailable to meet with Beam because of the Supreme Soviet session, and the ambassador had to meet instead with First
Deputy Foreign Minister V.V. Kuznetsov to make a presentation as specified by Washington. He emphasized that he was acting under instructions
from his government, which was concerned at the growing danger of war.
Kuznetsov interrupted Beam once to ask the source of America’s information concerning the military actions in East Pakistan. Beam said the
information is gathered from America’s current intelligence from that area.
Kuznetsov said that in recent days the Soviet government had approached both New Delhi and Islamabad with appeals that they exhibit
wisdom and patience and not take steps that could worsen the situation and lead to war. Gandhi had again said India did not intend to unleash war,
but reiterated the need for urgent Pakistani measures for a political settlement. On the military situation, Kuznetsov noted that the Soviet
information was confusing. However, the Soviets had received reports from New Delhi concerning apparent Pakistani efforts to provoke a military
conflict.
While this information was less than fully reliable, the apparent downing of three Pakistani planes over Indian airspace and the capture of two
Pakistani pilots, if confirmed, suggested Pakistan was guilty of violating India’s airspace. Kuznetsov said the situation in general seemed to be
worsening and the Soviets were preparing to make new approaches in both New Delhi and Islamabad. He said the Pakistani authorities were still
not taking necessary measures for a political settlement. For example, Mujib’s release would help negotiations with the Awami League. The
Soviets stressed this point in their approach to Yahya.
When Beam asked how Islamabad had responded thus far to the Soviet approaches, Kuznetsov said Yahya had promised not to launch military
actions but had tried to blame the Indians. He had said nothing definite on the key question of a political settlement.
In general, Kuznetsov said the situation was extremely complicated. It was difficult to find out what was going on and which side was initiating
military action. He asked if Washington had any new suggestions.
Beam replied he had no formula for a solution, but felt the Indians were supporting the insurgents, which amounted to hostile act against
Pakistan.
Kuznetsov reiterated his earlier view that Pakistan was responsible for the present situation. He hoped that America would persuade Pakistan to
see that the main step leading to East Pakistan’s normalization would be the speediest possible implementation of political arrangements, taking into
account the Bengali will as expressed in the 1970 elections.
On 24 November Nixon, Rogers and Kissinger met in the Oval Office at 12:30 p.m. to discuss the expanding East Pakistan conflict. Starting off
the conversation, Rogers denied that there was any difference in perspective on South Asia between the White House and the State Department –
an allegation Nixon often made against the American foreign service officials. Rogers then offered his assessment of how the United States should
respond to the crisis.
“First, it seems to me we should engage in the maximum diplomatic efforts to do everything we can to caution restraint on both sides at the
highest level always so that everyone can look at the record and see that we have done everything that we can diplomatically. Secondly, I think
that our relations with Yahya are good and should continue to be good and we should continue to keep very close to him. Three, I don’t think we
should try to mastermind a political solution. I never thought so. I don’t think it is possible and I think he [Yahya] is coming to the conclusion that
something has to be done politically.”

Nixon referred to the news reports on the fighting in East Pakistan and asked if the Indians were still denying that they had army divisions fighting
there. Rogers said that they were indeed denying it, and that while they did not have divisions involved, India was in East Pakistan in the brigade
strength of 5000 soldiers.
Kissinger noted that the Indian brigades were supported by artillery, air and armor.
Rogers guessed that India would “get more involved” in the fighting in East Pakistan and that Pakistan’s position would progressively
deteriorate. “I think we have to face the fact that Yahya’s position militarily is extremely weak. He’s got 60,000-80,000 men in East Pakistan.”
Nixon predicted, “He’ll be demolished there.”
Rogers pointed to the logistical problems confronted by Pakistan. “It is a 2,500 mile flight to resupply the troops in East Pakistan. Our ability to
affect the course of events is quite limited.”
Referring to Rogers’ observation that the moves being taken by the United States appeared to be limited to symbolic gestures in attempting to
restrain India, Nixon said, “I know it can be said that it won’t do any good, and we don’t have any leverage, and it’s only symbolic and the rest.
But on the other hand, I want you to look into what we could do that is symbolic because I think we need some symbolism.”
He said he recognized the realities of the situation: “Looking at the balance there, the Indians are going to win . . . Pakistan will disintegrate.” It
was, therefore, “very much in our interest to get the damned thing cooled, if we can. . . . Under those circumstances, it seems to me that, clearly
apart from the fact that Yahya has been more decent to us than she (Gandhi) has, clearly apart from that, I think that our policy wherever we can
should definitely be tilted toward Pakistan, and not toward India. I think India is more at fault.”
Rogers felt that if the issue was taken up by the United Nations, “Pakistan will come off better than India.” He “agreed fully” that the United
States should tilt toward Pakistan; the question, he said, was how to do it. He outlined several possibilities, which included cutting off military and
economic aid.
Kissinger gave an interpretation of India’s objectives in the crisis. He saw India as striving to split Pakistan, with West Pakistan ultimately
reduced to the status of Afghanistan, and East Pakistan, of Bhutan – a reference to two of South Asia’s relatively weaker nations in terms of
military might.
Rogers, however, viewed the conflict as growing out of the deeply ingrained sectarian animosity that had animated the initial division of the
subcontinent. Both Rogers and Kissinger agreed with Nixon’s assessment of Yahya Khan as a “decent and reasonable man”, if “not always smart
politically”. All the three viewed with trepidation the prospect of Yahya stepping aside in favor of Bhutto. Nixon called Bhutto “a total
demagogue”. In a concluding admonition to Rogers and Kissinger, Nixon said, “I don’t want to get caught in the business where we take the heat
for a miserable war that we had nothing to do with.”
On 25 November, Rogers summoned Rasgotra, India’s chargé in Washington. Referring to the conflicting reports of India’s troops entering
East Pakistan, he said, “We would like impartial observers to find out what was happening.” He then asked whether Rasgotra had any ideas how
this might be done. The Indian envoy, who operated from a habit of taking in more than giving out, simply said he had none.
When Rogers suggested that the Indian and Pakistani forces be withdrawn and separated a distance, so that neither side could take advantage
of the situation, Rasgotra said he would pass on the message to New Delhi.
When Sisco said Gandhi had not responded to the U.S. proposal for discussions between the Bangladesh leaders and Pakistan, Rasgotra said
India would have to get the Bangladesh reaction, but there had been no reaction till then. Rasgotra did not know whether India could accept the
withdrawal proposal.
Rogers said it would be difficult for the Americans to understand how India could say it did not want hostilities and yet would not disengage
because it did not know the terms of disengagement.
Rasgotra noted that even if India withdrew, it would still leave the basic situation in East Pakistan unchanged. He asked whether there had been
any change in the Pakistani attitude towards the use of the military in East Pakistan.
Sisco commented that there had been none, but Pakistan claimed that as long as the Mukti Bahini, supported by the Indian troops, was active in
East Pakistan it would not be possible to reduce military actions.
While Sisco talked with Rasgotra, Kissinger received a cable from Keating on a conversation the ambassador had with the Indian foreign
minister. On 25 November, Kissinger summed up for Nixon what Swaran Singh had said in New Delhi during what Keating called a “rambling
two-hour” talk. Singh said that “even now, it is not too late for President Yahya to make a dramatic political gesture. The situation would be
immediately defused by such a gesture. This should involve negotiations with East Pakistan’s elected representatives and not going ahead with his
farce of elections.”
Singh thought Yahya could still free Mujib and start talks – if not overnight, perhaps in two or three weeks. Singh’s statement was apparently a
camouflage to divert America’s attention from India’s secret military plan that envisioned the likelihood of waging a full-scale war in a matter of
days.
If Pakistan withdrew its troops from the border, Kissinger said, then another situation would arise and India would certainly consider that
situation. However, Yahya was only prepared to withdraw contingent on India’s reciprocal pullback.
Kissinger also told Nixon that India’s high commissioner in Pakistan, J.K. Atal, had returned to Islamabad from high-level consultations in New
Delhi, “carrying an important message”. An old friend of Yahya’s, Atal had gone to New Delhi after a long conversation with Yahya a week
earlier. He was reportedly impressed with Yahya’s plan to turn over his government to civilian leaders. Atal went to New Delhi to urge Gandhi to
give a chance to Yahya’s political timetable. He was back in Islamabad and was scheduled to see Sultan Khan. But the United States had no idea
about the outcome of Atal’s talks in New Delhi.
On 27 November, Farland informed Washington about a conversation he had with Atal, who indicated he would try to promote a
rapprochement between India and Pakistan. His idea was to promote a meeting between the Awami League and Yahya’s representatives. He
considered Mujib no longer important and his release, not a necessary precondition to such a dialogue. Farland passed along Atal’s suggestion to
Yahya. Yahya remarked that Atal’s suggestion differed so much from his government’s position, particularly about Mujib, that it must reflect that
the high commissioner was inadequately briefed before he took up his position in Pakistan.
Why Atal made remarks sharply differently from New Delhi’s position stirred up a debate in Washington. When the Washington Special Action

Group met on 29 November Kissinger asked Cushman, “Do you think the Indian high commissioner in Islamabad acted on his own in his meeting
with Yahya?”
Cushman said it was a very puzzling situation, indeed. In a latter conversation at a party with Farland, Atal did not seem to know what messages
he had sent to New Delhi or where the game stood. There were indications that he and Kaul did not see eye-to-eye, but he certainly was not
transmitting the same message as New Delhi.
Cushman’s comments confused Kissinger. He wanted to make sure what Cushman meant: “Did I understand that he didn’t know the content of
the messages he was sending to New Delhi or of the messages he was receiving from New Delhi?”
Cushman clarified: “The messages he had sent to New Delhi.”
Kissinger: “Hasn’t he just come from New Delhi?”
Cushman: “Yes.”
On the military front, Cushman reported there had been no dramatic change in the situation in East Pakistan since November 24. India had
seven divisions massed along the border with East Pakistan, but most of the fighting within East Pakistan was being done by the Mukti Bahini,
supported by the Indian artillery, armor and, on occasion, troops.
Kissinger then turned to Moorer, Joint Chiefs chairman: “What are your views on the military side?”
Moorer: “Our intelligence is about the same. We did have a report of a remark by Yahya at a party to the effect that ‘You won’t see me for a
day or two – I am going to the border to lead war operations.’ The logistic situation is such that the Pakistan forces in East Pakistan will run out of
supplies – mainly ammunition – in a short time, and Yahya may be forced to move in the West. Certainly, the situation is more critical than it was
last week.”
Kissinger then sought a rundown on the diplomatic moves.
Sisco said he believed India had every intention of continuing its present military posture to serve its political objectives.
Kissinger asked: “Do you think this campaign was planned before the Gandhi trip?”
Sisco: “Militarily, yes. There had already been some deployments. But the most active military moves were made post-Washington.”
Moorer: “They obviously had a contingency plan.”
Kissinger: “I’m asking this for my own education. We have been debating all summer whether or not the Indians were being restrained. If they
had been planning this all along, would this have been the earliest they could attack, given the time needed for deployment and the advent of the
rainy season? If the decision had been made last June, what would have been the earliest time they could have attacked?”
Moorer: “Four or five weeks.”
Williams: “It was timed to the requirement for the training of the Bengalis.”
Kissinger: “I’m not trying to put words in people’s mouths. But one could argue that everything the Indians have done since June has been
designed to prepare for this, and that the trips by Foreign Secretary Singh and Mrs. Gandhi were smoke-screens. Or, one could say that the
Indians have been making a serious effort to solve the problem and that they finally moved out of desperation.”
Moorer: “I think the readiness of the Bengalis dictated the timing. The Indians could have moved earlier with their regular forces. What is
happening is that the guerrillas are backing up against the Indians, who then are giving them artillery and other support. The Indian objective is to
change the relative strength of the Pakistanis and the guerrillas.”
Kissinger then asked Williams for his views.
Williams said, “I think the Indians might have moved two or three weeks earlier, allowing for time to train the Bengalis and for the monsoon.
They did have a margin of about three weeks before they invaded, which coincided with Mrs. Gandhi’s trip. I think they waited for her to return.”
Moorer: “They have obviously been training and supplying the guerrillas.”
Williams: “I think they had hoped the guerrillas would be more effective in their internal operations than they were. They found, however, that
the guerrillas were only effective when stiffened by the Indians, which was their second strategy. They would have preferred that it be done
internally, strictly by the Mukti Bahini.”
David Packard, deputy defense secretary, said it looked as though India had been moving right ahead, taking advantage of the situation as it
developed.
Kissinger remarked that India did not exploit the possible opening of talks between Yahya and the Bengalis, which Sisco worked on in the
summer. That could have been the beginning. If Bangladesh had asked for Mujib’s release in those talks, there might have been some movement
and the situation might have been stabilized.
On 29 November, Kissinger informed Nixon that active fighting continued in East Pakistan. The Indian officials seemed increasingly open about
the fact that the Indian troops had crossed into East Pakistan, but maintained they did so to quell Pakistani shelling. The Pakistani army in East
Pakistan, the Americans estimated, could defend the province for a month and limit Indian penetrations to ten or fifteen miles, if India avoided using
air power.
To get a better grip on the situation, Kissinger sent a telegram to Farland on 30 November asking the ambassador to comment on reports that
Pakistan might attack Kashmir to relieve pressure upon East Pakistan.
“We have no information here to suggest that a Pakistani attack on Kashmir is imminent or under active consideration, although some
contingency plan to that effect surely exists,” Farland replied. “Yahya continues to assure me that he does not wish war, nor does he intend to start
it here. He has so far held sway over his hawks, although how much longer he can do so in the face of continued Indian incursions into East
Pakistan is most uncertain. The Pakistanis are in a state of readiness and if they do finally conclude they must fight in the West as well as in the
East, Kashmir is an emotionally attractive target, although we have generally thought that they would go for the more easily penetrated areas further
south.”

19 
India Begins Blitzkrieg
aced with a potentially explosive situation in South Asia, on 1 December Nixon sent a letter to Gandhi, which Keating delivered to the Indian
premier. She read it and promised the American ambassador she would reply promptly, adding that every country must first look to its
national interest and it was her duty to see what was in her country’s own.
Speaking on the East Pakistan crisis, the prime minister blamed Yahya for creating his problems and insisted that he must face the consequences
of his action. “We are not in a position to make this easier for him,” Gandhi said, adding that India was being asked to allow Yahya’s misdeeds to
stand, but “we are not going to allow that.”
No one in India opposed war more than she did, Gandhi declared. “I wouldn’t like to take this country to war,” but “this war and this situation
are not of our making.”
In an indirect jab at the United States, she noted that many countries said they were exerting pressure on Yahya, but “what has it yielded?”
Nothing, she herself answered, except that “Yahya had his back to the wall” and wanted “to be bailed out”. Then she commented, “We have to
take steps which will make us stronger to deal with this situation.”
Gandhi said Yahya’s step to start a political process, especially what she called the “farcical” elections, had moved the situation in the wrong
direction. These so-called elections were “not going to make any difference whatsoever”.
When Keating commented that her position was very firm, Gandhi replied that things had become a little harder than before. She said her own
patience had worn thin, and she did not know how to tell India to continue to wait. “I can’t hold it.”
When Keating started to comment about the recent Indian military incursions, she cut him off. “We can’t afford to listen to advice which
weakens us.”
Following his conversation with Gandhi, Keating informed Washington: “In the absence of some major development toward a meaningful
political accommodation, India will assure that the efforts of the Mukti Bahini to liberate East Pakistan do not fail.”
The day Keating met with Gandhi, the United States decided to cut off military aid to India, as Nixon had threatened many times since the crisis
erupted, to punish New Delhi. Nixon held India responsible for the trouble in South Asia.
Sisco informed Rasgotra of America’s new aid policy. The Indian envoy regretted the decision. He said India would note the alacrity with which
the United States cut off its military sales to India, compared to the delays involved in the similar cut-off to Pakistan.
In New Delhi, the aid cut-off did not create much of a wrinkle. Keating reported to Washington that when he informed Kaul of the new U.S.
military supply policy, the foreign secretary “took the news well, but said that pressure tactics would not succeed in dissuading India from the path
on which it was embarked.”
America’s decision to cut off aid followed concerns in Washington that India was embarked on a mission not just to partition Pakistan, but also
ensure its complete disintegration. When the Washington Special Action Group met on 1 December, Kissinger asked whether Gandhi would
“allow the Pakistanis to stay in West Pakistan for the time being.” His statement alluded that India wanted to destroy West Pakistan as well. But
before anyone could answer, Kissinger was called from the meeting room.
When the group resumed discussion in Kissinger’s absence, Irwin asked if the war would be over in a month. Both Cushman and Moorer said,
“Yes.” Moorer said the Pakistan army in East Pakistan had begun to ration ammunition – ten rounds per tube. “They’re beginning to feel the
squeeze.”
When Kissinger re-joined the meeting, he cited some media reports that were critical of the administration. “Some of the papers are saying
we’re not doing our arithmetic – that we’re losing 500 million Indians for 150 million Pakistanis. I don’t know what we’re losing in India and, in
any event, that’s not the purpose of our policy.”
He then asked: “How long do you think Pakistan can hold out?”
Moorer replied, “Two or three weeks.”
The next day, Kissinger told Nixon that Indian and guerrilla offensive was gaining momentum, with the insurgents operating more freely. They
had captured some towns as close as seventeen miles from Dhaka, and the Bangladesh flag was flying in several towns in the interior.
Yahya Appeals For Nixon’s Help
Yahya made an appeal to Nixon on 2 December to make India stop the war. “India has chosen the path of war, aided and abetted by Soviet
Union, in a bid to break up my country. Time is fast running out and the choice before me has, indeed, become very limited.”
He said the U.S. actions announced so far had failed to deter India. Yahya urged Nixon to issue a personal statement “condemning India’s
aggression, aided and abetted by the Soviet Union, and calling for an immediate end to hostilities and withdrawal of opposing forces to a safe
distance behind their respective borders.” He asked Nixon to advise the Soviet Union to “desist from militarily supporting India”.
To win military aid from the United States, Yahya invoked the Pakistan-United States Bilateral Agreement of Co-operation Pact of 1959.
Under the pact, Pakistan claimed, the United States had an obligation to come to its aid; Washington disagreed with Pakistan’s interpretation of
what the agreement implied.
“I shall be most anxiously awaiting your reply,” Yahya told Nixon.
The administration discussed whether America ever agreed to provide military aid to Pakistan under the pact in the event of an attack by a third
country. Kissinger said a secret clause provided such assurances, but State and Pentagon officials disagreed. Van Hollen said the assurance was

given in the context of America’s assurance to India when China moved, and were no longer in effect.
On 4 December, Kissinger called Nixon to tell the president, “We have had an urgent appeal from Yahya.” Yahya was asking whether the
United States would send military supplies through Iran.
Nixon asked: “Can we help?”
Kissinger replied: “I think if we tell the Iranians we will make it up to them we can do it.”
Nixon concurred: “If it is leaking, we can have it denied. Have it done one step away.”
On instructions from Washington, the Shah indicated that he would be glad to help. But he stipulated that the United States quickly replace what
was transferred. On the same day in Amman, King Hussein showed U.S. Ambassador Dean Brown a telegram from Yahya asking for military
assistance. Hussein said Pakistan wanted eight to ten Jordanian F-104 fighters. Since the United States had provided the aircraft, Hussein turned
to the embassy for advice.
America gave the go-ahead to both Iran and Jordan. Rogers told Keating neither to confirm nor deny that the United States endorsed Jordanian
and Iranian transfer of American arms to Pakistan. But the U.S. Embassy in Iran reported to the State Department on 29 December that three F-
5A Fighter aircraft, reportedly from the United States, had been flown to Pakistan. A Northrop official matched the aircraft to a group of planes
originally slated for sale to Libya, but were later placed under the U.S. government control in California after a dispute with Tripoli.
Later, in 1972, Kissinger would admit during a conversation with Chinese premier Chou En-lai that the United States had illegally supplied arms
to Pakistan via third countries during the Bangladesh war.
“We have been prevented by the Democratic Congress from giving aid directly. I wanted to tell the prime minister in strictest confidence that
when we were in Iran we asked the Shah to organize a consortium of Greece, Iran, Turkey, maybe Jordan, to establish military assistance to
Pakistan with American weapons. We did some of this illegally during the war, as the prime minister knows. To do it legally we will have to start a
small arms program to Pakistan because there is a provision in our law that American weapons can be transferred to third countries only if those
countries are eligible to receive American weapons directly,” Kissinger said.
Chou En-lai said: “In December when went to give them twelve planes by Jordan it was not easy, nor did it give any good influence, impression
[sic].”
Kissinger: “We had to do it because the Soviet Union was bringing so much pressure on Iran. There was a complicated arrangement. We flew
Iranian planes to Jordan and Jordan planes to Pakistan. It was an emergency.” He said the United States gave Iran more modern planes so that
some of the Iranian planes could be free to go to Pakistan.
Chou: “And, Pakistan is still remaining a member of CENTO?”
Kissinger: “Yes, it is still technically a member of CENTO. But the major strategy is to give Pakistan enough strength so that India will not be
able to attack it; or that it turns itself into a vassal of India and therefore frees India to move into Southeast Asia or other parts.” Both Chou and
Kissinger believed India intended to establish hegemony over both South and Southeast Asia, a scheme both insisted they must endeavor together
to halt.
On 4 December, again Kissinger called Nixon, who was then vacationing in Florida. He briefed Nixon about the Security Council meeting,
saying “The Chinese jumped all over the Russians and the Indians and apparently the Indians wanted to put on the agenda only the item of
problems of East Pakistan and the Chinese said ‘No, let’s call it problems of India.’ And that’s all right if they all brawl with each other.”
Nixon responded: “Good. Let the liberals choose now between China and India. That’ll be very good.”
Kissinger: “Actually, in terms of the political situation, first of all we won’t take any more immediate flak, but in the six months the liberals are
going to look like jerks, because the Indian occupation of East Pakistan is going to make the Pakistani one look like a child’s play.”
Nixon then turned to the on-going fighting. “God, you know what would really be poetic justice here is if some way the Paks could really give
the Indians a bloody nose for a couple of days. The fighting, any report on that?” the president asked.
Kissinger: “Well, the fighting – we got reports in East Pakistan that the Indians are surprised at the intensity of the Pakistan resistance. But, of
course, they outnumber them there eight to one.”
Nixon: “How about West Pakistan?”
Kissinger: “In West Pakistan, the Indians don’t seem to have gotten very far. And, there I think they’re not going to be able to win except by
wearing them down. They outnumber them there five to one. They’ve been bombing Karachi and burning the oil installations.”
Nixon: “Isn’t that awful. That is terrible. The Indians are bombing Karachi?”
Kissinger: “Yes.”
Nixon: “Oh, for Christ’s sake . . . Rawalpindi I notice is on the list, too.”
Kissinger’s conversation with Nixon followed Gandhi’s declaration of war on Pakistan on 3 December. She told the Indians in a broadcast that
Pakistan had attacked India earlier in the day, shortly after 5:30 p.m. Pakistan’s air force had hit six Indian airfields in Kashmir and the Punjab. The
Pakistani army shelled Indian positions and India had no option but to adopt a war footing.
Pakistan responded to the Indian charges in a note to the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad the same day. Pakistan said the Indian Air Force had
been carrying out aggressive reconnaissance over West Pakistan for the last three or four days. Such action was a prelude to attacks started by the
Indian army between 3:30 p.m. and 4 p.m. of 3 December at several points from Kashmir to Rahim Yar Khan. The attacks on the Indian airfields
were necessary counter-measures.
American intelligence was unsure which side started the war, but Kissinger told Nixon that West Pakistan had attacked because the situation in
the East was collapsing. Nixon refused to accept that. He advised his national security adviser to tell the Soviet Union that “when India talked
about West Pakistan attacking them, it’s like the Russians claiming to be attacked by Finland.”
When the Washington Special Action Group met on 3 December, the CIA chief gave a rundown of the war. “We know that the Pakistanis did
attack the three airfields at Srinagar, Amritsar and Pathankot this morning. It was first reported on the Indian radio and now the Pakistan radio has
reported it. The Pakistan radio also says India is attacking all along the border.”
Kissinger wanted to know if the Indians were seizing territory in the East.

Helms said, yes.
In East Pakistan, Moorer added, the Indians were trying to keep the Pakistan troops occupied to give the guerrillas more latitude. “It’s just a
matter of time until the Indians believe the guerrillas are strong enough, at which point they will recognize a Bangladesh government.”
Kissinger: “You think it’s just a question of time until the Pakistanis are exhausted?”
Moorer: “Yes.”
Kissinger: “How about in the West? Whoever attacked, there will be a full-scale fighting.”
Moorer: “I’m surprised that the Pakistanis attacked at such a low level. In 1965, they moved much more strongly. One of the airfields was a
little army field and the other two had practically no aircraft on them. The major fields are farther south.”
Helms predicted on 3 December that Gandhi in “her speech at 1:30 today will recognize Bangladesh”.
On 4 December, Kissinger asked the CIA director whether India had declared an all-out war on Pakistan.
Helms: “They’ve said they have launched a ‘no-holds-barred’ offensive on East Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “Has Yahya said anything of a comparable nature?” Helms: “He has said his army would push the invader back into his own territory
and destroy him.”
Kissinger: “Is that objectionable? Can the United Nations object to someone driving an enemy back? The Pakistan ambassador called me the
other day to say he had been told by someone in the State Department to exercise restraint and wanted to know how he should do it. I told him to
go back and ask the person who told him.”
By then, Kissinger and other members of the group had no doubt India would win the war. “Everyone knows we will end up with Indian
occupation of East Pakistan. It will be interesting to see how all those people who were so horrified at what the Pakistanis were doing in East
Pakistan react when the Indians take over there,” Kissinger told the group, while debating how the United States should present a Security Council
resolution to end the war.
He suggested that Washington press hard at the United Nations on a ceasefire and withdrawal of forces before a political settlement. “And, we
understand that we will not go along with any specifics on political accommodation. We will accept a general political settlement language, but not
specifically related to Mujib’s release,” he said.
When Kissinger asked how long India could delay the proceedings before accepting ceasefire, Van Hollen said, “They will spin it out as long as
possible, while they are moving militarily.”
Helms replied, “Just about long enough to occupy East Pakistan.”
On 6 December, the day India recognized Bangladesh, Gandhi wrote to Nixon informing him that India was at war with Pakistan. “I should
stress to Your Excellency that the people and the government of India are determined that this wanton and unprovoked aggression should be
decisively and finally repelled once and for all,” she declared.
To Nixon, India’s action was an attempt by Moscow and New Delhi to humiliate China and America. “Now, what the Russians this morning
have launched is a blistering attack on Pakistan in TASS and, in effect, have warned the Chinese against getting involved. What we are seeing here
is a Soviet-Indian power play to humiliate the Chinese and also somewhat us.” Nixon told Kissinger when the two discussed the Soviet veto of the
Security Council resolution of 5 December, calling for a ceasefire.
To convey Nixon’s dismay to the Soviet leaders, Kissinger met on the same day with Yuli M. Vorontsov, minister counselor at the Soviet
Embassy in Washington. He told the Soviet envoy that Nixon “did not understand how the Soviet Union could believe that it was possible to work
on the broad amelioration of our relationships while at the same time encouraging the Indian military aggression against Pakistan. We did not take a
position on the merits of the developments inside Pakistan that triggered this sequence of events. We have, indeed, always taken the position that
we would encourage a political solution.”
Vorontsov asked whether he could convey something about a political solution, since this was featured so prominently in Kosygin’s letter.
Kissinger said, “Our attitude towards a political solution was as follows: if there were a ceasefire and a withdrawal, the United States would be
prepared to work immediately with the Soviet Union on ideas of a political solution. We recognized that substantial political autonomy for East
Pakistan was the probable outcome of a political evolution, and we were willing to work in that direction.”
Vorontsov later described the meeting in a telegram to the Soviet foreign minister.
“I asked Kissinger whether the U.S. government is taking any steps in its relations with Pakistan toward finding a political solution to the root
cause of the present crisis – the situation in East Pakistan, which the Soviet government had called for in its 3 December letter to President Nixon.”
Kissinger said the U.S. side “had almost completed arrangements for talks between Yahya Khan and Bangladeshi representatives acceptable to
Mujibur Rahman when India ruined everything by its invasion of Pakistan.”
“But what kind of political talks could there be right now with regard to East Pakistan when foreign troops had invaded all of Pakistan?”
Kissinger exclaimed in a somewhat excited tone. Then, in a calmer tone, he said that in any case matters had been moving and clearly continue to
move towards granting political autonomy to East Pakistan.
If the war was stopped now and Pakistan was given “two months of peace and quiet,” then as a result of political talks, such autonomy would
become a reality. In proposing a halt to hostilities, the United States was not at all suggesting that the “period of peace and quiet” be used and then
once again resume hostilities or “to restore the status quo in East Pakistan”. America favored positive results from political talks, Vorontsov
reported to Moscow, quoting Kissinger.
Then speaking on the “absolute necessity” of having the quickest possible ceasefire, he again said the Soviet support of India “is bringing Soviet-
U.S. relations to a critical juncture.” He expressed surprise on a purely personal level and questioned why the events between India and Pakistan
were so insistently and obviously being extended to relations between Moscow and Washington.
“Soon after I returned from the White House, Kissinger called me at the embassy and said that he had just spoken with President Nixon by
phone at his Florida home. Kissinger said that the president asked him to say in connection with our conversation that ‘even if the conflict does end
in the next few days, it will leave its mark on our relations’ if it ends in the same vein in which it is developing right now. These events may turn out
to be ‘a watershed for our relations,’ ” the Soviet envoy conveyed to Moscow.

“Judging by Kissinger’s tone during the entire conversation, one got the sense that the White House is nervous about the fairly complicated
situation in which the United States has found itself given the current development of events on the Indian subcontinent,” he explained.
He added, “The fact that the Soviet Union, not the United States, will gain all the political benefits if Bangladesh appears as a new country in
Asia as a result of current events . . . has caused the hasty attempt to transfer the dissatisfaction over the situation in South Asia that is developing
unfavorably for the United States onto Soviet-U.S. relations.”
On 10 December at 10:51 a.m., Nixon met with Kissinger in the Oval Office for another round of discussion on South Asia. Nixon began by
telling Kissinger about the protest the State Department was instructed to lodge about the strafing of U.S. military planes, (belonging to the U.S.
defense representative and the United Nations ) on the ground in Pakistan, by the Indian Air Force. Nixon wanted to make certain that the protest
had indeed been made.
Kissinger said the State Department did not promptly nor effectively carry out White House instructions. Then he briefed the president on the
latest in the subcontinent. “I want to tell you what I have done, tentatively, subject to your approval. They’ve got this East Pakistan, they’ve got the
offer of the commander of the Pakistan forces in East Pakistan to get a ceasefire and so forth. They [the State Department] were going to run to
the Security Council and get that done. We don’t want to be in a position where we push the Pakistanis over the cliff. So I told them to link the
ceasefire in the East with the ceasefire in the West.”
Kissinger said the ceasefire in the East had gone “down the drain”. He added, “The major problem now is to protect the West.”
Nixon nodded, “Yeah.”
Kissinger continued, “I’ve got Vorontsov coming in at 11:30 and I’m going to tell him that what the Pakistanis did in the East was as a result of
what we did. Which is true. I’m going to show him the Kennedy understanding. I’m going to hand him a very tough note to Brezhnev and say this
is it now, let’s settle the conflict, let’s get a ceasefire now. That’s the best that can be done now. They’ll lose half of their country, but at least they
preserve the other half.”
Nixon agreed that “our desire is to save West Pakistan.” He asked for an assurance that the necessary steps were being taken to keep the
Seventh Fleet moving.
Kissinger assured him that “everything is moving.” In addition to the carrier group, Kissinger reported that “four Jordanian planes have already
moved to Pakistan, twenty-two more are coming. We’re talking to the Saudis; the Turks we’ve now found are willing to give five.”
Later in the conversation, Nixon asked when Kissinger planned to meet with the Chinese. At 5:30 p.m, Kissinger replied.
Nixon asked what would be discussed, and Kissinger said, “I’m going to tell them what forces we’re moving.”
Nixon: “Could you say it would be very helpful if they could move some forces or threaten to move some forces.”
Kissinger: “Absolutely.”
Nixon: “They’ve got to threaten or they’ve got to move, one of the two. You know what I mean?
Kissinger: “Yeah.”
Nixon: “Threaten to move forces or move them, Henry, that’s what they must do now. Now, goddammit, we’re playing our role and that will
restrain India. And, also tell them this will help us get the ceasefire.” He indicated he did not want to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union that
China would reject.
Kissinger: “If we stay strong, even if it comes out badly, we’ll have come out well with the Chinese, which is important.”
Nixon: “Coming back to this India-Pakistan thing, have we got anything else we can do?”
Kissinger: “I think we’re going to crack it now.”
Nixon: “Well, the Indians will be warned by the Chinese, right?”
Kissinger: “Well, I’ll have to find out tonight.”
Nixon: “You do your best, Henry. This should have been done long ago. The Chinese have not warned the Indians. They haven’t warned them
that they’re going to come in. And, that’s the point. They’ve got to warn them. All they’ve got to do is move something. Move their, move a
division. You know, move some trucks. Fly some planes. You know, some symbolic act. We’re not doing a goddamn thing, Henry, you know
that. We’re just moving things around, aren’t we?”
Kissinger: “Yeah.”
Nixon: “These Indians are cowards, right?”
Kissinger: “Right, but with Russian backing. You see the Russians have sent notes to Iran, Turkey, to a lot of countries threatening them. The
Russians have played a miserable game.”
In response to Nixon’s question, Kissinger said the Russian threats were vague rather than specific. He felt that the Soviet Union would change
course in light of Nixon’s conversation with Soviet Agriculture Minister Vladimir Matskevich on 9 December. Kissinger felt that Nixon should
make the point that Soviet support of the Indian use of force in East Pakistan raised serious questions as to whether the United States could work
with Moscow on issues of mutual concern.
Looking ahead, Nixon posed the question of whether the United States should recognize the emerging political reality in East Pakistan. “What
do we do about that? Are we going to just say Indian occupation or Bangladesh? Or what? Are we going to oppose Bangladesh recognition?
What’s our position? Is anybody involved on these things?”
He added that what was lacking was a plan, outlining “how we want it come out.”
Kissinger replied: “After the Brezhnev letter came yesterday, we sent a copy of it to Yahya . . . And now Yahya has come back with a proposal
saying ceasefire, negotiations for mutual withdrawal, and negotiations to settle the political future. And, then what will happen on Bangladesh, Mr.
President, is that whatever West Pakistan and these people work out we will accept. But we will not be in the fore, in the front.”
Nixon: “Whatever West Pakistan works out with whom?”
Kissinger: “The negotiations on East Pakistan.”
Nixon: “But India will not agree to negotiations on East Pakistan.”

Kissinger: “Yeah, but the Russians have already agreed to it. So what will happen, let’s be realistic, what will happen is that the representatives
of East Pakistan will demand independence. And, in practice, I think that is what West Pakistan will then agree to. But then it won’t be us who
have done it. This will solve the problem of do we recognize Bangladesh against the wishes of the Pakistan government.”
Nixon: “We must never recognize Bangladesh until West Pakistan gives us the go ahead.”
Nixon concurred with Kissinger’s observation that “we have to continue to squeeze the Indians, even when this thing is settled.” He instructed
that the economic aid program for India be reprogrammed to help pay for the war damage suffered by Pakistan. Nixon also angrily instructed that
a concerted effort be made to publicize India’s role in the crisis: “Get a white paper out. I want the Indians blamed for this, you know what I
mean? We can’t let these goddamn sanctimonious Indians get away with this. Here they are raping and murdering. They talk about West Pakistan.
These Indians are pretty vicious.”

20 
Operation Liberate Dhaka
hile the world powers debated the South Asian issue at the United Nations in early December, India’s military pushed deeper into East
Pakistan. On 6 December, Kissinger told Nixon the Indian forces were continuing their all-out offensive into East Pakistan. Heavier
fighting was developing in the West, where the Pakistanis seemed to be taking the initiative. In East Pakistan, India was making a
gradual progress on several fronts. India’s aim was to force Pakistan to surrender in East Pakistan within a week. In the West, the Indian strategy
was to maintain an essentially defensive posture until the battle was won in the East.
On the political front, Gandhi had announced India’s long-anticipated recognition of Bangladesh as an independent nation. Even though its
significance had been lessened by the hostilities, the Pakistanis responded by breaking diplomatic relations with India.
Kissinger’s briefing took place in the background of a letter that Nixon had sent to Brezhnev on 6 December, essentially threatening the Soviet
leadership with the possible cancellation of the US-Soviet summit scheduled for May 1972, and thus signaling his intention to put the US-Soviet
relations in the cold storage.
“It is clear that the interests of all concerned states will be served if the territorial integrity of Pakistan was restored and the military action was
brought to an end. Urgent action is required and I believe that your great influence in New Delhi should serve these ends,” Nixon told Brezhnev. “I
must state frankly that it would be illusory to think that if India can somehow achieve its objectives by military action the issue will be closed.”
The same day, U.S. Defence Secretary Melvin Laird held a policy group meeting in which General Roy Westmoreland reported that India was
trying to quickly end the fighting in East Pakistan. Gandhi had announced that India wanted to complete action in the East within ten days and re-
deploy the troops to the West Pakistan borders. West Pakistan wanted to overwhelm the Indian forces in Kashmir, because the Pakistanis felt
Kashmir would sufficiently compensate for their loss of East Pakistan.
If the Indians should mount a full-scale attack, the Americans estimated that in conjunction with the Mukti-Bahini guerrillas, India could take
enough East Pakistani territory in ten days to establish the rebel government. If their activity was no more than what it was at present, however, it
would allow the East Pakistani troops to withdraw to more easily defended positions and they could hold out for at least a month. The Americans
figured that India’s aircraft strikes at West Pakistan oil targets significantly reduced Pakistan’s combat ability. Pakistan’s strategy was to create a
major diversion by attacking India from the West and taking Kashmir.
On December 6, when the Washington Special Action Group discussed Bangladesh, Kissinger asked how long the fight could last.
Westmoreland, a Vietnam War commander, predicted it could, for up to three weeks.
Kissinger: “What will India do with Bangladesh? Will they see it as an independent state or have them negotiate with Islamabad?”
Helms: “Independent.”
Sisco: “India has already recognized Bangladesh as an independent country.”
Kissinger: “And, the Indians won’t suggest that Bangladesh negotiate with Islamabad?”
Sisco: “Not now.”
Kissinger: “I suspect the Indians may lose interest in Mujib.”
Sisco: “I don’t know whether they’ll try to have him take over or not. They can afford it either way.”
Kissinger: “Will the Indians withdraw their army once the Pakistanis are disarmed?”
Westmoreland: “No, I think they will leave three or four divisions to work with the Mukti Bahini, and pull the remainder back to the West.”
Sisco: “I think they will pull out as quickly as they can. Once and if the Pak forces are disarmed, the Indians will have a basically friendly
population. They can afford to move back to the border areas quickly. I say this with one caveat – this depends on what happens in the West. If
the Paks can take a little piece of territory in the West as some sort of balance for East Pakistan, the Indians won’t get out of Bangladesh quite so
fast. They will see it as a further balance to the West.”
Kissinger: “Will they permit Bangladesh to establish itself with an army and a separate foreign policy?”
Sisco: “I wouldn’t exclude it. There is likely to be a continued Indian presence, however.”
Van Hollen: “After the Indian army has been in East Pakistan for two or three weeks, they may come to be accepted as a Hindu army of
occupation.”
Kissinger: “Do you think they will establish Bangladesh in its present frontiers? Or will they settle the refugees along the border and then annex
some territory?”
Van Hollen: “They may question whether they should send the refugees back now to a Bangladesh that is largely Muslim.”
Kissinger: “Will there be a massive famine in East Pakistan?”
Williams: “They have a huge crop just coming in.”
Kissinger: “How about the next spring?”
Williams: “Yes, there will be a famine by next spring unless they can pull themselves together by the end of March.”
Kissinger: “And, we will be asked to bail out Bangladesh from famine next spring?”
Williams: “Yes.”
Kissinger: “Then we had better start thinking about what our policy will be.”
Williams: “By March, Bangladesh will need all kinds of help.”
Johnson: “They’ll be an international basket case.”

Kissinger: “But not necessarily our basket case.”
When the National Security Council met with Nixon on 6 December, the CIA chief said India’s recognition of Bangladesh provided a
justification for intervention in East Pakistan. He used a map to show the progress of Indian and Mukti Bahini forces in East Pakistan. Helms felt
that ten days was a conservative estimate of how long it would be before the Pakistani forces in East Pakistan would be forced to surrender.
When Nixon met with Kissinger alone, the president regretted that he had not made his position clear enough to Gandhi during their meeting in
November. “What I’m concerned about, I really worry about, is whether or not I was too easy on the goddamn woman when she was here.” He
felt that she had determined upon a course of action before their meeting and had “suckered” him in their talks.
Kissinger reminded him that the advice given to Nixon in the briefing materials prepared for the visit was to deal with Gandhi in such a way that
she could not complain about her reception and use it as a pretext to pursue military action. Nixon said at least he was “tougher” on her than the
briefing materials had advised.
In retrospect, Kissinger felt that a much tougher line had been called for. “When I look back on it now, should we have recommended to you to
brutalize her privately? To say now I want you to know you do this and you will wreck your relations with us for five years, and we will look for
every opportunity to damage you.”
Nixon agreed: “That’s right.”
Kissinger: “That’s probably what we should have done.”
Nixon: “This woman suckered us. But let me tell you she’s going to pay. She is going to pay. Now I mean on this aid side.”
On 7 December, the General Assembly – by a vote of 104 to eleven, with ten abstentions – called on India and Pakistan to institute an
immediate ceasefire and to withdraw troops from each other’s territory. Pakistan accepted the resolution; India refused.
The same day, Yahya sent a message to Nixon through the backchannel in which he played up the communist-threat card to persuade America
to come to Pakistan’s aid against India.
“If India should succeed in its objective, the loss of East Pakistan with a population of seventy million people dominated by Russia will also be a
threat to the security of South Asia,” Yahya said. “It will bring under the Soviet domination the region of Assam, Burma, Thailand and Malaysia.
The far-reaching consequences of such a development to the future of Asia need no comment.”
He asked Nixon “to do whatever you can to relieve the pressure from our borders. There is need for urgent action to issue a stern warning to
Russia and India to stop aggression against Pakistan. There is also an urgent need for material assistance from the United States of America,
directly or indirectly, as you may consider appropriate to meet the situation.”
Nixon replied the same day, assuring America’s help to rescue the beleaguered president of Pakistan. “I want you to know that you have the
understanding and support of the United States at this critical hour. We will continue our strong efforts to bring peace to the subcontinent, effect the
withdrawal of Indian forces from your country, restore the territorial integrity of Pakistan, and see to it that political, not military, solutions are found
for regional problems.”
Nixon’s words, however, did not calm Yahya’s tense mind. Yahya realized that he had lost East Pakistan. On December 8, Farland sent a
backchannel message to Kissinger, saying Yahya described the situation in East Pakistan as “beyond hope.”
In contrast, Gandhi gave an upbeat report to the cabinet on 6 December, which was reported to Washington by a CIA mole in her cabinet. She
reported that India was doing quite well on the diplomatic front. Gandhi said the Soviet Union’s support in the United Nations showed the value of
the Indo-Soviet friendship treaty. She said the Chinese did not intervene physically in the North. However, she said, the Soviets had warned her
that the Chinese could “rattle the sword” in Ladakh and Chumbi areas. The Soviets had promised to counter-balance any such action.
Gandhi also told the cabinet that the United States might attempt to bring the ceasefire issue before the General Assembly session after another
Soviet veto. She said India would not accept the advice of the General Assembly until Bangladesh was liberated and the southern area of Azad
Kashmir – the part taken by Pakistan from India in 1947 – was captured. She said India would incorporate the southern part of Azad Kashmir for
strategic rather than territorial reasons, because India had no desire to occupy any West Pakistan territory. She vowed to destroy the Pakistani
armored and air force strength before she would accept a ceasefire so that Pakistan could never again invade India.
In her report to the cabinet, Gandhi castigated Washington. She said it was a pity that the United States had not changed its policy towards the
subcontinent despite India’s attempts. With Bangladesh emerging as an independent nation, she said, West Pakistan would be reduced to the size
of other small West Asian countries, and the balance of forces would be favorable to India. The United States could not appreciate the changes
taking place. However, the prime minister added, there was still time for America to alter its policy. She expected socialist countries to recognize
Bangladesh shortly. India’s immediate concern was to quickly finish the war.
On 8 December, Kissinger briefed Nixon about Gandhi’s cabinet report. He said Pakistan continued to bitterly contest Indian gains in East
Pakistan, but the consensus among veteran military observers and media analysts was that the end of the Pakistan army’s effective resistance might
come sooner than expected. The CIA estimated that the Indians and the guerrillas probably controlled about half the province and were
progressively isolating the Pakistan army as they gained control of strategic points. The U.S. consul general in Dhaka commented that the “noose is
obviously getting tighter” for the Pakistanis in the East.
Fighting in the West had also reportedly intensified, although the Indians still seemed to be essentially on the defensive and had not yet launched
a major counter-offensive. The Pakistanis had mounted two substantial drives into Kashmir and seemed to have made some progress. There was
also fighting to the south on the Punjab plain, but the results so far were inconclusive. The Indians have, however, penetrated at least fifteen miles
into West Pakistan in the direction of Karachi. Both sides continued to make air strikes on the western front, but neither had yet gained the upper
hand.
The CIA had reviewed China’s military position along the Indian border and concluded that the Chinese were not militarily prepared for a major
and sustained involvement in the Indo-Pak war. It seemed clear that an involvement on the scale of the 1962 invasion of India was probably
beyond China’s present capabilities. China did, however, retain the option of a smaller-scale effort, ranging from overt troop movements and
publicized preparations, to aggressive patrolling and harassment of Indian border outposts on a limited diversionary attack.
As the Indian forces and the Mukti Bahini advanced towards Dhaka, the Americans started thinking about evacuation. The United Nations had
been attempting for several days to arrange the evacuation of foreign nationals from Dhaka, but had failed because of Indian military operations.

