radicals; in recent years the politics of East Bengali protest have focused almost exclusively on the issue of autonomy. Nonetheless, given the large
number of Bengali extremists in India and the ease of interchange of ideas and people between the two regions, radical movements could develop
extremely rapidly,” an American intelligence estimate concluded.
Whatever its government, an independent Bangladesh would, in the short term, have some things going for it. Relatively speaking for an
underdeveloped country, its balance of payments problems would not be bad, thanks to its large current exports of jute. It would almost certainly
repudiate the large debts to West Pakistan and the outside world incurred in its name. Able to trade freely with India, as it had not been in the past,
it could buy many goods at lower prices.
But Bangladesh would face serious problems both in the short and long term. With seventy to eighty million people packed into an area the size
of Florida, which is similar to Bangladesh in size, unable to grow enough food to feed itself, almost devoid of natural resources, facing a decline in
the sale of jute, periodically subjected to floods and cyclones – East Bengal would be plagued by economic deprivation and political crisis.
“Were the moderate Mujib to come to power, it was questionable whether he could do much to improve the lot of his people. If he did not, the
euphoria of independence would possibly disappear within a short time, and there would be an increased interest in and susceptibility to the radical
and extremist ideas and groups, which existed in West Bengal.” This would, of course, make Bangladesh a continuing object of concern to India.
A 26 March Defense Intelligence Agency report by U.S. Army Major John Hunt called the crackdown as Yahya’s “misadventure”, with
negative consequences for America. “The West’s violent suppression, however, threatens to radicalize the East to the detriment of U.S. interests.
The crisis has exhibited anti-American facets from the beginning and both sides will find the United States as a convenient scapegoat,” Hunt
predicted.

3 
Why the Yahya-Mujib Talks Failed:
Did Mujib Want to Break Pakistan?
n 14 January 1971, just weeks after the Awami League won a landslide electoral victory, Yahya Khan described Sheikh Mujib as
Pakistan’s “future prime minister”. Less than three months later, he called the Bengali leader a “traitor”, describing Mujib’s non-
cooperation movement to press his demands as nothing less than “an act of treason”. After talking with him for ten days to find a solution
to the crisis, Yahya left East Pakistan unannounced; then on 26 March, he accused Mujib of attacking Pakistan’s solidarity and integrity. He
vowed that Mujib’s crime would not go unpunished. He disbanded the Awami League and threw Mujib into a dark cell one thousand miles away
in the Attock Fort in Abbottabad, West Pakistan.
What went so terribly wrong between Yahya and Mujib? Did Mujib really want to divide Pakistan? Did Yahya truly want a solution or to
merely use the opportunity provided by the talks to buy time and prepare for an assault on the Bengalis?
During a meeting with Rogers in New York on 22 October 1970, where he attended the U.N. General Assembly session, Yahya had explained
how the political process in Pakistan would evolve after the election. In the “first stage,” he said, there would be a coalition government. He would
appoint a prime minister and then a president would be elected. When this took place, Yahya would lift martial law. All of this should take about
six months, Yahya said.
Yahya remarked that the holding of elections was difficult, but the latter stages would be even more so. If a constitution was not drafted, he said,
“I don’t know what will happen – perhaps a plebiscite,” an allusion to a separation of the two wings. “The biggest mistake made by the previous
administration was that it considered the country one unit, which it is not.”
Yahya did not have much faith in the parliamentary system, nor did he hold Pakistan’s politicians, especially Bhutto in high esteem. He told
Nixon in Washington on 25 October 1970, that he had been accused by Bhutto of delaying the elections so that he could deal with India’s Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi in New York, where she would be attending the U.N. session, and sell out Pakistan. It was absurd, the general observed,
the levels to which political opponents would stoop.
Nixon replied: “I hope you keep a strong presidency as in France.”
Yahya said: “Without it Pakistan would disintegrate. Our people like the parliamentary system only because they have been ruled by Britain for
so many centuries, but they cannot make it work and they do not have the basic prerequisite, namely a two-party system; we have about thirty-five
parties.”
Yahya had decided early on against handing over power to Mujib under a constitution based on the Awami League’s six-point program. He
smelled Pakistan’s demise in it. Yahya revealed his fears during a lengthy conversation with the U.S. ambassador on 1 February.
According to a report from the ambassador to the State Department, Yahya “worried aloud about the possibility of a split-up of the two wings”.
Such an action, Yahya added, was the most disturbing element in the formulation of the constitution.
“He said he had no intention of giving his official sanction to a constitution, which had inherent within it factors which would bring about the
dissolution of Pakistan; a united country was a national goal which he cherished,” Farland wrote, quoting Yahya.
Paraphrasing his predecessor Ayub Khan’s words, Yahya said “he did not intend to preside over the dissolution of Pakistan.”
When Farland asked what dangers the general foresaw, Yahya played the China card in an apparent attempt to win America’s reassurance that
Washington would not support an independent East Bengal. He said the major danger should be obvious to anybody who had read a map or
studied military stratagems or knew even a little about the Chinese leadership’s aspirations.
A militarily insecure, independent and geographically separated East Pakistan, Yahya explained, would be a highest-priority target for China.
Given an independent East Bengal as a starting nucleus, “it would be one of the easiest political moves envisionable for the Chinese to pull into its
adjacent areas, specifically West Bengal and Assam.”
Bhashani’s followers would be grateful for such an opportunity, Yahya said, referring to Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani, who led the
pro-Chinese National Awami Party, a major political group in East Pakistan.
Yahya highlighted his comments by saying that this would give the “damned Chinese precisely what they’ve wanted for years – a port on the
Bay of Bengal and an outlet to the Indian Ocean”. Yahya went on to say that this would also give China an opportunity to outflank all of Southeast
Asia in which even Burma would fall “like an over-ripe mango” and Thailand, under increasing pressures, would be looking for means of
accommodation. Yahya concluded by saying to the ambassador that “if you think you’ve had a mess in Vietnam, just think of what will happen if
China dominates the whole area.”
Farland, too, had observed the opportunities that an independent new nation would afford to China, but he said he was not particularly
knowledgeable of Beijing’s thinking. Keeping in line with long-held U.S. policy, he assured Yahya that Washington supported Pakistan’s territorial
integrity.
Yahya said he appreciated the reaffirmation of the U.S. government’s policy, because Pakistan at times had heard reports that Washington
encouraged the Bengali separation movement, which had been of “concern in high councils.” He said “he intended to continue to do everything
possible to hold the wings together” because the dangers to West Pakistan as it would then exist, to India and, generally speaking, to Southeast
Asia would be acutely magnified.
In the light of his concern of a possible East-West separation, when Yahya rescheduled the National Assembly session on 6 March he issued a
warning, especially aimed at the Awami League and its leadership. “Let me make it absolutely clear that no matter what happens, as long as I am in
command of the Pakistan armed forces and head of the state, I will ensure complete and absolute integrity of Pakistan. Let there be no mistake on

this point. I have a duty towards millions of people of East and West Pakistan to preserve this country. They expect this from me and I shall not fail
them.”
But his warning made no difference in East Pakistan. On 7 March Mujib went ahead with his planned mass rally in Dhaka, which drew an
estimated one million people. Surrounded by a sea of people clamoring for their rights, Mujib made his historic speech, telling his fellow Bengalis to
prepare for a fight to win independence.
As the crisis reached the boiling point, Yahya arrived in Dhaka on 15 March. He met with Mujib for more than two hours the next day – the
first in a series of talks over the next ten days. On 20 March, while continuing talks with Mujib, Yahya ordered Lieutenant General Tikka Khan,
commander of the Eastern sector, to begin preparations for a military takeover. On 25 March, after the talks among Yahya, Mujib and Bhutto had
collapsed, and Yahya had secretly left Dhaka, Tikka Khan started the military crackdown; the struggle for an independent Bangladesh began.
Mujib Favors United Pakistan
To justify the military action, Yahya later fabricated a story implicating Mujib with sedition. The White Paper that Pakistan released in August 1971
accused Mujib of conspiring with India to break the country, a charge similar to the one brought against him by Yahya’s predecessor several years
earlier but dropped later under growing public pressure. The paper claimed: “It was arranged that on a signal from the Awami League
headquarters in Dacca, the armed uprising would begin” in the early hours of 26 March. Only a few hours before the “zero hour,” the paper
continued, Yahya ordered the crackdown to prevent the uprising.
In fact, instead of orchestrating an uprising, Mujib was busy in the evening of March 25 giving directives to resume jute exports, which had been
disrupted by the political turmoil. When he heard the military had started shooting in the city and hunting down Awami League members, he waited
calmly in his house to be arrested.
Mujib, by various accounts at home and abroad, remained committed to Pakistan until 25 March. During a conversation with Kissinger on 7
July 1971, Jagjivan Ram, India’s defense minister, said: “Mujibur Rahman never wanted secession. He was a moderating influence.” Ram said he
had known the Bengali leader from Partition days and had been aware of what was going on in East Pakistan.
Mujib’s pre-March messages to the Americans also signaled his opposition to Pakistan’s partition. Daniel Newberry, U.S. charge d’ affaires in
Dhaka, brought up that point in a report he sent to Washington on 26 February 1974, on Mujib government’s performance. “Whatever his other
failings, and they are many, Mujib is a master in the art of ambiguity and Bengali political maneuver. Mujib, we remember, was never a devotee of
Bangladesh’s independence, even as late as March 1971,” he recalled in his cable. “Like his mentor, H.S. Suhrawardy, he knew an independent
East Bengal would be completely overshadowed by India. The events of 1971 changed the situation and confronted him and his country with the
fact of the Indian power. So keen is Mujib’s sense of the immediacy of power that he has consistently pursued a policy of close official friendship
with Delhi.”
Three years earlier, on 28 February 1971, when Farland met the Bengali leader he “found that Mujib favored a form of confederation rather
than the separation of East Pakistan, but he insisted that ‘his people’ be accorded their rights and not be kept in a ‘colonial status.’ ”
Mujib’s unwillingness to divide Pakistan explains why he did not prepare a contingency plan to face Yahya’s impending military action. Mujib
refused to go underground on 25 March because he abhorred the “politics of guns.” Moreover, he never expected the kind of brutality that Yahya
unleashed in East Pakistan. His political experience had taught him that a crackdown, even if it did happen, would be ephemeral, as happened after
Ayub’s coup d’ etat in 1958 and Yahya’s takeover in 1969. The chain of events in East Pakistan in 1971 closely resembled the pattern in 1969.
Everything looked to him exactly as it did two years earlier. The imposition of martial law, ban on political activity and arrests of political leaders as
well as shooting protesting students and workers had become staples of Pakistan’s politics. As an activist who had already spent nearly ten years
in jail, he reasoned that his political goals would be better served by the martyrdom or further imprisonment. But he obviously did not expect to
face a treason charge and possible execution. Only two months earlier, after all, Yahya had described him as “the future prime minister of
Pakistan.” Mujib figured that if Yahya used military force, his movement would be set back only temporarily; he would re-emerge triumphant
eventually, although he had publicly voiced skepticism that the West Pakistanis would never allow him to rule Pakistan. This line of thinking might
have prompted him to advise his West Pakistani colleagues – Mir Ghaus Bakhsh Bizenjo and Wali Khan, leaders of the leftist National Awami
Party – to leave Dhaka, while he himself stayed in his house on the eve of the crackdown. In short, Mujib simply did not want to be recorded in
history as the man who broke Pakistan. He, however, did consider the idea in case he failed to reach a deal with the West Pakistanis and
approached several foreign envoys to gauge their reaction, including the one from the United States, which opposed secession. America’s eventual
opposition to outright secession dampened Mujib’s enthusiasm for a unilateral declaration of independence.
“I do not want to break Pakistan,” Mujib said in an interview with Time magazine shortly before the final rupture in March. “But we Bengalis
must have autonomy so that we are not treated like a colony of the western wing,” Time published the interview on 12 April 1971.
To keep his young militants in line, Mujib spoke of “emancipation” and “freedom.” “But there is no question of secession,” Time magazine
correspondent David Greenway quoted Mujib as saying in an article 23 August 1971. “We only want our due share. Besides, East Pakistanis are
in a majority, and it is ridiculous to think that the majority would secede from the minority.”
Mujib had made a similar commitment to Yahya three months earlier. On 7 January he talked with the general in Dhaka on his six-point plan.
After presenting his program, when he asked if Yahya had any objections, the general said he had none, but could Mujib carry the West Pakistani
leaders with him? “Of course,” Mujib replied, and then requested that the president convene the parliament on 15 February.
During the same meeting, when East Pakistan Governor Vice Admiral S.M. Ahsan, remarked that the Awami League, with its absolute majority
in the national legislature, could ram through its constitution without paying attention to West Pakistan’s interests, Mujib retorted: “No, I am a
democrat and the majority leader of all Pakistan. I cannot ignore the interests of West Pakistan. I am not only responsible to the people of East
and West Pakistan, but also to the world opinion. I shall do everything on democratic principles.”
On 3 March Mujib told an Associated Press correspondent in Dhaka that he was “willing to share power with Bhutto, each to serve as prime
minister in his region, to keep Pakistan together,” according to the U.S. Intelligence bulletin, Indo-Pakistani Crisis: Chronology of Events.
Acting along the line proposed by Mujib, on 14 March Bhutto called for installing an Awami League government in East Pakistan and one or more
People’s Party governments in West Pakistan, with the military controlling the central government. Mujib partially accepted Bhutto’s plan during

his talks with Yahya, according to the report.
Another account of Mujib’s pledge to Pakistan’s unity came from Iqbal F. Quadir, a retired vice admiral who was Pakistan’s naval attache in
Paris in 1971. A West European diplomat told Quadir that Mujib sent a message to Yahya on 11 March, saying he opposed Pakistan’s partition
and wanted to discuss possible solutions with the president.
Mujib passed the message through the unnamed diplomat, who was then consul general in Dhaka.. He passed it on to Yahya in the manner
Mujib requested. Quadir learned about this in 1978 in Karachi, where the diplomat was then consul general, Quadir wrote in an article in February
2003 in the Pakistan Defence Journal.
Vice Admiral S.M. Ahsan, who was East Pakistan’s governor until relieved at the end of February 1971, told U.S. envoy Sidney Sober on 16
August during an hour-long talk in Karachi that “prior to March at least, separation from Pakistan was not Mujib’s intention”. Ahsan earned the
respect and confidence of the Awami League and other Bengalis during his tenure, and maintained active dialogue with Mujib while in Dhaka.
He also told the envoy that the “only practical solution to the East Pakistan problem in the long run is political. The alternative is separation of
East from West Pakistan and the establishment of an independent state.” And, a political solution was “possible only through the rehabilitation and
use of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.”
Ahsan believed that Yahya sincerely wanted to restore civilian rule in Pakistan. During Yahya’s January visit to East Pakistan, the admiral was
convinced that the president fully intended to turn over power to the Awami League, but by February end he had changed his mind. Ahsan
speculated that Bhutto was the chief cause of the change in the president’s attitude. Awami League leaders were on the whole sincere, relatively
conservative middle-class who simply wanted a firm assurance of redress for East Pakistan through maximum autonomy. Ahsan said he had made
it quite clear to the president that a delay in calling the assembly would lead to a disaster and even Mujib would find it difficult, if not impossible, to
control events. The admiral said there was evidence that by late February the military build-up was beginning and steps were being taken for a
forceful imposition of the martial law authority.
He dismissed the pervasive notion that the top military brass pushed Yahya into adopting the hard line.”The source of power and voice of
authority in Pakistan is President Yahya. He is the first and last authority. Rumors of dynamic generals vying for power beneath him are simply
rumors. The mentality of the army in Pakistan is such that subordinates obey and rarely if ever question policy decisions,” according to a cable
message sent by the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad to the State Department on 17 August 1971.
Ahsan had predicted on 13 February 1970, that “Sheikh Mujibur Rahman seems sure bet to win coming elections in East Pakistan.” He made
the prediction during a meeting with three U.S. diplomats, including the deputy chief of mission, Sober, and Andrew Kilgore, political officer. They
met with the governor in Dhaka in light of allegations that Washington was meddling in East Bengal to separate it from West Pakistan.
Ahsan assured the Americans that “no Pakistan official of authority believed the charges.” He advised them against issuing any public denials,
which could only draw unnecessary attention to the allegations, raised by Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani, president of the pro-Chinese
National Awami Party, and Mohammad Toaha, general secretary.
During the meeting, the governor told the Americans that the government “was not overly concerned about Sheikh Mujib’s six points”.
According to a cable sent to the State Department by the U.S. Consulate General in Dhaka on 16 February 1970, “After the elections power
balances and relations among various regions would have to be worked out by usual political horse trading. If Mujib were to become prime
minster, and that seemed pretty good bet, presumably he would not wish to see a center too weak to maintain control over the country.”
Air Marshal Asghar Khan, former chief of Pakistan’s air force, painted another picture. He asserted that Mujib had anticipated the crackdown,
an assertion corroborated by another West Pakistani politician, Ghaus Baksh Bizenjo, who was present in East Pakistan during the Mujib-Yahya
talks and was advised by Mujib on 24 March to leave Dhaka, after the Bengali leader learned about the impending military action.
“I asked Mujib what scenario he visualized and how the stalemate could be broken. He replied that the situation was very clear. Yahya Khan
would come to Dhaka first, followed by . . . Bhutto. Yahya would then order military action and that would be the end of Pakistan. About himself,
he said, he [Mujib] hoped that he would be taken prisoner, for if he was not, he would be killed either by the Pakistan army or by his own
people,” Khan wrote in his book, We’ve Learnt Nothing from History: Pakistan-Politics and Military Power, narrating a conversation
with Mujib in Dhaka in early March.
Asghar Khan’s statements only reinforced the view that Mujib had expected his arrest to be only a passing phase as it had been previously and
that he would be even more popular with the Bengalis once he got out the prison. Victory would be ultimately his – and his people’s – as the
outcome of the election showed. Mujib might have been misled by Yahya’s disinformation campaign, too. In the morning of 25 March, when the
preparations for the crackdown were in progress, Radio Pakistan reported that Yahya Khan had agreed “in principle” to hand over power to the
elected representatives in East Pakistan and had conceded the Awami League’s three other demands. Mujib was to meet again with Yahya in the
afternoon, but that meeting was canceled.
The final account of Mujib’s unwillingness to break Pakistan came from Prince Sadruddin Agha Khan, the U.N. high commissioner for refugees.
On 29 November 1971, he told a State Department official that Mujib might not want an independent Bangladesh. “Even today, he wanted a
unified Pakistan,” Sadruddin told Sisco, adding that his view was based on his long meetings with A.K. Brohi, Mujib’s defense counsel in the
sedition trial in 1971. Mujib, true to his pledge to the Bengalis, wanted their emancipation based on his six-point program, which envisaged East
Pakistan’s maximum autonomy in a confederal Pakistan, but not an independent Bangladesh.
The events in Dhaka during the fateful days of March 1971 surprised not only Mujib, but also many Americans, including Kissinger, who were
unclear why the talks had collapsed. The Americans thought Mujib and Yahya had reached a tentative deal, providing for an immediate
establishment of provincial governments, temporary continuation of the central government under Yahya and the drafting of a constitution. The new
constitution would outline the division of power between the central government and the provinces, with the central government keeping control
only of defense, foreign affairs, and currency.
“I have no idea what caused the breakdown in talks. I was as much surprised as anyone else,” Kissinger told the Washington Special Action
Group, a panel that implemented the Nixon administration’s foreign policy. The group met on 26 March to discuss the East Pakistan situation.
Kissinger said he thought an agreement between Mujib and Yahya was in sight.
CIA chief Helms said an agreement appeared imminent on 24 March, but the talks eventually fell apart possibly because Mujib had demanded
an immediate lifting of martial law – a step that would have ended Yahya’s grip on power.

Van Hollen offered a different explanation: “One possible reason was that Yahya was unable to sell the settlement in West Pakistan.”
Yahya Backtracks After Mujib Victory
A version of what caused the breakdown came from Council Muslim League President Mumtaz Daultana. On 29 March, three days after the
military started Operation Searchlight in Dhaka, Hobart Luppi, the U.S. consul general in Karachi, spoke with Daultana at his residence. Daultana,
who was in East Pakistan during Yahya’s visit, spoke at length about the Mujib-Yahya talks.
He said Mujib’s demands were much as those Yahya had spelled out in his address to the nation on 29 March, except that Yahya had not
detailed Mujib’s views on an interim central government. Mujib had wanted Yahya to remain as president with no political government at the
central level. Mujib was not “particularly concerned” about the six points. He was willing to accept an interim arrangement based on the 1962
constitution. However, he envisioned that the president would allow the Awami League to exercise full control over East Pakistan affairs, while
Yahya would coordinate inter-provincial affairs of the West wing.
On the “two-assembly” proposal, Mujib had been rather vague whether he envisaged two separate assemblies or two subcommittees of the
National Assembly. Daultana pressed Mujib to let the full assembly meet to sanction the interim arrangements, but Mujib refused. He said his
supporters would not tolerate his sitting in the same room with Bhutto.
Daultana also tried to persuade Mujib to let the leaders of the small parties work on a solution that would put Mujib in power at the center.
Mujib said they could try, but he was convinced the West Pakistani establishment – as represented by Yahya and Bhutto – would never permit the
Bengalis to rule Pakistan.
Mujib was also infuriated by the president’s choice of advisers for the negotiations in Dhaka – Justice A.R. Cornelius, Yahya’s law minister,
General S.G.M.M. Pirzada, Yahya’s chief of staff, and M.M. Ahmed, Yahya’s economic adviser, whom Mujib considered a representative of the
anti-Bengali establishment of West Pakistan.
In a conversation alone with Mujib, Daultana had asked him if he genuinely wanted Pakistan to remain one. He told Mujib that some forty
MNAs-elect in West Pakistan were prepared to work with the Bengali leader towards a constitutional settlement that would permit the Awami
League majority to take power at the center and to enjoy maximum provincial autonomy in the East wing. If, however, Mujib was working
towards separation, Daultana and his friends needed to know so that they could work to prevent a bloody rupture. Mujib replied that while he was
under great pressure to declare an independent Bangladesh, he wanted to maintain Pakistan. Daultana accepted Mujib’s response as sincere.
Daultana concluded from his conversations with Mujib in Dhaka that the Awami League leader was unshakably persuaded that the West
Pakistanis would never permit a Bengali to assume power through democratic means. He was convinced that the recent moves by Yahya and
Bhutto, such as the postponement of the National Assembly, were additional steps in a historical process of conspiracy against the Bengalis.
As a result of these suspicions, Mujib’s goal in the negotiations with Yahya appeared to be the achievement of de jure control in East Pakistan
under an interim arrangement. If he achieved this, Mujib believed he could then negotiate on an equal basis with West Pakistan over permanent
constitutional arrangements. Daultana surmised that Mujib would ultimately have sought a confederal arrangement.
Daultana’s account indicated that Yahya had reassessed his position after Mujib’s election victory. There are two possible explanations as to
why Mujib agreed to keep Yahya as president. He probably wanted to entice Yahya to hand over power peacefully, or else Yahya himself had
bargained for it.
Yahya’s contacts with Mujib went back at least to 1969 when the Bengalis revolted against the military strongman Ayub Khan. Although Ayub
gave the appearance of relinquishing power on his own, recent accounts show he was, in fact, toppled by Yahya. One such account came from
Brigadier Abdul Rehman Siddiqi, head of the Inter Services public relations and press adviser to Yahya Khan.
In February 1969 when Ayub Khan faced street agitation and sought to negotiate his way out by hosting a Round table Conference, Yahya
started plotting against his superior. He secretly met Mujib and encouraged him to press on his demands, a tactic that Altaf Gauhar, Ayub’s
powerful information secretary, later espoused as an effective way to stage a military coup d’ etat. Yahya went as far as to tell Mujib that “he could
go ahead with his anti-Ayub campaign without any let or hindrance from the army.”
Siddiqi narrated this tale in a book, East Pakistan: The Endgame – An Onlooker’s Journal 1969-1971, based on his diaries and other
sources he had cultivated as the army’s chief public relations official.
General Ghulam Umar, Yahya’s political assistant, ordered Siddiqi one week before the conference to secretly prepare an advance draft of
Yahya’s address to the nation as the chief martial law administrator. Two days after that order, Yahya flatly refused Ayub’s direct request for the
army to come to the government’s rescue. Yahya made it clear that it was either complete martial law under his own control, or nothing. Ayub
knew then that his days were numbered. Following his refusal to help Ayub quell the violent civic unrest, Yahya cunningly enlisted the support of
his old friend and drinking buddy, Interior Minister Admiral A.R. Khan, who persisted in presenting highly pessimistic daily briefs to further
undermine Ayub. When Siddiqi confronted Pirzada, Yahya’s chief of staff, with these peculiar goings-on, the general politely told him to keep his
silence. Within a month, Ayub left the scene, allowing Yahya to enter the scene through the back door.
The process of Ayub’s fall started after the politicians failed to reach an agreement with him at the conference. After his failed attempt to find a
way to bring the unrest under control, he called the army commanders to devise a plan to quell the unrest. Ayub first approached Yahya in late
February 1971 when he told him that he might need the army’s help to restore public order. In mid-March, he asked Yahya to come to the aid of
the civilian administration. Yahya told Ayub the military could not impose martial law in only selected cities where political disturbances were
intense, because the politicians could easily move into areas not under martial law and continue fomenting trouble for the government. He argued
that martial law must be imposed all over the country to be effective. In addition, he told Ayub, if he wanted to quietly leave, he must put Abdul
Jabbar Khan, speaker of the Pakistan National Assembly, in power because he was in line according to the constitution. If he wanted to give
power to the military, he must abrogate the constitution.
Ayub, who had recently suffered a heart attack, felt disturbed by Yahya’s suggestion to abrogate the constitution. According to War and
Secession: Pakistan, India, and the Creation of Bangladesh , by Richard Sisson and Leo E. Rose, he had said: “My God, it’s impossible. It’s
my creation, my legacy. It has my blood in it.” Yahya then suggested that Ayub resume talks with the politicians and work out solutions. “The
politicians are all swine and won’t listen to me,” a frustrated Ayub fumed. In the evening of 25 March 1969, as field marshal, Ayub ordered the

military to impose martial law and assume power.
The American intelligence community, which had inaccurately predicted Ayub would survive the political turmoil, was unsure exactly how the
power transfer had occurred. On 25 March, when Kissinger briefed Nixon about Ayub’s departure, he commented: “The possibility that the army
moved at its own initiative and forced Ayub’s resignation cannot be excluded, but initially, at least, it appears more likely that the move was
mutually agreed upon.”
Yahya made it look like Ayub had handed over power on his own. In a letter to Nixon on 27 May 1969, the general wrote: “On March 24th
President Mohammad Ayub Khan addressed to me a letter, explaining that since the civil administration and constitutional authority in Pakistan had
become ineffective, he had no option but to step aside and let the defense forces of Pakistan, as [the] only remaining effective and legal instrument,
to take over full control of the country’s affairs. On March 25th, he announced his decision to relinquish office of the president of Pakistan and
called upon me, as the commander-in-chief of the Pakistan army, to fulfill my constitutional responsibilities to defend the country not only against
external aggression but also to save it from internal disorder and chaos.”
After the takeover, Yahya revealed his true intentions and confided to some of his senior officers: “Gentlemen, we must be prepared to rule this
unfortunate country for the next 14 years or so,” Siddiqi claimed. Soon, Yahya announced general elections after the intelligence agencies
convinced him that they would result in a split vote and a factious National Assembly, making it impossible for the victorious party to fulfill the
stipulation of an approved constitution within 120 days as Yahya had mandated. Such a failure would then lead to fresh elections, while power
would remain indefinitely in the army’s firm grip.
However, the election results could not have been farther from Yahya’s calculations. Badly let down by the intelligence agencies, Yahya decided
to pursue a new course of action. His famous reference to Mujib as the future prime minister was in reality no more than “a calculated maneuver
aimed, at first, to set the military against Mujib, and, second, to provoke the Pakistan Peoples Party,” Siddiqi asserted.
The worried generals then recruited Bhutto to ensure that any chance of a compromise with Mujib would be nonexistent. In fact, Umar even met
many West Pakistani minority party leaders to dissuade them from attending the first National Assembly session in Dhaka. And, when Mujib began
his non-cooperation movement in response, the army-controlled West Pakistani media retaliated by accusing the Bengalis of treason.
Mujib apparently was aware of what the military was up to. According to Ghulam Mustafa Khar, Punjab’s former chief minister, Mujib feared
the army would kill him. Mujib once asked him to tell Bhutto that the army would kill him first and then murder the People’s Party leader. Khar
said Mujib opposed Pakistan’s bifurcation, but some leftist Awami League elements forced him to support Pakistan’s division. Mujib only wanted
“true autonomy” for East Pakistan, Khar said.
The Pakistan War Inquiry Commission appointed by Bhutto in December 1971 to examine the setback in East Pakistan held the top generals
responsible for the East Pakistan mess up. It recommended that Yahya Khan, General Hamid Khan, chief of staff of the Pakistan army and deputy
chief martial law administrator, Lieutenant General S.G.M.M. Pirzada, Lieutenant General Gul Hassan Khan, chief of the general staff who was
later appointed army chief by Bhutto, Major General Ghulam Umar and Major General Osman Mitha, be publicly tried. Tikka Khan, Rao Farman
Ali and Major General Khadim Hussain Raja, commander of the Infantry Division, were associated with the planning of the military action,
according to the Pakistan war commission report. They “were present in Dacca along with Yahya Khan, and secretly departed there on the
evening of that fateful day after fixing the deadline for the military action,” the commission said. They created a situation in East Pakistan that led to
a civil disobedience movement, armed revolt by the Awami League and the subsequent surrender of the Pakistani troops and Pakistan’s partition.
But the Pakistan government took no action against them.
To the Pakistanis, the report’s fate remained a mystery; neither Bhutto nor his successor published it. “When Justice Hamoodur Rahman in his
official inquiry recorded the truth of 1971, Bhutto as prime minister personally ordered that each and every copy of the report be burnt,” wrote
political analyst Jamaluddin Naqvi in The Dawn, a Pakistani newspaper. Parts of the report were leaked and published in the Indian magazine
India Today in August 2000.
Why did Bhutto suppress the report? An authoritative explanation has yet to emerge. One possible explanation was the fear of reprisal by the
Pakistani military. Bhutto, who had little military support, dared not face the all-powerful Pakistan armed forces. If the report were published,
Bhutto would possibly have faced public clamor to put the generals on trial. But he was under threat from Washington not to put Yahya on trial. In
a personal message Nixon had told Bhutto “that he should treat Yahya well in retirement and we would not look favorably on any retribution,”
according to Kissinger, who disclosed it in February 1972 to the Chinese premier Chou En-lai during Nixon’s trip to China.
Chou En-lai commented that Bhutto had assured him “he was taking good care of him and protecting him, and if he did not do so, some other
generals would want to take care of him [Yahya] differently.”
“Both of us owe something to Yahya, although he didn’t show much statesmanship in leading his country, for bringing the link between our two
countries,” Chou En-lai told Nixon and Kissinger in March 1972. “We should not forget and we cannot forget, especially that Dr. Kissinger was
able through him to come secretly for talks here. And, when a man makes a contribution to the world, we should remember him.”
Yahya really did not lead his troops in East Pakistan well, the Chinese leader said. At the time of the surrender, Pakistan still had 80,000 troops
in East Pakistan. “It was not a situation in which they couldn’t keep fighting. We know the Pakistanis are good fighters, and the men wanted to
keep on. The trouble was the commanders were terrible – they really just scattered the troops.”
Yahya should have concentrated his troops to win a victory, and once the Indian side had suffered a defeat they would have stopped because
West Bengal was not very secure either, Chou En-lai observed. The Indians had eight divisions at first, but these were also scattered. They had
three divisions in the western part of East Bengal; the northwestern part had two divisions; and in the eastern part they also had two divisions.
They also had two other divisions on the McMahon line, which they did not move. They only took one division from the McMahon line down to
East Pakistan. In Sikkim, the Indians originally had three divisions, from which they took one division over to eight in East Pakistan and left two
divisions facing China.
“If at that time the Pakistanis had concentrated a force of 40,000 against one Indian division, they would have been able to win and that would
have demoralized the Indians. So at that time even our vice foreign minister still believed they could win the war. Bhutto, too. They are both men of
letters; not soldiers. But we didn’t believe this. We said that if they fought, they would sacrifice everything.”
Yahya was probably a good man with good intentions, according to Chou, “but he didn’t know how to lead an army, how to fight.” This was
why the younger generals in the Pakistani army were dissatisfied with Yahya, he added.

Bhutto himself revealed how weak his position was with the military, during a conversation with Farland after he had succeeded Yahya as
president. According to Farland, Bhutto had requested two military helicopters “presumably to provide logistical support for his stay in Murree,”
but the army rebuffed him. General Tikka Khan, who was hand-picked by Bhutto as the army chief, told Bhutto it was nothing personal against
him, but the army needed the choppers for its own use.
“Bhutto implied that he was not altogether comfortable in his relationship with the military leadership. He recalled having gotten rid of Air
Marshal Rahim and General Hasan [former air force and army chief, respectively], but said that the potential for trouble remained. He stated he
simply could not afford at this stage to ignore the military,” Farland told the State Department in a cable.
Bhutto dismissed the military chiefs on 3 March 1972, after they had refused orders to suppress a major police strike. The generals, despite
their hidden dislike for Bhutto, could do little to oppose him, especially after the East Pakistan setback. Bhutto’s apparent inclination to write off
Kashmir, much as he did East Pakistan, by negotiating the Simla Accord with India in 1972, was more than the army was prepared to tolerate. In
the immediate aftermath of the 1971 war, the army could only stand in the sidelines as Bhutto consolidated his power, sought diplomatic
arrangements with New Delhi, and managed the release of the 93,000 prisoners of war languishing in India.
General Gul Hassan, whom Bhutto appointed army chief in December 1971 but later banished to Greece as Pakistan’s ambassador, held
Bhutto responsible for breaking Pakistan. “Soon after assuming office in 1971, it transpired that you were the chief architect in the dismemberment
of the country,” Hassan wrote when he resigned as ambassador on 17 April 1977, protesting Bhutto’s political moves, which he said would
destroy his country and “leave 70 million of our people with no homeland.”
Bhutto picked General Tikka Khan, known as the butcher of East Pakistan for his role in the massacre in Dhaka, to replace Hassan, hoping he
would not interfere in politics. Bhutto told Oriana Fallaci, an Italian journalist, in April 1972, that he had appointed Tikka army chief to prevent a
possible putsch. In fact, Bhutto had defended Tikka Khan’s action in East Pakistan, saying he merely followed orders as a good soldier should.
Bhutto dropped all the blame for Pakistan’s setback at the footsteps of Yahya, whom he put under house arrest after taking over from him on 20
December 1971, with the support of the junior generals. Yahya was released after General Ziaul Haq overthrew Bhutto in July 1977.
Bhutto had promised to put Yahya on trial if the war commission so recommended. “The defeat we suffered is his – Mrs. Gandhi can rightly
boast of having won a war, but if she won it, she should first of all thank Yahya Khan and his gang of illiterate psychopaths. Even to get him to
reason was an impossible task – it only made you lose your temper,” Bhutto told the journalist Fallaci.
Bhutto apparently had developed a personal hatred for Yahya. He described to Fallaci how Yahya mistreated him soon after he had ordered
the crackdown in East Pakistan.
“In April, after that fine business in Dacca, he sent for me. He looked satisfied, sure of himself, by now convinced he had the situation in hand.
He offered me a drink. ‘Well, you politicians are really finished,’ he said. Then he said that not only Mujib but I too was considered an agitator. I
too was preaching against the unity of Pakistan. ‘I’m always under pressure to arrest you, Bhutto.’ I got so angry I lost all control. I answered that
I would not let myself be intimidated by him, that his methods had led us to disaster. I threw away the glass of whiskey and left the room. There I
was stopped by General Pirzada, who took me by the arm, “No, come on, calm down, have a seat, go back in. I calmed down and went back. I
tried to explain to him that there was a great difference between me and Mujib: He was a secessionist and I wasn’t. A useless task. Instead of
listening to me, he went on drinking, drinking. Then he got nasty.”
Yahya, who remained mostly silent until his death in 1980, refused to accept the responsibility for the East Pakistan debacle and put the blame
squarely on Bhutto. He made a fifty-seven-page affidavit before his death through Lahore High Court lawyer Manzur Ahmed Rana to do what he
described as setting the record straight for the future generations. Yahya scrutinized each typed page in May 1978 at his house in Rawalpindi,
made a few corrections, and then signed the document, declaring it to be all true. The affidavit, made publicly available in 2005, said:
“It was Bhutto, not Mujib, who broke Pakistan. Bhutto’s stance in 1971 and his stubbornness harmed Pakistan’s solidarity much more than
Sheikh Mujib’s six-point demand. It was his high ambitions and rigid stance that led to rebellion in East Pakistan. He riled up the Bengalis and
brought an end to Pakistan’s solidarity. East Pakistan broke away.”
Yahya, however, never explained how Bhutto, who was not in power before the crackdown, could be blamed for the setback. Yahya’s claim
implied he was conceding that he made a big mistake when he listened to Bhutto and decided not to hand over power to Mujib; it was perhaps a
general’s vain attempt to absolve himself of the responsibility of his own action.
He termed Mujib a patriot, but said that some leftists in the Awami League instigated him – a theory that got currency in West Pakistan,
although it is hardly conceivable that given Mujib’s towering personality, his resolve could have been shaken by a minority in his party. By calling
Mujib a patriot in his journal, Yahya contradicted himself, too. On 19 August 1971, when Farland asked if he would hang Mujib, Yahya said: “I
am not going to execute the man, even though he is a traitor,” according to a cable the ambassador sent to the State Department.
Contradicting Bhutto’s claim that Tikka Khan merely carried out the orders of the high command, Yahya denied he ever ordered Mujib’s arrest.
He said Tikka issued the order to capture Mujib dead or alive, a claim hard to accept at its face value, because the Pakistani army hierarchy was
unlikely to permit a provincial governor or a regional commander to act on his own on such a major issue. If Tikka had really acted on his own
against the high command’s wishes, he could have been disciplined after his return from East Pakistan in April 1971; it never happened. According
to Z.A. Khan, a Pakistani retired brigadier who led the team that arrested Mujib, General Abdul Hamid Khan, the chief of staff who was among
the top generals who persuaded Yahya to harshly treat the Bengalis, himself approved the arrest and ordered him to capture Mujib alive.
According to Yahya, Mujib was prepared to change his six-point demand, if necessary – an assertion supported by Mumtaz Daultana, who
made a similar comment to the U.S. consul general in Karachi three days after the 26 March crackdown. Yahya claimed that in the end he wanted
to leave power in the hands of the Awami League, a decision he probably made after realising that India would defeat Pakistan in the ensuing war.
In fact, he did tell Farland through Sultan Khan, Pakistan’s foreign secretary, that he had authorized Bhutto to introduce a U.N. resolution for a
compromise with the Awami League within the framework of one Pakistan. Yahya confirmed it to the U.S. ambassador when Kissinger wanted to
verify the resolution Bhutto had introduced in the Security Council two days before the surrender in Dhaka.
Bhutto’s Version: “My Country Is Finished”
Bhutto gave an account of what happened in Dhaka in an interview with Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci in 1972. In mid-March 1971, according to

Bhutto, Yahya told him about his upcoming trip to Dhaka and asked if Bhutto wanted to go, too. Bhutto replied that he would, if Mujib was willing
talk to him. After Yahya began talks with Mujib, he sent a telegram from Dhaka to tell Bhutto that Mujib would talk with him. Bhutto came to
Dhaka on 19 March and met Mujib the next day together with Yahya. “Mujib was all sweetness and light with Yahya,” recounted Bhutto, but not
to him.
“I’ve come to reach an agreement with you, Mr. President, and I want nothing to do with Mr. Bhutto. I’ll tell the press that I have met with the
president and that Mr. Bhutto was there by chance,” Bhutto quoted Mujib as saying. Yahya responded: “No, no, Mujib. You must speak for
yourself.”
Mujib then noted that so many people died in the hurricane in 1970 in East Pakistan, but no West Pakistani politician bothered to show up, a
snub that was an indirect jab at Bhutto. It ticked him off.
“How was I responsible for the hurricane? Had I been the one to send the hurricane?” Bhutto vented. Mujib’s answer was to get up and say
that he had to leave to go to a funeral.
Bhutto got up, too, to escort him to the ante room. But Mujib did not want him to. Three people were present in the ante room: Yahya’s aide-
de-camp; his military secretary; and his political aide, General Ghulam Umar. According to Bhutto, Mujib began screaming, “Go away, everybody
go away! I have to talk to Mr. Bhutto!” After the three had left, he sat down and then told Bhutto: “Brother, brother! We must come to an
agreement, brother! For the love of God, I implore you!”
“Astonished, I took him outside so no one would hear him. Outside, and in a particularly excited tone, he declared that I must take West
Pakistan for myself, he East Pakistan, and that he had set up everything for a secret meeting. After dark, he would send for me. I told him I didn’t
like this business. I hadn’t come to Dacca to meet him like a thief under a banana tree and in the dark. I didn’t intend to dismember Pakistan, and if
he wanted secession, he had only to propose it to the assembly, counting on his absolute majority. But it was like talking to a wall. I had to accept
the compromise of resuming talks through our spokesmen. Which is what happened without leading to anything, of course. In those days, he was
more deranged than ever – he lost his head over nothing. And, so we arrived at the twenty-fifth,” Bhutto elaborated.
“You didn’t notice anything suspicious on March 25?” Fallaci asked Bhutto during their interview.
Bhutto replied that he “felt certain uneasiness, a strange sensation, which had come to a head. Every evening I went to Yahya to report that
Mujib and I weren’t making any progress, and Yahya showed no interest. He looked away or complained about the television or grumbled
because he couldn’t listen to his favorite songs – his records hadn’t arrived from Rawalpindi. Then the morning of the twenty-fifth he said
something that left me disconcerted: ‘There’s no need to meet Mujib today. We’ll see him tomorrow, you and I.’ At 8 p.m., he reported
‘everything to Mujib’s envoy,’ who exclaimed, ‘that son of a bitch has already left,’ ” Bhutto said.
Bhutto did not believe Yahya had already left Dhaka. “I telephoned the presidential residence and asked to speak with Yahya. They told me he
couldn’t be disturbed; he was at supper with General Tikka Khan, who was appointed East Pakistan’s governor on 9 March. I telephoned Tikka
Khan. They told me he couldn’t be disturbed; he was at supper with Yahya Khan. Only then did I begin to worry, and suspecting a trick, I went to
supper, then to sleep. I was awakened by gunfire and by friends running in from other rooms. I ran to the window, and as God is my witness, I
wept. I wept and said, “My country is finished.”
Bhutto said he learned about Mujib’s arrest at 8 a.m. of 26 March. “How did I take it? I was glad he was alive, and I thought they might have
maltreated him a little. Then I thought that his arrest might help to reach a compromise. They wouldn’t keep him in prison more than a month or
two, and, in the meantime, we’d be able to bring back law and order.”
Although Bhutto did not admit to having any advance knowledge of the military crackdown, he did endorse it. Upon his return from Dhaka,
Bhutto commented on the military action in East Pakistan while talking to an Associated Press of Pakistan reporter, I.A. Khan, in Karachi
“Thank God, Pakistan has been saved.”
Fallaci asked, “Did you really mean to say that this massacre was morally justified?” And Bhutto said: “Every government, every country, has
the right to exercise force when necessary. For instance, in the name of unity. You can’t build without destroying. To build a country, Stalin was
obliged to use force and kill. Mao Tse-tung was obliged to use force and kill. To mention only two recent cases, without raking over the whole
history of the world. Yes, there are circumstances where a bloody suppression is justifiable and justified. In March, the unity of Pakistan depended
on the suppression of the secessionists. But to carry it out with such brutality on the people instead of on those responsible wasn’t necessary.
That’s not the way to convince poor people who’ve been told that with the Six Points there’ll be no more hurricanes, no more floods, no more
hunger. I spoke out against such methods more emphatically than anyone else, and when no one dared do so.”
Bizenjo’s Account: “The General Had Spoken”
Yet another account of the Mujib-Yahya talks came from the former governor of Baluchistan, Mir Ghaus Bakhsh Bizenjo, who was elected to the
Pakistan National Assembly [parliament] in 1970 on a National Awami Party ticket from West Pakistan.
As the situation deteriorated with each passing day in March 1971, Yahya Khan expressed his intention to meet with Sheikh Mujib to discuss
matters, but Mujib was reluctant. Some of Bizenjo’s friends and colleagues in Karachi, who had been watching the unfolding events with deep
concern, asked him to go to Dhaka to try to persuade Mujib to meet with Yahya and have a frank and forthright talk on the situation.
East Pakistan was then heading towards the point beyond redemption. Mujib was not expressly opposed to negotiations, but the irony of the
situation consisted in an amalgam of several crisscrossing factors. Punjab’s traditional power elite had already decided to call it quits and get rid of
the Bengalis rather than let them assume power by virtue of their majority in the National Assembly.
Bizenjo recounted an example of the cynicism that marked the West Pakistani rulers” mindset. He went to see Yahya Khan in 1970 to discuss
certain points relating to the holding of elections in Baluchistan based on the one-man-one-vote principle. During the conversation, when the East
Pakistan issue came up, the general said: “Sooner or later, East Pakistan will have to be amputated. And, if at all that is to happen, why let them
suck our blood for two or three more years?”
Bizenjo was appalled.
“I was shocked to hear these words coming from the mouth of the president of Pakistan,” he wrote in his autobiography, In Search of

Solutions. “Who was sucking whose blood, the whole world knew, but not Yahya Khan and his ilk in the ruling junta and their handful of cohorts
in East Pakistan.”
Because of Yahya Khan’s alarming remarks the previous year, Bizenjo was reluctant to visit Dhaka. He told his friends and colleagues that
Mujib was the most popular national hero of Bengal. “If you can think of a way I can establish contact with him, then I may take the chance of
going to Dhaka.”
Muazzam Ali, who owned the Pakistan Press International news agency, was among those who wanted Bizenjo to go to Dhaka. He said he
could send a message across to Dhaka using one of his telex machines that was still working. Bizenjo requested him to send a telex message to
Mujib “that if he deemed it useful, I would like to meet him” in Dhaka. The next day, Muazzam Ali brought Mujib’s reply that he would be pleased
if Bizenjo could come to Dhaka and also stayed with him. When Bizenjo was at the Karachi airport to depart for Dhaka, his party chief Wali Khan
arrived unexpectedly from London. Everybody pressed him to go to Dhaka with Bizenjo. Wali Khan instantly agreed.
Bizenjo and Wali Khan came to Dhaka on 13 March. From the airport they went straight to the residence of their “all-time hosts and party
comrades” Ahmadul and Laila Kabir, owners of the Daily Sangbad newspaper. From there, they rang up Sheikh Mujib, who was very glad to
hear that Wali Khan came along with Bizenjo. “He sounded calm and composed as he said plaintively: ‘You both should have stayed with me.
You are my guests. And, you did not even intimate to me your arrival schedule.’ My reply was: ‘Ahmadul Kabir’s is also not a stranger’s house.
He is your friend, too.’ ”
They met with Mujib the next day. Mujib welcomed the two with great warmth and affection. As soon as they sat down, Bizenjo went straight
to the purpose of their visit and told Mujib: “We expect that you will frankly tell us about your plans, because we are among those in West
Pakistan who strongly support your political stand. You have won the elections and power should be transferred to you. If you choose to make a
unilateral declaration of independence, you can imagine the enormity of the problems we will have to face.”
On hearing this, Mujib “became very emotional. Tears welled up in his eyes.” He asked: “Who is telling whom not to break up Pakistan? You,
who were associated with the Congress, [alluding to our pre-Independence association with the Indian National Congress] telling me, who was a
hardcore Muslim Leaguer and rendered sacrifices for the creation of Pakistan? What an irony!”
Wali Khan intervened and reminded Mujib: “We were then pleading with you not to break India and create Pakistan, but you said you would
not rest until you created Pakistan, and you did create it. Now with folded hands we are begging you, please don’t break Pakistan, but you say
you will break Pakistan. You Muslim Leaguers, past and present varieties, are a special kind of species.”
They tried to drive the point home that he must meet with Yahya Khan and find a way out to ensure the transfer of power to him. The men at the
helm were utterly incapable of handling the crisis. Sheikh Mujib replied: “I want to tell you that they [Yahya and his associates] will not transfer
power to me, even if that meant the breakup of Pakistan. Punjab will not allow me to come to power. I will try but on one condition. You both will
remain in Dhaka as long as the talks lasted. One thing more. Now when you leave my house, I will come out with you but will not declare publicly
that I am going to meet Yahya Khan.”
When he came out into the courtyard, he found a big crowd of local and foreign correspondents waiting outside. Thousands of people were
present, raising slogans of “Joi Bangla!” After surveying the scene, Mujib announced to the journalists that he would meet Yahya Khan. Everyone
present listened in disbelief. When an American correspondent asked him whether he would meet Yahya Khan only if the general came to his
residence as Bhutto did, Mujib’s reply was most sensible and politically correct: “Yahya Khan is the president of the country. I will meet him
wherever he suggests.”
On 15 March, Yahya Khan arrived in Dhaka. He invited Wali Khan and Bizenjo to meet him at the Government House. They told Yahya that
Sheikh Mujib was not thinking of anything like secession. His contention was that his party had won a majority of the National Assembly seats and
democratic norms demanded that power be transferred to him. Yahya Khan asked Bizenjo and Wali Khan to remain in Dhaka while the talks
continued.
The Yahya-Mujib talks began on 16 March. Mujib kept them abreast of the proceedings every day. In the first few days, the talks seemed to
proceed rather smoothly. Later on, Yahya Khan invited all the West Pakistani political leaders to Dhaka. He also summoned his economic adviser
M.M. Ahmed. When Mujib learned this, he expressed his fears that the negotiations would stall, because Bhutto and M.M. Ahmed, whom Mujib
considered a hardcore anti-Bengali, would sabotage the talks.
Upon arrival in Dhaka, Bhutto sent his party’s delegation to meet Wali Khan and Bizenjo. Bhutto asked the West Pakistanis to evolve a
common position, but Wali Khan and Bizenjo rejected his suggestion.
Talks with Yahya then proceeded on a new trajectory. Initially, he said he could transfer power if the conditions of Legal Framework Order
were met. Mujib suggested that two assemblies – one consisting of members elected from West Pakistan and the other from East Pakistan – be
convened and asked to prepare their separate draft constitutions, followed by a joint session of the two to draft a federal constitution. Yahya
insisted on convening one assembly. Bizenjo proposed to Yahya: “Let us not create the impression that we are two separate countries whose
assemblies are meeting separately to draft separate constitutions. Let there be five assemblies or better call them five Constitutional Committees
[one for each province] to prepare five different draft constitutions. These constitutional committees should then meet in a joint session of the
National Assembly to frame the country’s federal constitution.”
Yahya showed a slight inclination towards the suggestion. However, when Wali Khan and Bizenjo met Mujib separately that night, “he told them
that the general’s mood was shifting fast and becoming unpredictable.” He said: “I shall no longer ask for convening of one assembly or two
assemblies. I shall demand immediate transfer of power and lifting of martial law. I shall convene the National Assembly as the leader of the
majority party. The core issue is the lifting of martial law and transfer of power to my party.
“We conveyed to Yahya Khan Sheikh Mujib’s demand to lift martial law and hand over power to him. When we cautioned Yahya that it was
not advisable to invite the disintegration of Pakistan by sticking to technicalities, he shot back: ‘If your friend Mujib doesn’t behave, my army
knows how to shoot their way through’. The general had spoken. It was not difficult to read what was going on in his mind. Turning to him, I
asked: ‘Mr. President, do you really think that the solution to this delicate issue is the military solution, solving it through military force?’ His reply,
strangely enough, was, ‘No!’ ”
When the two met Mujib on March 24, he broke the alarming news, saying: “Now it is better that you both leave Dhaka. The army has decided
to move against us in the next two days. Your presence here will serve no useful purpose.” Stunned and speechless, they left Sheikh Mujib’s

house.
Yahya called all the West Pakistani National Assembly members to the Government House that night. Bizenjo deliberately did not go. Instead,
he went to meet Comrade Moni Singh of the Communist Party to say goodbye.
When he returned to the Kabirs” house, Laila was waiting anxiously. She informed Bizenjo that there had been several phone calls for him from
the Government House. As they were talking, Wali Khan returned from the Government House. The general had told him that their presence in
Dhaka would no longer be necessary. He invited Wali Khan and Bizenjo to travel with him on his flight back to Karachi. Wali Khan thanked the
general and declined. He sought Yahya’s help to buy two tickets to Karachi, because there was no one in Dhaka to issue Pakistan International
tickets. The next day they got their tickets and flew back to Karachi. That was 25 March 1971.
Yahya’s Explanation: Mujib Wants Secession
On 31 March Pakistan’s ambassador to Washington, Agha Hilaly, delivered a letter from Yahya to U.S. President Nixon, explaining the rationale
behind his decision to launch a crackdown on 25 March. Yahya had hoped his discussions in Dhaka would lead to a broad political agreement
regarding the convention of the National Assembly and framing of a constitution.
“Unfortunately, however, the political leadership in East Pakistan and, especially Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, took a progressively rigid stand,
which made such an agreement impossible. Meanwhile, murder, arson and widespread disorder in defiance of the governmental authority were let
loose in the province,” Yahya wrote. “In the larger interest of the country, I exercised utmost restraint and patience and tried to evolve a generally
acceptable formula to resolve constitutional difficulties. In pursuit of the same objective, I went personally to East Pakistan to hold consultations
with Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Even while I was there, the Awami League leaders continued to make statements and to indulge in practices which
clearly showed that they were not prepared for pursuing a compromise. The last round of talks in Dacca left me in no doubt that they had no
intention of accepting any constitutional formula, which would ensure integrity and unity of the country. Eventually, a point was reached where the
Awami League put forward final proposals, which virtually amounted to dismemberment of the country. Since they had no such mandate from the
people and as unity of the country was at stake, firm action had to be taken to assert the government’s authority and to safeguard the integrity of
Pakistan. There was no option but to take that decision.”
On 10 May, Yahya sent his economic adviser, M.M. Ahmad, to Washington to explain what prompted him to take the military action. Ahmad
told the Americans that Yahya felt disappointed with Mujib for shifting his ground after the election. Mujib was to have come to Islamabad for
meetings early in the constitutional process, instead Yahya had to go to Dhaka. Again, when the second round of talks was arranged, Mujib found
an excuse not to come. Yahya had expected some understanding among the politicians before the constituent assembly actually met. The problem
was that the main political parties were regional in character; they did not prioritize the national interest. When Yahya failed to arrange a round of
discussions, he found it necessary to postpone the assembly session.
America did not entirely buy Yahya’s story. Van Hollen, deputy assistant secretary of state, told a meeting on 26 March that Bhutto “forced
Yahya to postpone the constituent assembly.”
The postponement had provoked a sharp reaction in East Pakistan, even though Yahya announced a fresh date within six days. Yahya had gone
to Dhaka on 15 March. The Awami League put forward its six demands, adding four more. The new demands amounted to lifting the martial law
before the constituent assembly and transferring power to a civilian government. Some progress had been made in the talks, and Yahya asked
other political leaders to come over from West Pakistan. Ahmad himself joined them for talks on the economic issues. Despite some differences, a
general agreement seemed possible. Yahya offered to solve the impasse along any of the three following lines:
1. There could be a proclamation embodying an interim constitution, including most of the six points. Yahya wanted the constituent assembly to
meet first to approve the constitution, but the Awami League wanted the martial law to be lifted first.
2. If the constituent assembly could not meet first, there could be a proclamation putting forward the interim constitution but not lifting martial
law.
3. A third possibility would have been an announcement that such an interim constitution would date from the day that the constituent assembly
adopted it.
The West Pakistani leaders wanted the constituent assembly to meet and then break into two houses. The Awami League wanted the assembly to
meet as two houses right from the start, Ahmad explained to Kissinger.
When Kissinger asked him to outline the future plan, Ahmad said Yahya still wanted to transfer political power. He did not intend to announce
the holding of fresh elections. Those elected representatives without some unfavorable evidence could form the nucleus of a government.
Kissinger asked whether this would include Mujib, and Ahmad replied Mujib ranked within the first eight or so of those political leaders against
whom there was evidence of conspiring to secession. However, the rest of the Awami League could drop its title and form a government. They
could operate on the basis of an agreement as close to the six points as possible, meeting East Pakistan’s legitimate needs.
Later that day, Ahmad met Nixon in Washington. Nixon said many of his critics felt that the United States should become heavily involved in
telling Pakistan how to work out its political difficulties. He vowed Washington would not get involved in that way. It was wrong, he concluded, to
assume that America should go around telling other countries how to arrange their political affairs.
Ahmad said Yahya had made every effort to negotiate a political arrangement with the East Pakistani leaders. He had made it clear from the
start that he was willing to grant virtual autonomy within the framework of one country. He had told Mujib he should not come to a soldier – Yahya
– and ask him to split the country. If he wanted to do that, he should try to do it through the constituent assembly. Yahya had agreed to grant
virtual autonomy as described in the six points, but Mujib apparently wanted independence, Ahmad told Nixon.
Farland, the U.S. ambassador in Islamabad, gave his position in a cable to the State Department.
“It has been this embassy’s consistent opinion that Yahya was sincere in his efforts to bring about a political solution under a system recognizing
the population majority of East Pakistan,” Farland wrote. “He never left any doubt, however, that the system would have to be consistent with the
concept of one Pakistan rather than two [or more]. It will be disputed whether Yahya and the military came down to final stages of the political

