The Dhaka airfield was “unusable.” It would probably require repairs during a ceasefire before it could handle evacuation flights. The United
Nations was gearing up for another airlift attempt, including some one hundred Americans, but it might well turn out that an evacuation by
helicopters operating off an aircraft carrier was the only answer.
On 8 December, the CIA director informed Nixon’s advisers that the Indian forces had broken through Pakistani lines in Comilla, about fifty
miles east of Dhaka. The situation was deteriorating for Pakistani forces throughout East Pakistan. In the West, Pakistan claimed to have captured
Poonch on the Kashmir ceasefire line, but admitted to sustaining heavy casualties in Kashmir and in a tank battle on the Sind-Rajasthan frontier.
Helms told the Washington Special Action Group, the Pakistani forces in East Pakistan were under such heavy pressure from the Indian offensive
that they had begun to destroy their military records.
Sisco asked Helms: “How long do you think the Paks can hold out in the East?”
Helms: “Forty-eight hours – if it were not for the rivers, it would be over by now.”
Kissinger asked General John D. Ryan of the Joint Chiefs, “What is your assessment of the military situation in the West?”
Ryan: “We still think the Indians plan a holding action – we don’t think they will push very hard.”
Kissinger: “How long would it take them to transfer their troops from East to West?”
Ryan: “It would take a long time for a transfer of all their divisions, but their airborne division could be transferred in five or six days.”
Williams: “It is twenty-eight hours by train from Calcutta to New Delhi, to give you some idea of time. This would mean, of course, clearing the
rail line and using it exclusively for the troop transport.”
Ryan: “How much they would want to transfer to the West is debatable. The Indians already have superiority in the West.”
Kissinger: “If India turns on West Pakistan, takes Azad Kashmir and smashes the Pak air and tank forces, a number of things seems inevitable.
Should we, in full conscience, allow the liberation of the same disintegrating forces in West Pakistan as in the East? Baluchistan and other
comparable issues are bound to come to the fore, as Mrs. Gandhi indicated to the president and as she told a Columbia University seminar in New
York, I understand. Pakistan would be left defenseless and West Pakistan would be turned into a vassal state. We have to decide some questions
– the military supply question, for example. I have reviewed the cables to Jordan, which enthusiastically tell Hussein he can’t furnish planes to the
Paks. We shouldn’t decide this on such doctrinaire grounds. The question is, when an American ally is being raped, whether or not the United
States should participate in enforcing a blockade of our ally, when the other side is getting the Soviet aid. I don’t know what the decision will be,
but we have to consider this in broader terms. That’s why I’m holding up your cables. In any event, they should be toned down.”
Sisco: “We should tell Hussein to keep his options open. The question of military supply in the context of East Pakistan is one thing. If the
situation evolves in the West as Henry describes, and there is a serious risk to West Pakistan, that’s something else. Personally, I doubt that that is
the Indian objective, but it may be.”
Johnson: “Singh told Keating that India had no intention of taking ‘any’ territory. He was presumably referring to Kashmir.”
Sisco: “I wonder if they’re not making a distinction here – Kashmir is a disputed area. I suspect they’re really talking about something other than
that strip of Azad Kashmir that Dick [Helms] referred to.”
Helms: “In this connection, Mrs. Gandhi told her cabinet that she had expected a more balanced view from the Chinese. She expressed the
hope that the Chinese would not intervene physically in the north, but said that the Soviets had said the Chinese would be able to ‘rattle the
sword’. She also said that the Soviets have promised to counterbalance any such action.”
Johnson [to Helms]: Your briefing this morning said there was no Chinese buildup in the area.”
Helms: “They already have enough forces there to rattle the sword. They have the people there to make some motions.”
Kissinger: “We have two military supply questions: 1) to get King Hussein into a holding pattern on the provision of aircraft to Pakistan, while
the president considers the issue; and 2) how to convey to the Indians and possibly the Soviet Union that a turn of their attention to West Pakistan
would present some problems.”
Packard: “The basic problem is that we can’t authorize Jordan to do anything we can’t do ourselves. If a third country has some planes that we
don’t have, we could authorize them to supply them to Pakistan. In these circumstances, it might be better for us to supply the planes directly, but
we can’t authorize Jordan to do it unless we are authorized to do it ourselves.”
Johnson: “We would have to make a judgment that Pakistan is eligible to make such purchases and then notify the Congress.”
Kissinger: “If we hadn’t cut off arms to Pakistan, this problem wouldn’t exist.”
Packard: “That’s right.”
Kissinger: “We didn’t analyze what the real danger was at the time we took that step – we all failed there. If we had understood the implications
– I was wrong too – we were all wrong.”
“Packard: “There’s another issue on Jordan – if they deliver the planes to Pakistan, we will have to replace them, since we can’t afford to let
Jordan weaken itself.”
Kissinger: “What is the judgment of this group? We have a country, supported and equipped by the Soviet Union, turning one-half of another
country into a satellite state and the other half into an impotent vassal. Leaving aside any American interest in the subcontinent, what conclusions
will other countries draw from this in their dealings with the Soviets? Dick [Helms], would you do an analysis of this?”
Helms: “Don’t we have some obligation under CENTO?”
Johnson: “No legal obligation.”
Kissinger: “We had no legal obligation to India in 1962, but we came to the conclusion that if China should overrun India, it would present us
with great problems. I’ve read the bilateral treaty, and it’s not easy to escape the conclusion that some conditions which would warrant some
involvement of the constitutional process are close by. If India succeeds, what would be the impact in the larger theater of world affairs?”
Packard: “It would negate SEATO.”
Johnson: “An Indian attack against Pakistan is excluded from SEATO.”
Packard: “But as a practical matter, SEATO would be down the drain.”

Kissinger: “We have been talking for two years about a Security Council guarantee for the Middle East. What is the impact of the recent chain
of events on other areas and expectations in other areas? Let’s look at the military supply question. We could say that we have done everything
two weeks too late. If we wait until India takes Azad Kashmir, then take action on military supplies for Pakistan, we would merely infuriate the
Indians and demonstrate our impotence. If we had cut off aid two weeks ago, it might have had some influence on the situation in the East, instead
of being a grandstand play. Let’s look at this whole picture.”
Packard: “We should consider some way that would help West Pakistan hold its own.”
Kissinger: “How?”
Johnson: “I agree this should be examined. We should consider exactly what effect military supplies could have.”
Kissinger: “There are two separate problems: The threat of military supply and the fact of such supply. Once a war in West Pakistan is engaged,
provision of planes by Jordan might combine all the disadvantages. I’m more interested in the deterrent effect. If it were done as a token before the
war, it would be an indication that, while we don’t accept what has happened in East Pakistan, we can’t do anything about it, but if they move in
West Pakistan, it would be a whole new ball game.”
Van Hollen: “We could pick up both elements – ask for specific Indian assurances on Azad Kashmir and that they do not seek to destroy Pak
forces in the West.”
Kissinger: “We should also make it clear that if they do, they will face a new situation.”
Johnson: “Of course, the Paks are trying to bite off Kashmir.”
Kissinger: “I don’t think they have the punch.”
Armistead Selden, deputy assistant secretary of Defense, said, “We have a new report indicating that the Paks may have knocked out as many
as one hundred and twenty Indian planes on their first attacks on those four airfields.”
Helms: “Our 1962 assurances to Ayub made it clear that we would come to Pakistan’s assistance in the face of aggression against Pakistan
from India.”
Van Hollen: “That was in the context of our assurances to India when China moved in. This was overtaken by the events of 1965, and our legal
people don’t think the Paks have a binding case in international law.”
Johnson: “If we want to assist Pakistan, we can find a basis for doing it.”
Van Hollen: “If we make a policy decision to assist Pakistan militarily, we don’t have to worry about it.”
Kissinger: “If the word of a country has any legal meaning, it seems to me this would apply. The Pakistanis haven’t raised it with us yet, of
course.”
Packard: “There is the practical problem, though – if we do anything, we should do something effective.”
Helms: “I agree. If we don’t win, don’t do it.”
Packard: “We should take a good look at it.”
Williams: “In 1965, the Pakistanis closed our base at Peshawar and for all practical purposes left CENTO. With the fall of East Pakistan two
days away, I think an attempt to get a ceasefire in West Pakistan needs to be made diplomatically.”
Johnson: “But that would stop the Pakistanis in Kashmir.”
Williams: “But if they will be chewed up, we might be doing them a favor.”
Gandhi Plans To “Balkanize” West Pakistan
After leaving the meeting, Kissinger joined Nixon and U.S. Attorney General John Mitchell in the Old Executive Office Building to discuss the
crisis. Kissinger referred to a message from the Shah that Iran could not send aircraft to support Pakistan, because of the Indo-Soviet treaty. Shah
proposed that Jordan send its planes to Pakistan, because the Pakistanis could fly Jordanian planes. Then Iran would send its planes to Jordan
with Iranian pilots to cover Jordan, while they were engaged in Pakistan.
Nixon said: “I think we could get a commitment from Israel on the Jordanians.” He then instructed Kissinger to discuss the matter with Israeli
Prime Minister Golda Meir. “When you talk to her, you tell her, Henry, that this is a goddamn Russian ploy.”
Turning to the situation in East Pakistan, Kissinger warned that “the Indian plan is now clear. They are going to move their forces from East
Pakistan to the West. They will then smash the Pakistan land forces and air forces.” He added that India planned to “annex the part of Kashmir
that is in Pakistan”.
Kissinger said Gandhi’s goal was to “Balkanize” West Pakistan into units such as Baluchistan and the Northwest Frontier Province. West
Pakistan would become a state akin to Afghanistan and East Pakistan would equate with Bhutan. “All of this would have been achieved by the
Soviet support, Soviet arms and Indian military force.”
Kissinger warned that “the impact of this on many countries threatened by the Soviet Union” would be serious. He pointed in particular to the
potential impact upon the Middle East. If the crisis resulted in “the complete dismemberment of Pakistan,” he worried China might conclude that
the United States was “just too weak” to have prevented the humiliation of an ally.
Kissinger felt that the Chinese would then look to other options “to break their encirclement”.
“So I think this, unfortunately, has turned into a big watershed.” Kissinger then suggested how Nixon should react in this “tough situation”. “It
seems to me that what we have to do now, or what I would recommend, is where we went wrong before is not to try to scare off the Indians.”
Nixon asked: “How could we scare them?”
Kissinger offered no concrete answer, but said that if Nixon’s advisers had understood the situation better they would have proposed a stronger
response to Indian actions. He assured Nixon that he had done “exactly what all your advisers recommended”.
Nixon said he had warned Gandhi during her visit to Washington: “I told her that any war would be very, very unacceptable.”
Kissinger observed that any such warning obviously fell on deaf ears: “She was determined to go” into East Pakistan. “We should have been

tougher with the Russians.”
Nixon: “What could we have done?”
Kissinger: “We should have told them what we finally told them last Sunday [5 December] that this would mark a watershed in our relationship,
that there could be no Middle East negotiations if this thing would grow. We would have to play it tough. And, thirdly, we should have cut off
economic aid the first or second day, plus all of arms instead of waiting ten days and diddling around.
Nixon: “We have done all of that. But I ordered all of that.” Kissinger felt that the United States had responded too slowly in the fast moving
situation, a failing he ascribed in part to insufficient concentration of control in the White House.
Nixon asked: “Now what do we do?”
Kissinger outlined two choices: “We have got to convince the Indians now, we’ve got to scare them off from an attack on West Pakistan as
much as we possibly can. And, therefore, we’ve got to get another tough warning to the Russians.”
Kissinger noted that in doing so, “You are risking the summit. On the other hand, the summit may not be worth a damn if they lose – if they kick
you around.”
Kissinger’s judgement, in military terms, was that, “we have only one hope now: to convince the Indians the thing is going to escalate. And to
convince the Russians that they are going to pay an enormous price.” Referring to America’s ban on arms supply to Pakistan, he said, “It may not
work, Mr. President . . . we can’t make up six years of military imbalance.”
Nixon: “We should never have let it get out of balance.” He attributed the military imbalance on the subcontinent in good part to President
Lyndon Johnson – “to his great discredit”.
Kissinger, for his part, faulted the bureaucracy. “You promised Yahya on your first visit to send some arms.” The difficulty was to get the
bureaucracy to fulfill the promise. “We didn’t know there would be a war in ’71, but it took a year to get your promise to Yahya worked out.”
Nixon turned to the question of whether to encourage a transfer of planes to Pakistan. Kissinger and Nixon agreed that the issue posed a risk.
Kissinger said: “I think we’re in trouble. If we did this, we could give a note to the Chinese and say if you are ever going to move, this is the
time.”
Nixon agreed: “All right, that’s what we’ll do.”
Mitchell observed: “All they have to do is put their forces on the border.”
Kissinger noted the danger of a corresponding move by the Soviet Union to support India. “I must warn you, Mr. President, if our bluff is
called, we’ll be in trouble.”
Nixon said the Soviets had to “cold-bloodlessly make the decision”.
Kissinger: “We’ve got to make it within thirty-six hours.”
Nixon: “No more goddamn meetings to decide this.”
Kissinger promised to offer Nixon his choices after the meeting of the Washington Special Action Group the following day.
Nixon said that one of his choices was to do relatively little to intervene further in the crisis. “If we let it go,” he told Kissinger, “your fear is that it
will certainly screw up the South Asian area. Your greater fear, however, is that it may get . . . the Chinese stirred up so that they do something
else. . . . And, it will encourage the Russians to do the same thing someplace else.”
Kissinger concurred. He pointed to the possible implications for the Middle East.
Nixon: “I am for doing anything.”
Kissinger worried that the United States lacked the requisite punch to make an intervention effective.
Nixon agreed: “We can’t do this without the Chinese helping us. As I look at this thing, the Chinese have got to move to that damn border. The
Indians have got to get a little scared.”
He instructed Kissinger to get a message to that effect to the Chinese.
Beyond approaching China, Nixon wondered, “what really we can do to affect the outcome.”
Kissinger said one thing that could be done was to encourage Jordan to transfer planes to Pakistan. Another would be to move the carrier force
into the Bay of Bengal.
Nixon said another form of pressure on New Delhi would be to brand India publicly as an aggressor. He instructed Kissinger to discuss a
coordinated move with China. He told him to go to New York to meet the Chinese and say he had a message from the president for the premier,
Chou En-lai.
Kissinger said he was more optimistic than he had been earlier that China would respond positively to a suggestion regarding a coordinated
move. “They know,” he said, “that this is a dress rehearsal of what could happen to them.” Kissinger was alluding to the issue of Tibet.
Nixon picked up on that theme: “What I would like to do in a note to the Chinese is to state exactly that, that I consider this to be a dress
rehearsal and I think their move toward the border would restrain India.”
Nixon Urges China To Scare India
In the evening of 8 December, Nixon talked with Kissinger on the phone. He said the United States could not suggest to the Soviet Union that the
situation in South Asia should revert to the status quo ante, but, “we can say ‘get the hell out of West Pakistan.’ ”
Kissinger : “At this stage, we have to prevent an Indian attack on West Pakistan.”
Nixon agreed.
Kissinger: “We have to maintain the position of withdrawal from all of Pakistan.”
He concluded that if America held firm in its approach to India and the Soviet Union, the administration would achieve its overall goals, even if it
failed to prevent India from breaking Pakistan: “If they maintain their respect for us even if you lose, we still will come out all right.”
For Kissinger, it was a question of preserving America’s credibility and honor. By introducing the U.S. military power into the equation in the

form of a carrier and other units from the Seventh Fleet, America sought to stop “a Soviet stooge, supported by Soviet arms” from overrunning an
ally.
Nixon believed that China could help restrain India. “I tell you a movement of even some Chinese toward that border could scare those
goddamn Indians to death.”
Kissinger agreed: “As soon as we have made the decision here, we can then talk to the Chinese.”
U.S. Betrayed Pakistan, China Charges
On 10 December, Kissinger and George H.W. Bush, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, met with the Chinese permanent representative
in New York. After giving the Chinese an account of Nixon’s message to Brezhnev and the ceasefire idea, Kissinger encouraged China to join the
war. “If the People’s Republic were to consider the situation on the Indian subcontinent a threat to its security, and if it took measures to protect its
security, the United States would oppose efforts of others to interfere with the People’s Republic.”
He said Washington’s immediate goal was to stop West Pakistan’s destruction. “We are afraid that if nothing is done to stop it, East Pakistan
will become a Bhutan and West Pakistan will become a Nepal. And, India with the Soviet help would be free to turn its energies elsewhere,” an
allusion to Southeast Asia.
Huang Hua, the Chinese permanent representative to the United Nations, apparently took Kissinger’s hint in an unintended way. He responded:
“We are prepared for attacks on the east, west, north, and south. We are prepared to engage in guerrilla warfare once again with millet and rifle,
and we are prepared to begin our construction over again, after that eventuality. And, the private attitude adopted by Brezhnev which we see now,
in which he talks about so-called political negotiations is in fact direct and obvious intervention in the internal affairs of a sovereign country and
something we feel is completely unacceptable, is inadmissible.”
He then added: “We feel that the struggle waged by the people in Pakistan is a just struggle and, therefore, it is bound to have the support of the
Chinese people and the people of the world.
Kissinger: “We want to preserve the army in West Pakistan so that it is better able to fight if the situation rises again. We are also prepared to
attempt to assemble a maximum amount of pressure in order to deter India.
“We want to keep the pressure on India, both militarily and politically. We have no interest in political negotiations between Pakistani leaders
and East Pakistani leaders as such. The only interest that we possibly have is to get the Soviet agreement to a united Pakistan. We have no interest
in an agreement between Bangladesh and Pakistan.
“We are prepared also to consider simply a ceasefire. We are prepared also to follow your course in the U.N, which most of my colleagues
would be delighted to do and then Pakistan would be destroyed. If we followed your course of insisting on ceasefire and withdrawal and do
nothing then Pakistan will be destroyed, and many people in America will be delighted. If you and Pakistan want this then we will do it. That is no
problem for us. That is the easiest course for us.”
Kissinger continued: “It is our judgment, with great sorrow, that the Pakistan army in two weeks will disintegrate in the West as it has
disintegrated in the East. If we are wrong about this, we are wrong about everything. What do you think of ceasefire without political negotiations?
The only reason we want political negotiations at all is to preserve East Pakistan, not to weaken it.”
Huang: “Why should we not condemn India for its aggression against East Pakistan? Why should there not be a demand for the resolution
already passed in the General Assembly which calls for withdrawal?”
Kissinger: “We are not saying we accept the occupation of East Pakistan; we don’t have to accept that. But this would be a resolution for a
ceasefire only. And the Arabs would not accept the occupation of their territory even though there is a ceasefire.”
Kissinger added: “When I asked for this meeting, I did so to suggest Chinese military help, to be quite honest. That’s what I had in mind, not to
discuss with you how to defeat Pakistan. What is going to happen is that the Pakistani commander in East Pakistan, independent of anything we
did, has asked the U.N. to arrange a ceasefire in East Pakistan.”
Huang promised to transmit immediately Kissinger’s message to Beijing.
Kissinger: “We are looking for a way to protect what is left of Pakistan. We will not recognize Bangladesh. We will not negotiate with
Bangladesh. We will not encourage talks between Pakistan and Bangladesh.”
Huang wanted to know if Bush recently met with anybody from Bangladesh. His question stemmed from a story that appeared in the U.S.
media saying Bush had met with a Bengali delegation in New York.
Three weeks earlier, Bush explained, Justice Abu Syeed Chowdhury asked for an appointment in his capacity as a judge in Pakistan. He had his
staff do a background check on the man. Chowdhury then made a personal call, and brought along three men. When their group started
mentioning Bangladesh in the conversation, Bush cut them off, pointing out that Chowdhury was supposed to be seeing him as a judge. He told
Chowdhury’s team that he was barred from discussing Bangladesh matters with them.
Huang: “I am clear now.”
Kissinger: “In any event, no matter what you read, no one is authorized to talk to Bangladesh. We don’t recognize Bangladesh and will not
recognize it.”
Huang said he would immediately send this message to Chou Enlai.
Kissinger had expected China to join the war after India moved its soldiers into East Pakistan. During a visit to China in June 1972, he raised
this point during his discussion with Chou En-lai, noting that Nixon had risked a major confrontation with the Soviet Union to save West Pakistan
and hoped China would come to Pakistan’s aid.
“When I mentioned that we had expected military moves by the People’s Republic of China, Chou was somewhat defensive, pointing out that
poor Pakistani military strategy had crumpled East Pakistan before any outside help would have done any good. He noted that Yahya had
dispersed his forces too thinly; and he revealed that two divisions of Chinese military equipment had been lost without a fight,” Kissinger reported
to Nixon in a memo on 27 June 1972.

Three years later, when President Gerald Ford visited Beijing, Deputy Premier Deng Xiao Ping brought up the 1971 war issue, accusing the
United States of betraying Pakistan. Deng’s statement put Kissinger on the defensive.
Deng charged: “After your [Secretary Kissinger’s] second visit to China, Pakistan was dismembered. And, Premier Chou En-lai told the Doctor
– and it might be counted as criticism, but with good intention – that you took no effective action, because your tone was of advice and not the
tone of warning.
“When the Soviet Union took action with regard to India, it paid attention to the attitude of the United States because it knew China’s capability
was quite limited. We have good relations with Pakistan and also have rendered some help to Pakistan, but our equipment is backward. Only the
United States can give them some good things either directly or indirectly.”
Kissinger replied he agreed with Chou En-lai’s analysis and did not consider it an unfair comment at all. “But our situation was complicated by
two factors: One, the Vietnam War and the domestic difficulties caused by it; and second, President Yahya Khan was not the greatest leader of
which history informs us. He made great mistakes politically and militarily. So he made it very hard for us, but you will [also] remember the
difficulties President Nixon and I had in America. But President Nixon and I had made the decision – for your information – that if you had moved
and the Soviet Union had brought pressure on you, we would have given [China] military support – even though the Shanghai Communiqué was
not yet issued. We understand why you didn’t, but you should know our position, our seriousness of purpose.”
On 9 December, Kissinger told Nixon that the Indian forces in East Pakistan were making steady progress on several fronts and were at one
point only twenty-two miles from Dhaka. The most immediate threat was from the East, but the Indians must make a major river crossing if their
thrust was to continue. Chittagong, the second largest city in the province, had been cut off from Dhaka. How long the Pakistani resistance would
continue depended on whether the Pakistani forces gave up or were captured as their posts were taken or could fall back in a relatively good
order to a few urban centers like Dhaka for a last-ditch defense.
Pakistan’s resistance capability was less than promising. Farland reported that during a conversation on 8 December, Yahya seemed resigned
that he could do nothing more to help his troops in the East; he still did say that they would fight “to the last Muslim”. The ambassador had also
received reports of desertions by the members of army and police units, but there had been no indications yet that discipline was collapsing or that
large numbers were surrendering.
In New Delhi, meanwhile, India’s defense secretary put forth a “personal suggestion” on 8 December that India could be more effective in
protecting the minorities in East Pakistan, including West Pakistani soldiers, if the Pakistani government were prepared to arrange an orderly
Bangladesh takeover.
In the West, the military situation remained about the same. The Indians, with the exception of an extending penetration toward Karachi in the
south, were still in a holding posture on the ground, while conducting repeated air attacks against military targets throughout West Pakistan.
The Pakistanis were taking some initiative in the Punjab plain and especially along the Kashmir ceasefire line, and there were reports of an
increased offensive in the following day or two. However, they were still to launch the major offensive that many expected. It was possible that
they were hoping that the Indians would be ready to stop or at least more subject to international pressure once East Pakistan fell and did not want
to unnecessarily provoke a major Indian counter-offensive in the West. On the other hand, if the Indians did shift to an all-out offensive in the
West, the Pakistanis would still have most of their forces intact to defend their heartland.
At 10 a.m. on 9 December, Moorer told Nixon’s advisers that “in East Pakistan, in the absence of a ceasefire, it’s just a matter of time until the
Pakistan army will be essentially ineffective.” There was, however, no indication that their morale had been broken. Their supplies were cut off and
they had no air left. Any serious fighting could be over in ten days or two weeks, depending on whether the Pakistanis continue to fight to the last
man or begin to surrender in large numbers.
In West Pakistan, the Pakistanis were slightly superior in numbers, with about 100,000 men. They were trying to occupy enough of Kashmir to
give them a bargaining chip if and when there was a ceasefire. They were trying to block the main lines of communication. In the south of the
Kashmir area, the Indians outnumbered the Pakistanis two-to-one. They might plan to move south to Lahore, although there was no indication.
The best Pakistan could do was to gain as much control of Kashmir as possible. Moorer added that the Pakistanis could continue for about three
weeks or so. However, if there was a period of attrition, with no ceasefire, the Indians could hold out longer.
Kissinger: “So if the war is prolonged, it won’t make any difference if the Paks take Kashmir, since they wouldn’t be able to hold it.”
Moorer: “Yes, but that is their only chance.”
Kissinger: “Yesterday someone here said a ceasefire in West Pakistan would work to the disadvantage of the Paks. Now do I understand that
you are saying that a prolonged war, even if the Paks get Kashmir, will lead to the destruction of the Pak army?”
Moorer: “Exactly. When East Pakistan is gone, the Indians will transfer their divisions to West – possibly four of the six divisions now in the
East. This will take one to three weeks, depending on how much air they use. If the war continues to the end, the outcome for Pakistan is
inevitable.”
Kissinger: “So we have to prevent an Indian onslaught on West Pakistan, since the outcome will be the same as in East Pakistan. The Indians
will then control the area to Bhutan in the East and Nepal in the West.”
Irwin noted that the 9 December CIA paper, which examined the implications of an Indian victory over Pakistan, predicted the possible
acceleration of the break-up tendencies in West Pakistan – possibly into as many as four separate states.
Johnson: “That sounds reasonable.”
Kissinger then raised a policy decision question as to the U.S. role regarding West Pakistan: “Are we agreed that we should do our best to
prevent an Indian attack on West Pakistan? That this is our chief objective?”
Irwin: “The question is how to do it. To what degree would this require involvement of the United States.”
Johnson: “I think we should make a maximum effort with both sides to bring the fighting to a stop. The Paks have already accepted the U.N.
ceasefire resolution.”
Kissinger: “Is that all we can do?”
Armistead Selden, deputy assistant secretary of Defense, asked: “What will be the fate of the Pak army in East Pakistan? There will be a
massacre if they keep on fighting.”

Johnson: “What can we do in the East?”
Helms: “There is nothing to do. There is no way of getting them out.”
Johnson: “India can afford to withdraw their troops from East Pakistan, once the Mukti Bahini are in the saddle.”
James H. Noyes, assistant secretary of Defence for International Security Affairs, interjected: “The more territory Pakistan takes in the West,
the more provocation this is to India – the more justification India has to continue.”
Moorer: “India doesn’t need any provocation or justification. They have a plan and they are carrying it out.”
Johnson: “And, the Paks can’t prevent it.”
Helms: “What leverage do we have on India?”
Johnson: “None. I’m talking about our objectives.” He then asked whether the United States should ask Yahya about arranging a ceasefire to
restore “the status quo ante in the West”.
Kissinger: “Wouldn’t he say ‘they have taken half my country, and I can’t talk about it’?”
Johnson: “What is the alternative – continued fighting in the West until his forces are destroyed?”
Williams: “But Yahya doesn’t expect this to happen. He expects the fighting will be stopped by the great powers. He expects them to bring it to
a halt and then to go to some form of a negotiating table.”
Moorer: “Is there any way to get NATO into the act?”
Helms: “The British and French don’t go along with us.”
Williams: “If we approach the Indians, their response will probably be that they will stop the war in the West in return for Pakistan’s recognition
of Bangladesh.”
Johnson: “But with the destruction of the Pak forces in the East, they can’t do anything anyway.”
Williams: “But the Indians have already said this is what they want, and we would get this response to any approach to them. Once they achieve
their objective in the East, there is the possibility that they may stop.”
Irwin: “But they have said they intend to destroy the Pak army and air force and straighten out the line on Kashmir.”
Kissinger: “If they destroy the army and the air force, Pakistan will be in their paws. The result would be a nation of 100 million people
dismembered, their political structure changed by military attack, despite a treaty of alliance with and private assurances by the United States. And,
all the other countries, on whom we have considered we could rely, such as Iran, would know that this has been done by the weight of Soviet arms
and with Soviet diplomatic support. What will be the effect in the Middle East, for example – could we tell Israel that she should give up something
along a line from A to B, in return for something else, with any plausibility?”
Sisco: “I don’t accept that view. We do have a kind of alliance with Pakistan in both the CENTO and the bilateral context, but that alliance was
against communist aggression. I grant that the Russians are behind India in this, but our commitment was not in the India-Pakistan context. I don’t
believe Iran or Israel or any other Middle Eastern country expect direct U.S. involvement in South Asia.”
Sisco dismissed a far-reaching impact as Kissinger painted: “I don’t see the implication for the rest of the world that you draw. I have the
impression from what Yahya told Farland that he has ‘accepted’ the inevitable result in East Pakistan. We can’t do anything about that. East
Pakistan is gone and we both have to face that fact. The thing that confronts Yahya and us in relation to the balance on the subcontinent is what
happens in West Pakistan. It is not in our interest to have India destroy the Pak army in West Pakistan or otherwise effect a further radical change
in the status quo, possibly resulting in the fractionalization of Pakistan. I think we have three options: (1) we can do nothing – complete non-
involvement – in which case East Pakistan would be lost, India would destroy the Pak army and would take at least Azad Kashmir. This is clearly
unacceptable. (2) That we not accept this situation, but see what we can do diplomatically or otherwise to deter the Indians from their present
course. We should recognize that we are limited in the ways in which we can deter the Indians. Even if we should move rapidly on arms supply to
the Paks, this would have only a marginal effect.”
Kissinger asked Sisco whether his suggestions were based on the assumption that “the Indians were willing to press the fighting to a conclusion.”
Sisco responded: “Yes. We should ask ourselves how we could deter the Indians so as to end with a West Pakistan based on the status quo
ante, including no alteration of the boundaries of Kashmir.”
Kissinger: “Would you accept Bangladesh?”
Sisco avoided a direct answer: “I have no problem with going to the Indians alone, as you suggest. We should also go to the Russians. I think
we should also have a serious talk with Yahya.”
Kissinger: “What would be the point of a serious talk with Yahya?”
Sisco: “To see how he reads his position. I realize this is an oversimplification, but Yahya is faced with a situation involving the sure destruction
of elements of his government in East Pakistan. How does he read his capability in the West? Probably not as we do. Given the disproportionate
military capability between India and Pakistan, we see the likelihood of a Pak defeat. But if Yahya doesn’t read it that way, he may want to
continue the military struggle. If he wants to do this, we’re not in a position to second-guess him. The fundamental question is whether we should
try to have some exchange along the line that the East is pretty well lost, and how do we save the rest of Pakistan?”
Kissinger: “So we would go to Yahya and say he should settle now?” Sisco: “Yahya is faced with the necessity of cutting his losses and saving
West Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “Suppose Yahya says yes, and the Indians say he has to recognize Bangladesh?”
Sisco: “We shouldn’t press him to do that. I’m stating the situation in bold terms.”
Johnson: “India doesn’t need Yahya’s recognition of Bangladesh. Neither Yahya nor the United States can restore the status quo ante in
Bangladesh. There is nothing Yahya can do, even if he doesn’t accept the loss.”
Williams: “We have only a limited leverage on India. In the absence of any assurance that a military supply effort would be effective and would
make any difference in the military balance, we’re in a terribly weak position. I think we need something additional if we are to extract Yahya with
some shred of honor. I think we should go back to a sharpened Security Council resolution – a steadfast of some sort which would save the army

and hold to the demarcation of the present boundaries. We might add Bangladesh to this equation in some way.”
Sisco: “I don’t exclude the possibility of a deal of some sort, even now.”
Williams: “There are still elements of concession. Don’t forget that the spirit of nationalism was terribly strong in East Pakistan even before the
fighting broke out. This is where any talent we have needs to be applied. I think we should discuss it with Yahya. If we put some force behind it,
we may even have a chance of getting the Russians behind it. Many West Pakistanis will recognize and accept the loss of East Pakistan, although it
will be hard for the army to take.”
Kissinger: “Assuming that this kind of option will be kept open, the president wants India to understand very clearly that we would not look with
indifference on an Indian onslaught on West Pakistan. Our press spokesmen should not press the idea of neutrality or noninvolvement to the point
that the Indians could misunderstand that this foretells our attitude toward an attack on West Pakistan. We should keep open the option of trying
to deter the Indians, by a show of force, if necessary.”
Kissinger then asked Moorer if he could give the pros and cons of getting an American aircraft carrier into the Bay of Bengal and make it
appear as if it was meant to evacuate Americans, although in reality to threaten the Soviets and the Indians. The point of Moorer’s analysis became
mute when Kissinger met with Nixon in the Oval Office after the meeting and the president ordered him to move the carrier, ruling out Kissinger’s
mild opposition. Kissinger opposed the move based on advice from Treasury Secretary John Connally, who favored using a helicopter ship rather
than a carrier, as the latter could be interpreted by the American public as a threat to intervene militarily.
Nixon responded angrily: “Goddamn it, I’ve got a responsibility to protect American lives. I’m going to do it.” Nixon apparently said he was
prepared to use the carrier force to protect U.S. citizens in East Pakistan, who numbered two hundred.
Kissinger: “Nobody will believe it. The Indians will scream we’re threatening them.”
Nixon: “Why are we doing it anyway? Aren’t we going in for the purpose of strength?”
Kissinger saw Nixon’s determination to use the carrier. “I’d move the carrier so that we can tell the Chinese tomorrow to move their forces to
the frontier,” Kissinger said, adding that a decision to move the carrier group into the Bay of Bengal meant that “we’d have to do a lot of things,
and we’d have to do them toughly.”
Nixon: “I understand.”
Kissinger: “We’d have to get the Indian ambassador called in and demand assurances against annexation. We’d have to leak at that moment
that secret understanding to protect the Indians [Pakistanis] against aggression.”
Nixon: “I understand.” He then asked Kissinger “to get the whole thing together.”
Turning to the political impact of using the carrier, Kissinger noted that it would take six days to move the carrier from Southeast Asia to the Bay
of Bengal, by which time Congress would have already been out for a recess. He said he would talk to Admiral Moorer “to see whether we can
keep the carrier back of the Bay of Bengal”.
Nixon: “Then can we move the other helicopter thing in?”
Kissinger said yes.
On 12 December, Moorer informed Kissinger that the plan was to move the carrier through the Malacca Straits separating Malaysia and
Indonesia. The carrier force that had been stationed off Vietnam was expected to traverse on
12 December morning, Washington time. The force was anticipated to arrive off East Pakistan by 16 December morning and then on to the Indian
Ocean. “In forty-five hours they can move where we want them. It’s a carrier, four destroyers, an oiler and amphibious force [the Tripoli] with
three destroyers – all set to go at daylight Monday [13 December], their time.”
Kissinger: “Send it where there are Americans – say, Karachi.” He said the Pentagon could comment “that they were sent to help in a possible
evacuation.”
Irwin: “Will we announce it?”
Kissinger: “Wait for a question from the press.”
Nixon Moves Seventh Fleet To Bluff Soviets
When Kissinger met with Nixon in the Oval Office, he did not recommend sending the carrier, fearing public backlash in the United States,
although he suggested sending a helicopter ship and some escorts.
“From the Chinese angle, I would like to move the carrier. From the public opinion angle, what would the press and television do to us if an
American carrier showed up there?” the national security adviser asked.
Nixon asked: “Can’t the carrier be there for the purpose of evacuation?”
Kissinger responded: “But against whom are we going to use the planes? Are we going to shoot our way in?”
Nixon asked what good it would do to move a helicopter ship into the area.
Kissinger said it would be “a token that something else will come afterward”.
Kissinger told Nixon that the White House and the State Department were following different approaches to the crisis. He said the State
Department “would propose a ceasefire in the west in return for in effect our recognition of Bangladesh,” and added that such an approach would
constitute “a total collapse” and “it would hurt us with the Chinese.”
Nixon, however, felt it was necessary to take into account the “realities” of the situation. “The partition of Pakistan is a fact. You see those
people welcoming the Indian troops when they come in. Why then are we going through all of this agony?” the president asked.
Kissinger replied: “We are going through this agony to prevent the West Pakistan army from being destroyed. And secondly, to retain our
Chinese arm. And thirdly, to prevent a complete collapse of the world’s psychological balance of power, which will be produced if a combination
of the Soviet Union and the Soviet armed client state can tackle a not insignificant country without anybody doing anything.”
Kissinger felt that if the United States would “put enough chips into the pot” it could persuade the Soviets “for their own reasons, for the other
considerations, to call a halt to it”.

Nixon: “What are we going to ask the Russians to do?”
Kissinger: “Ceasefire, negotiation, and subsequent withdrawal.”
“But,” he added, “we’d have to clear it with Yahya first.”
Nixon: “Ceasefire and negotiation on what basis?”
Kissinger: “Between the Awami League and Islamabad on the basis of the December 1970 election,” and “within the framework of a united
Pakistan.” Withdrawal, he said, would occur after the negotiations.
To Nixon’s question about what the United States could do to influence the outcome, Kissinger replied: “I would keep open the possibility that
we’ll pour arms into Pakistan.” If the Soviet Union could ship arms to India, Kissinger did not see why the United States could not supply arms to
Pakistan. “I don’t understand the theory of non-involvement. I don’t see where we will be as a country. I have to tell you honestly I consider this
our Rhineland.”
He warned: “If the Russians come out of it totally cocky, we may have a Middle East war in the spring.”
Nixon expressed concerns about adopting a hard line. “We have to know what we are jeopardizing,” he said.
Kissinger: “You are jeopardizing your relationship with the Soviets, but that is also your card, your willingness to jeopardize it.” Not to play that
card, would be to concede the Soviet Union a dangerous victory, he added.
Nixon observed that opponents of his policy towards South Asia were also concerned about jeopardizing United States relations with India.
Kissinger said: “You could argue that it will help us in the long-term with the Indians.”
Nixon replied: “I don’t give a damn about the Indians.”
Nixon then asked how the transfer of planes from Jordan to Pakistan could be facilitated.
Kissinger: The United States could tell “the King to move his planes and inform us that he has done it.” Then the White House would instruct the
State Department “to shut up”. He said America would tell Jordan that it was illegal, but if he did it “we’ll keep things under control.”
Nixon: “All right, that’s the way we play that.”
India’s ambassador met with Irwin on 14 December to express concern about reports that the United States sent a nuclear-powered aircraft
carrier, equipped with “all kinds of devices and gadgets” to evacuate the Americans. New Delhi instructed him to seek assurance from Washington
that there would be no evacuation operation without prior agreement with India or by force. Sisco said he would report what Jha had said.
Jha said he had also seen a report from New Delhi that America had some plan or intention to establish a beachhead in Bangladesh to evacuate
the Americans or help transfer the Pakistanis to West Pakistan. Any such attempt would endanger long-term Indo-U.S. relations, he cautioned.
Sisco said he had seen the report, but was personally unaware of any such plan. He said that if he had anything further, he would be back in
touch. Sisco said that although he did not wish to go into past history, the Americans did see in Indian actions things that “not only reflect the
present strains in our relations but also which obviously could have implications for our long-term relations, which both sides will be looking at in
the future.”
On 9 December, Soviet Agriculture Minister Vladimir Matskevich came to Washington. Nixon met with him and Vorontsov at Kissinger’s
recommendation. Kissinger saw Matskevich’s presence as an opportunity to send a high-level message to the Soviet leadership that if India turned
its military on West Pakistan after defeating the forces in East Pakistan, it would create a crisis of the utmost gravity.
Nixon told the Soviet leader that while India’s victory over Pakistan might provide short-term gain for Moscow and New Delhi against
Islamabad and Beijing, it would poison the whole new relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union. The question remained: “Are
short-term gains for India worth jeopardizing Soviet relations with the United States?”
“This is not conveyed in a threatening way,” the president stressed. “It would be difficult, however, for the United States to stand by if the
Indians moved forces into West Pakistan. The key to a settlement was in the hands of the Soviet Union. If the Soviets did not restrain the Indians,
it would be difficult for Washington to deal with Yahya.”
“If the Indians continue military operations, we must inevitably look toward a confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States.
The Soviet Union has a treaty with India, but the United States has obligations to Pakistan,” Nixon told Matskevich.
He proposed that there be a ceasefire first, followed by political negotiations “within a Pakistan framework.”
After the president’s meeting with the Soviet leader, Nixon and Kissinger assessed the conversation. Nixon was pleased with the exchange. “I
really stuck it to him,” the president said.
Kissinger predicted: “It will end now. It will end. We will lose 70 percent but that’s a hell of a lot better. We were losing 110 percent
yesterday.” Nixon felt that, at a minimum, his initiative with Matskevich would have the effect of stopping “the goddamn Indians from going to the
West”.
The Soviet Union responded to Nixon’s message on 12 December saying Gandhi personally assured Moscow that “India has no intention to
take any military actions against West Pakistan. The Soviet leaders believe that this makes the situation easier and hope that the government of
Pakistan will draw from this appropriate conclusions.”
On 12 December, Nixon met again with Kissinger in the White House to discuss a message just received from Moscow, which was conveyed
by Vorontsov to Haig. Kissinger told Nixon the Russians had an assurance from Gandhi that she would not attack West Pakistan and that they
were then working with her to arrange a ceasefire.
Nixon commented: “We must not be in a position where the Russians and we settle the son-of-a-bitch and leave the Chinese out.”
Turning to the decision made in the morning to confront the Soviet Union militarily if necessary in support of China, Kissinger said: “What you
did this morning Mr. President was a heroic act.”
Nixon responded: “I had to do it.” He said the prevailing instinct in the government was to avoid difficult choices: “It’s the whole attitude, the
whole government, the whole American establishment would say, well don’t borrow trouble. It’s all going to work out. Nothing ever works out
unless you do something about it. That’s the trouble with the world.”

Referring to the appeasement of Hitler before World War II, he ascribed the war to the “pusillanimous” conduct of the Western allies.
Kissinger: “When I showed Vorontsov the Kennedy treaty they knew they were looking down the gun barrel.”
Nixon asked: “Did he react?”
Kissinger replied: “Oh yeah.” It was time “to turn the screw another half turn”.
He said that if the United States was to ease up on the pressure on India and the Soviet Union, “we’ve had it.” “Therefore,” he added, “my
strong recommendation is that we trigger this U.N. thing as quickly as we possibly can because it is the only way we can go on the record now of
condemning India.”
Nixon concurred: “That’s right.”
Kissinger felt that it was essential that the condemnation be leveled initially in a White House statement. Kissinger put forward a draft of such a
statement and Nixon approved it.
Kissinger was confident that events were moving in the right direction: “We’ve got them. But the big problem now is, Mr. President, not to give
the – is to – [sic] if we play this thing well we’ll come out ahead with both the Chinese and the Russians.” He went on: “We are doing this Mr.
President with no cards whatsoever.”
Nixon felt he had one card: “The Russians want something from us.”
The optimism engendered by the Soviet response was tempered, near the end of the conversation, by the fact that the crisis still could take a
dangerous turn.
Kissinger said: “The Chinese may come anyway and we’ll have to face the Russians down anyway.”
Nixon responded: “Yeah, but if the Russians and the Chinese come now they will come.” He then added: “Now there is one great problem. As
I said, I may be wrong, but Communists generally use negotiations for the purpose of screwing, not for the purpose of settling.”
Kissinger felt that the Soviets were “too scared” to play a devious game with the negotiations. He referred again to the Kennedy commitment to
Pakistan as convincing Vorontsov that the United States “meant business.” Kissinger felt that the Soviet Union was not ready for a military
confrontation with the United States. “In ’73-’74 they may have you. They’re not ready yet.”
Nixon and Kissinger then drafted a response to the message just received from the Soviet Union. They continued to work on what was sent
subsequently as a hotline response. Kissinger concluded from the Soviet message that there won’t be military action against West Pakistan. He and
Nixon discussed and revised the message according to Nixon’s instructions. Nixon said the message should stress that “time is of the essence to
avoid frightening consequences neither of us want.”
Nixon then reverted to the public statement the White House would issue in condemnation of India. He said “the argument against putting it to
the Indians is, as you know, that well if we put it to the Indians then they will stiffen their backs and say screw you.”
Kissinger interjected: “They won’t.”
Nixon said he felt that the Indians seemed to be affected by world opinion. “To the extent that they are goddamn it [sic] we’re going to get it
across that world opinion is against them.”
On 9 December, Kissinger prepared a memo for Nixon for a meeting of senior officials implementing the U.S. policies. It was “to instill the
necessary discipline within the bureaucracy and the forum of the Washington Special Action Group to insure compliance with your policies on
South Asia”.
Kissinger told the president, “Our policy and the policy of the United States government is to undertake those practical steps which are
necessary to prevent the dismemberment and defeat of Pakistan as a result of Indian military action supported and abetted by the Soviet Union.
There should be no mistake that Pakistan’s collapse and dismemberment would result in a major setback for U.S. interests worldwide and, in this
context, the United States is indeed involved in the situation in South Asia.”
He suggested that Nixon instruct Johnson to call in India’s ambassador and ask him “whether India will attempt, as a result of military operations
in West Pakistan, to annex or in any other way to occupy and permanently hold territories which are now under Pakistani sovereignty.” Johnson
should tell Jha that “any attempt to do so would be taken most seriously in Washington.”
In addition, the Joint Chiefs chairman should also be told “to undertake immediate actions under the pretext of prudent contingency measures to
move a carrier task force, including an amphibious ship with helicopters to the Indian Ocean with movement to commence immediately.
Moreover, Kissinger suggested that Nixon issue an order that if India did not give “a satisfactory response,” that the Pentagon should be ready
by 9 a.m. with “specific recommendations for additional military actions which might be undertaken to convey the U.S. determination”.
Kissinger, meanwhile, passed on Brezhnev’s message through the backchannel to Farland, instructing the ambassador to give it to Yahya
directly – and not to share it with any bureaucrats. Kissinger outlined that the Soviet leader’s proposal for an immediate ceasefire to be followed
by political negotiations had several advantages for Pakistan: it would gain Islamabad time and preclude the possibility of the Pakistani army’s
destruction. If hostilities resumed, India would be much worse internationally and the Pakistan forces would have had a breathing spell. It
committed the Soviet Union not to recognize Bangladesh, indicating a measure of the Soviet Union’s disassociation from India.
Pakistan’s ambassador met with Sisco on 9 December and made an urgent appeal for military aid, invoking the pact between Pakistan and the
United States. “We depend on you entirely,” Raza said. He understood the U.S. could not provide manpower but that it could offer arms, either
directly or indirectly via third countries. Raza expressed hope America would respond promptly.
Sisco assured Raza, “We will give this matter our active consideration.”
Raza reiterated his appeal on 10 December, this time to Johnson. Using non-diplomatical and blunt language, the ambassador said the United
States had let his country down in the past by trying to adopt a neutral stance between Pakistan and India, a reference to the Johnson
administration’s policy during the 1965 war. He hoped Washington would not do the same again.
Washington was unsure how to respond to Pakistan’s appeal. It sought Farland’s input, who advised that Washington obtain as accurate a
reading as possible of Indian intentions beyond the East Pakistan conflict, before framing a response. He noted that Islamabad believed India
wanted to crush Pakistan’s entire military machine, both in East and West Pakistan.
Meanwhile, Keating reported to the State Department about his 8 December talks with India’s Defense Secretary, K.B. Lall. Lall said the East

Pakistan conflict should be brought to an end as soon as possible to avoid a humanitarian crisis. India wished to avoid further casualties. If there
was an orderly takeover, he promised, India would safeguard the Biharis and the Punjabis in East Pakistan. Lall also assured that the Pakistani
prisoners would be protected according to provisions of the Geneva Convention. Washington welcomed Lall’s remarks.
On 10 December, Jha met with the State Department officials to explain the latest situation. Irwin asked if the ambassador could assure him
India would not annex any territory, including any part of Azad Kashmir. He made clear that he spoke with particular reference to West Pakistan.
Jha said India had recognized Bangladesh. It would not annex the East, nor would it have what he termed a “protectorate relationship” with
Bangladesh. In the West, India had no territorial annexation plan. However, he had no clear idea about Azad Kashmir, either and needed to ask
Delhi. He promised to be in touch with the United States as soon as possible. If the Bangladesh fighting could be sorted out quickly, Jha said India
would seek early normalization. He said this was only his personal speculation; he would have to report to his government to get its official views.
Armed with information from New Delhi, Jha told Irwin two days later that India had no war aims; it did not want war and did not start it. India
clearly did not covet Pakistan’s territory. India was anxious to see Bangladesh remaining completely independent. On Kashmir, he said it belonged
to India. Pakistan illegally held parts of it, but India opposed changing the situation by force.
Irwin asked about India’s future control over East Pakistan. Jha had no firm answer. Later in the conversation, however, he said that one way to
ensure Bangladesh would not be controlled by India was for it to join the United Nations in its own right. “India does not want Bangladesh to
become an Indian protectorate and was anxious not to have control over it,” Jha reiterated.
As Jha discussed the war with Irwin, on 10 December, the U.S. consulate general in Dhaka forwarded a report to the State Department that
U.N. Special Assistant Paul Marc Henry had received from General Farman Ali Khan. General Farman Ali also forwarded a copy to Yahya for
approval for the United Nations to arrange an immediate ceasefire in East Pakistan.
Yahya approved Farman’s proposal, stipulating safe passage and repatriation of the Pakistani forces to West Pakistan. It was not a surrender
offer. Farman Ali’s message indicated that if the offer was rejected, the Pakistani forces would fight “to the last man”.
Farman Ali later told a Pakistani war commission looking into the 1971 setback that East Pakistan’s governor told him to draft the message.
Farman handed over a copy of the proposal as directed by the governor, who had been authorized by Yahya to offer proposals for a political
settlement with the Awami League. In his authorization, according to the commission, Yahya clearly instructed Niazi that “the question of surrender
of armed forces would not be considered and does not arise.”
Yahya was warned by Malik, according to his information, that the Indian army intended to kill all West Pakistanis in East Pakistan, both
military and civilian. He and his cabinet felt that Pakistan had to accept any ceasefire terms that would prevent a massacre in East Pakistan.
The war commission concluded: “If General Yahya Khan, as commander-in-chief of the army, had shown greater determination and courage
and directed the Eastern Command to hold on somewhat longer than the 16th of December, 1971, it was quite possible that a satisfactory solution
ordering a ceasefire might have been obtained from the Security Council.” Yahya later went back on this proposal based on false hope that China
would intervene in support of Pakistan.
In Washington, Kissinger told Nixon that according to a clandestine report from Islamabad, Yahya had told his prime minister designate, Nurul
Amin, on 11 December, that the Chinese ambassador in Pakistan had assured him that within seventy-two hours, the Chinese army would move
toward the Northeast Frontier Agency border. But the CIA had received no information of unusual activity by the Chinese forces in Tibet.
The Pakistani forces eagerly waited for the promised help and continued to regroup to defend Dhaka. No one came to their rescue, however,
and they were far outnumbered by their Indian counterparts. Compared with the 30,000 or more Pakistanis, India had roughly 60,000 men in
three divisions moving towards the city, with at least as many more in reserve near East Pakistan’s borders. The guerrillas were also poised outside
the city.
In the West, fighting in the Kashmir and Punjab areas continued with little significant movement by either side. In the southern sector on the
western front, the Indians were some thirty miles inside Pakistan’s Sind province. If the Indians pressed towards Hyderabad, Pakistan had to
divert forces from the north to prevent Karachi from being cut off from the rest of the country.
In Washington, Kissinger told Nixon’s foreign policy team on 10 December that “the president doesn’t want us to move in the United Nations
to arrange a surrender.” When one aide described the situation as “hopeless”, Kissinger insisted, “We don’t want to be the instrument pushing a
Pakistani surrender, when the Chinese are on their side.” He also advised Sisco to ensure Farland not to press Pakistan on this. “We don’t want
our ambassador to press Yahya to surrender.” Sisco assured that “there is no danger of that. Farland wouldn’t do that.”
The day the State Department received the ceasefire message from Dhaka, Kissinger told a meeting of senior officials that Washington should
call for a ceasefire in the West. “It must be clearly understood that our policy is to get a ceasefire in the West. We’ll make a treaty, if necessary.”
Sisco: “Let’s tell Yahya in a message that this is what we plan to do, and does he agree?”
Kissinger: “If there is a ceasefire now, we don’t have to worry about the territorial question in the West.”
Based on the decision the senior officials made during the meeting, the State Department sent a telegram to Farland asking him to verify the
authenticity of Farman’s message to the U.N. representative in Dhaka. Washington also asked Farland to ask Yahya whether he wanted a
ceasefire in the West as well. Farland replied, “You will be receiving flash instructions through regular channels concerning Pakistani proposal for
immediate ceasefire.”
During a conversation with Kissinger on 10 December, Nixon asked whether the carriers were moving towards the Bay of Bengal as he had
instructed. Kissinger assured him that “everything is moving.” Kissinger also reported, “Four Jordanian planes have already moved to Pakistan,
twenty-two more are coming. We’re talking to the Saudis. The Turks we’ve now found are willing to give five.”
Nixon then asked what Kissinger planned to discuss with the Chinese later in the day.
Kissinger: “I’m going to tell them what forces we’re moving.”
Nixon: “Could you say it would be very helpful if they could move some forces, or threaten to move some forces?”
Kissinger: “Absolutely.”
Nixon: “They’ve got to threaten or they’ve got to move, one of the two. You know what I mean?
Kissinger replied: “Yeah.”

