recently, in 2009, Khar revealed that the Bengali leader worried the military would kill him. Mujib had even asked Khar to convey to Bhutto that
he, too, would be killed by the military.
Yahya denied he ever wanted to kill Mujib. During his house arrest under Bhutto, the general maintained a personal journal. He wrote in the
journal before his death in 1980 that Bhutto had wanted Mujib hanged. Yahya also wrote that before he left for Iran in October 1971 to attend the
2500th anniversary of Iran’s monarchy, Bhutto had told him to wind up the military court’s proceedings to quickly finish off Mujib.
“I told him that until the proceedings of the court are finalized I cannot make a decision. He said that in Iran all sorts of pressures would be
brought against me by heads of state to let off Mujib, so I must act at once and hang him,” the general claimed.
Yahya’s claims could not be dismissed entirely, because with Mujib alive, Bhutto could not be sure that the power he had craved so badly
would actually come to him. It was clearly in his interest to have Yahya hang the Bengali leader to clear the way for the fulfillment of his long-held
ambition to get to the top power rung.
Yahya also claimed that he told Bhutto before handing over power that the court proceedings had been completed, but were being reviewed by
the Law Ministry and so he could not take a final decision.
“The way he told the nation that I had ordered the execution of Mujib and that he had saved him! Lies! Lies! Lies! But then what else could be
expected from a master liar? It can be checked up with the proceedings of the military court and the dates and timings of the case, which was
being processed by the central government offices. The funny thing was that [the] good Mujib believed him when he told him that Yahya wanted to
hang him but Bhutto saved him,” Yahya scribbled in his journal.
In an interview with Newsweek magazine in January 1972 after his triumphant return to Bangladesh, Mujib said Yahya wanted to execute him
the day East Pakistan fell, but Bhutto saved him by persuading the general that it would jeopardize the lives of the Pakistani war prisoners in India.
Despite Bhutto’s efforts, there was a move to kill him in jail, Mujib told Newsweek . But Bhutto “smuggled him out in the middle of the night and
kept him in his house and other hideouts until his release.”
Mujib’s comments were possibly based on the misleading information given to him by Bhutto, because the latter was in New York when East
Pakistan fell. While Niazi was negotiating the surrender, Bhutto worked on a U.N. resolution calling for a political settlement with the Awami
League under one Pakistan. In fact, Bhutto told Farland that after taking over on 20 December 1971, he had Mujib released from prison and
ordered him to be housed in a bungalow on his way to Rawalpindi. Bhutto first met Mujib on 23 December, according to an interview Bhutto had
given to Kuldip Nayar, an Indian newspaper columnist.
Mujib, according to Altaf Gauhar, Ayub Khan’s all-powerful information secretary who later became a journalist, was kept in Sihala Rest
House near Rawalpindi. As a prisoner during Bhutto’s rule, Gauhar was kept in the same room where Mujib had stayed. Gauhar was arrested for
criticizing the military action under the Yahya regime in an article in the Dawn newspaper.
“My jailer, Abdul Rahman, who was a senior superintendent of police, was good enough to inform me that this was the room in which Mujibur
Rahman was kept till he was released by Bhutto,” Gauhar later wrote in an article in Gauhar.com. “You will be sleeping in his bed and using his
quilt. The jailer ‘took me outside to show me the shells of peanuts which Mujib used to eat. As time passes one gets used to one’s jailer. One day
Abdul Rahman told me that Mujib nearly went mad and started banging his head against the wall of the room. ‘I want to see Yahya Khan,’ he kept
shouting. ‘I can stop the massacre that is going on in Dhaka.’ Abdul Rahman conveyed this to General Pirzada, but Mujib was not allowed access
to the president.”
Bhutto never admitted having any discussion with Yahya regarding Mujib’s trial on the day he took over. He said Yahya handed over power to
him after a short meeting upon his return from attending the U.N. Security Council session in New York.
Even if Bhutto wanted Mujib’s death during the war, his thinking changed after he assumed power. Concerned about the Pakistani soldiers held
in captivity in India, Bhutto believed that if he hanged Mujib, he would infuriate the Bengalis with serious consequences. Moreover, even after
Bangladesh became independent, he nurtured a dream of an accommodation with the Bengalis and requested Nixon to delay Bangladesh’s
recognition to allow him time to unsuccessfully try to reach an understanding with Mujib. He once told the Americans that he would exchange
Mujib for the war prisoners.
After the war, the Nixon administration claimed that its quiet diplomacy succeeded in saving Mujib’s life. Peter Constable, country director for
Pakistan and India at the State Department during the war, told Congress in 1972 that the administration successfully intervened to save Mujib. “I
should also note here that as part of efforts for a political accommodation, the United States sought and received from President Yahya,
assurances that Sheikh Mujibur Rahman would not be executed. Those assurances were honored, and following the emergence of an independent
Bangladesh, Pakistan’s new president, Mr. Bhutto, released Sheikh Mujib and allowed him to return to Dacca,” Constable said in his testimony
before the Fraser subcommittee.

10 
Moshtaque-U.S. Secret Talks:
What Really Happened?
n 13 April 1971, an Awami League representative met with the British deputy high commissioner in Kolkata. In a report to the State
Department the same day, the U.S. Consulate General in Kolkata said the Awami representative indicated that Tajuddin Ahmed, prime
minister of the Bangladesh government-in-exile, wanted to meet with U.S. and British diplomats.
The State Department, unsure of Tajuddin’s bona fides, asked the U.S. Consulate General in Dhaka to verify his leadership role. The consulate
confirmed Ahmed’s key position in the Awami League and said he would probably emerge as the political head of the Bengali resistance
movement.
Although the British officials agreed to meet with Tajuddin, the State Department instructed the consulate general in Kolkata to decline to do the
same. Washington felt that such a meeting could have implications regarding Bangladesh’s recognition as an independent country. The department,
however, left the door open for future meetings with Ahmed or other representatives of the Awami League, the dominant Bengali political
organisation.
Despite some rethinking of its initial posture, the Nixon administration remained firm on its policy not to deal with the Bengalis lest such a step
antagonize Pakistan. On 7 May, General Alexander Haig, the deputy national security adviser, sent a note to Irwin, reiterating an earlier instruction
from the president to give Pakistan a free hand in deciding the East Pakistan issue.
Nixon knew that only greater autonomy would restore normalcy in East Pakistan in the long run, still he preferred “to see the West Pakistanis
reach that conclusion, if it is valid, for themselves,” the note said. The U.S. position for now, therefore, should allow Yahya time to follow through
his efforts to work out his own arrangements. Based on this rigidity, the U.S. Consulate General in Kolkata turned down the request to meet with
Tajuddin Ahmed.
Analyzing the Bangladesh leaders’ move, Harold Saunders, member of the National Security Council staff, felt confused about what motivated
them to approach the consulate. In a memo, he told Kissinger: “As you know, Bangladesh representatives in India have recently sought out and
made contact with middle-ranking U.S. officials in New Delhi and Calcutta concerning a settlement with the West Pakistanis. It is not at all clear,
however, what they are really fishing for. The approach in Calcutta, allegedly reflecting the Bangladesh foreign minister’s wishes, was along the
lines of a settlement on the basis of something less than full independence, while the approach by the foreign secretary in New Delhi was based on
the opposite outcome of total independence.”
Mahbubul Alam Chashi, Bangladesh’s war-time foreign secretary, had separately asked the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi for help to reach a
peaceful resolution with Yahya Khan.
Meanwhile, the State Department told the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan on 22 June that it had received a document addressed to Nixon and
datelined, “Mujibnagar,” 24 April 1971, seeking immediate American recognition of the “sovereign independent People’s Republic of
Bangladesh”.
Syed Nazrul Islam, acting president, and Khandakar Moshtaque Ahmed, foreign minister, signed the document. It was sent via regular
international air mail from West Berlin, Germany, postmarked 26 May 1971, with no return address.
The department raised questions about the method of transmittal, but concluded that if the document was indeed genuine, then “it is the first
formal request from the officials of the Bangladesh movement for” U.S. recognition and “has sensitive political implications”.
This document made “it difficult for us to continue to take the public line that we have never received any request for recognition” from
Bangladesh, the department told its diplomats in South Asia. Still, it decided not to acknowledge its receipt, but to merely record it with the
Records Services Division that routinely logs all communications received by the State Department.
Kolkata Conspiracy
Moshtaque Ahmed, an admittedly pro-Western and right-wing politician, unequivocally favored strong ties with the United States. He opposed
communists, as did a majority of the top Awami League leaders. Yet he was singled out as the man who hatched the conspiracy in Kolkata to
seek a compromise with Yahya, excluding Sheikh Mujib, a story that gained wide circulation in Bangladesh soon after the war.
A.Z.M Haider, who was then working for the now-defunct Eastern News Agency, a wire service in Dhaka, once narrated the story, quoting a
book, After the dark night: Problems of Sheikh Mujib, by S.M. Ali, a Bengali journalist. Haider bought the book in New Delhi when he went
to cover the Simla Agreement and presented it to Mujib, with whom he had a very cordial relationship. Suspecting Mujib might never finish the
book, Haider underlined several lines for him to read before giving it to him. Mujib read the lines and then commented, “Hmmm, I know
everything.”
Those lines read thus: “Khandakar Moshtaque Ahmed, the foreign minister of the provisional revolutionary government of Bangladesh, sent a
message to the State Department through the U.S. Consulate General in Calcutta for a compromise with Yahya Khan within the framework of one
Pakistan minus Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. That message was intercepted by the Indian intelligence and passed on to Mrs. Gandhi. Mrs Gandhi, in
turn, passed it on to Tajuddin Ahmed, the prime minister of the provisional revolutionary government of Bangladesh. Upon receipt of the message,
Tajuddin Ahmed became furious and put Khandakar Moshtaque Ahmed under house arrest in Calcutta.”
In fact, the contacts with the Americans were initiated not by Moshtaque, but by Kazi Zahirul Qaiyum, an Awami League parliament member
from Comilla, who claimed he represented Moshtaque. On July 31, Qaiyum told a political officer at the consulate general in Kolkata the Awami

League leaders feared that extremist elements would take over the Bangladesh movement if guerrilla war lasted too long. So, they were interested
in a political settlement and were prepared to back away from their demand for total independence. Qaiyum proposed a meeting between the
Awami League, Pakistan, the United States and India to strike a deal with Yahya. He stipulated that Mujib’s participation in the negotiations was a
prerequisite.
Entire Awami League Wants Compromise With Yahya
According to Qaiyum’s statements, it was not just Moshtaque, but the entire Awami League leadership, including Syed Nazrul Islam, that wanted
a political deal with Yahya Khan.
Qaiyum’s meeting with the Americans was initiated by an unnamed Awami League representative who went to the consulate on 30 July 1971,
to request an appointment for Qaiyum with the consul general. When told that was impossible, he said Qaiyum would meet with any other available
officer.
During the meeting, Qaiyum gave the Awami League movement’s background up through the elections and 25 March events. Noting the
Awami League was openly pro-Indian and pro-American, he said his party’s contact with the Americans had been lost and that Moshtaque had
selected him to attempt to re-establish it.
Moshtaque had also instructed Chashi some time earlier to contact the Americans, but he was uncertain how best to go about it. Qaiyum gave
no indication to the political officer that he knew about Chashi’s approach to the U.S. ambassador in New Delhi. He said Moshtaque wanted to
meet with the U.S. government officials, but such a meeting must be handled discreetly, preferably without India’s knowledge.
Qaiyum, who had attended an early July meeting of the Awami League representatives near Siliguri, said a vast majority of them believed that
only the United States could save the East Bengal situation. Despite the 10 April independence proclamation, which was reaffirmed at the early
July meeting, the Awami League leaders still wanted a political settlement with West Pakistan, he said. He said the war would not solve the
problem; no one could foresee ultimate ramifications of an Indo-Pak conflict. From his personal experience, he noted that even the brief 1965 war
had caused an enormous setback on his Comilla business interest.
Qaiyum reiterated the familiar contention that the leftists would take over a prolonged guerrilla struggle. The communists had only one percent
support in East Bengal, but they were working frantically to infiltrate the liberation movement. Qaiyum cautioned that if the repression and
sufferings of the Bengalis continued, young men, who were joining the Mukti Bahini, would be won over by the communists.
When the political officer asked about Bangladesh’s plans, Qaiyum said Tajuddin Ahmed was at a loss as to what to do. Seizing and holding
liberated territory in East Bengal was not feasible because it required two fully trained and equipped army divisions. Rather, he thought the Mukti
Bahini would continue guerrilla warfare in an effort to cripple West Pakistan’s economy and will. He said the Awami League had some friends in
West Pakistan who might eventually influence the situation to the party’s advantage. Pakistan might be compelled to change its policy towards East
Bengal in six months. Qaiyum feared, however, that West Pakistan would get enough foreign aid to enable it to continue much longer on its present
course, thus virtually ensuring an eventual takeover of East Bengal by the extremists.
He hoped America would not provide further military and economic assistance to West Pakistan, but expressed understanding and approval of
U.S. efforts to maintain a dialogue with Yahya. He suggested that the best way – and perhaps the only one – to solve the impasse was to have
Nixon, Yahya, Gandhi and Mujib hold a summit similar to the Tashkent conference.
He realized that much work would be required to organize such a meeting, but felt that there were men of goodwill available on all sides to do
such kind of work. The Awami League, he said, would be willing to retreat considerably from positions taken since March 1971. For example, he
foresaw the possibility of a settlement allowing portions of the Pakistan army to remain in East Bengal, supplemented by U.N. forces, to protect
non-Bengali interests. The acceptable Pakistan army units would be the five or six East Bengal Regiment battalions that were then stationed in
West Pakistan, plus one or two Baluch and one or two Pathan battalions.
The political officer told Qaiyum, “We would, of course, report the meeting, but did not encourage him to expect any substantive response.”
Qaiyum indicated he would call again the following week.
While the consulate general did not name the officer in the cable, the Foreign Service List showed George B. Griffin was a political officer in
Kolkata at that time, in 1971. Griffin was refused an entry visa by the Indian government in July 1981 to take up his post as a political counselor at
the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi. America accused India of making the decision based on Soviet “disinformation,” but P.V. Narasimha Rao, then
external affairs minister, dismissed the charge, saying it was decided independently and “was in no way prompted by a third country”.
The consulate general reported to Washington on 1 August that Qaiyum impressed the officer as “a sober, responsible man, and we have no
reason to doubt his bona fides. We are struck by moderation of his views as contrasted with the strident tone of the ‘official’ Bangladesh
propaganda. We think it is plausible that the Awami League leadership, looking ahead to grim alternatives that will face them if the present chaotic
situation continues, are seriously considering a compromise settlement and are trying to establish contact with the U.S. government with this in
mind. Although Qaiyum claims his sentiments represent a consensus of the elected Awami League leadership, we believe it is important to
determine whether, in fact, the top leaders were equally moderately inclined,” the mission commented.
On 7 August, Qaiyum met again with the political officer at the consulate. He reaffirmed he had contacted the U.S. mission under Moshtaque’s
specific instructions. Moshtaque, however, never mentioned Qaiyum when he met with the political officer in late September at the Bangladesh
High Commission.
During his meeting, Qaiyum emphasized two points: only the United States could successfully arrange a settlement, and that Mujib must be a
party to such a settlement. If Yahya executed Mujib, he stressed, prospects for a compromise “will be zero”. He added that the other Awami
League leaders, including the cabinet members, had “no authority, no control over the masses” and would be unable to negotiate a deal.
On the other hand, he continued, if Mujib struck a deal the Bengalis would accept it, even it meant a return to the status quo ante. The refugees
would go home under any pact Mujib approved. For this reason, Qaiyum asked that the U.S. government do everything in its power to ensure
Mujib’s safety. He told the diplomat America was following the correct policy by allowing limited arms shipments to Pakistan, as this would make
it easier for Washington to approach Pakistan on the political settlement issue.

Qaiyum also told the diplomat that the Awami League leaders believed a war could break out, perhaps in the following fifteen to twenty days,
which would spell an “enormous disaster” for everyone on the subcontinent. There were rumors that India might soon recognize Bangladesh. Such
a move would sharpen the Indo-Pak confrontation, reduce prospects for a political solution, and make war more likely. If the war came, the
Soviet Union – rather than the United States – was likely to lead the settlement talks, he predicted, adding that it would be to the Awami League’s
disadvantage.
Qaiyum requested that Washington act quickly. The United States could judge exactly how to initiate the talks. He recommended that America
first convey to Pakistan the Awami League’s desire for a compromise through either Pakistan’s ambassador in Washington or the U.S. Embassy in
Islamabad.
He authorized the political officer to disclose to Pakistan the details of his conversation. He said he personally would go to West Pakistan for
talks and Moshtaque would, too, provided the ground had been prepared and they had assurances of safe conduct. Moshtaque also wanted to
confer with the U.S. officials, but did not know how best to arrange such talks.
Qaiyum said the Mukti Bahini was increasingly becoming a powerful military force. He said Bangladesh had developed a two-pronged military
strategy. It intended to build the Mukti Bahini as a “conventional” force of two divisions from the existing one, consisting of ten battalions of 1200
men each. When the second division was trained and equipped, the soldiers would use their conventional forces to seize and hold a portion of East
Bengal. Meanwhile, the fighters would continue guerrilla-warfare tactics throughout the province. Qaiyum said India had 500 Bengalis in military
schools at Dehra Dun and in Rajasthan, who would be assigned to the “conventional” forces upon completion of their training.
India, he said, was in the process of providing the conventional divisions with modern equipment, including anti-aircraft guns. The guerrilla
fighters were given shorter training at camps near the border. In the long run, he predicted, the Awami League could achieve a military victory.
The U.S. consul general in Kolkata, Herbert Gordon, summed up the conversations in a telegram to the State Department on 7 August. Qaiyum
told the political officer the Awami League leadership was unanimous in their desire for a compromise settlement with Pakistan. Gordon reported
that, to the best of his knowledge, Qaiyum was the only Awami League contact with the U.S. government thus far.
Gordon saw no reason to doubt Qaiyum’s bona fides, but Washington remained skeptical. The State Department asked the U.S. Consulate
General in Dhaka to verify Qaiyum’s position in the Awami League. The Dhaka mission reported he was not prominent in the leadership but was
probably Moshtaque’s confidant and a bona fide representative.
When the Americans sought to reconfirm Qaiyum’s compromise plan, they got an entirely different picture from Chashi. On August 8, when the
political counselor at the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi met with the Bangladesh foreign secretary, he contradicted Qaiyum. Chashi said, “The goal
of the movement was total independence.” He wanted to talk with Ambassador Kenneth Keating about it, but settled for the counselor after being
told that Keating’s official position precluded him from seeing a Bangladesh representative. Chashi urged America to support total independence
rather than try to hammer out a deal with Yahya under one Pakistan, as Qaiyum stipulated. Why did Chashi contradict Qaiyum? Moshtaque
possibly wanted to test how America – and Yahya – would react to diverse formulations.
On 9 August the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan weighed in on Qaiyum’s approach. It concluded that even if the initiative was legitimate and
represented the Bangladesh leadership’s views, Yahya was unlikely to accept it. Furthermore, the embassy saw a hidden risk to the relations
between the United States and Pakistan in becoming involved as a conduit for a proposal such as that put forward by Qaiyum. Still, in the interest
of longer-term relations with Bangladesh, the embassy judged the risk was worth taking.
In Washington, the issue of contacts with the Bangladesh representatives came up on 11 August, when Nixon addressed some members of the
Senior Review Group, including Kissinger, Irwin, Moorer, Cushman, Williams, Sisco and Saunders.
Kissinger opposed the idea of asking Yahya to deal with the Awami Leaguers. He said that asking Yahya to deal with the Awami Leaguers was
“like asking Abraham Lincoln to deal with Jefferson Davis,” a reference to the confederate president during the American Civil War. Kissinger said
Yahya was “not the brightest man in the world,” but asking him to deal directly with the Awami League would be hard to do.
Nixon agreed: “We can’t ask Yahya to do that. We can’t allow India to dictate the political future of East Pakistan.” He said the West
Pakistanis probably could not dictate the political future of East Pakistan, either. But Farland could talk privately with Yahya if the United States
could come up with concrete suggestions, the president said.
Kissinger said Yahya would listen if the point were “hooked to” a refugee resettlement proposal. Nixon responded that Williams, who had just
been named the U.S. representative to coordinate American relief efforts in East Pakistan, could give Yahya an opportunity to “do something
political in the name of humanitarian relief”.
The president then instructed Irwin and Sisco: “Tell your people that it isn’t going to help for them to publicly take a stand on the political issue.
Our people have got to stay neutral on the question of political accommodation in public. Privately, we can tell President Yahya that he should not
shoot Mujib.”
Irwin pointed out that the degree to which Yahya could be moved towards a political accommodation would increase the ease of moving
towards a successful relief program: “We could move behind the scenes in doing this.” Nixon replied that the United States did not care “who runs
the place out there,” a reference to East Pakistan. “We can’t answer that problem.”
Irwin said the issue of dealing with the Awami League had been discussed with Rogers. “We have had reports in recent days of the possibility
that some Awami League leaders in Calcutta want to negotiate with Yahya on the basis of giving up their claim for the independence of East
Pakistan. The question being discussed is whether Ambassador Farland could talk to Yahya just suggesting that if the Awami League is serious
about withdrawing its claim of independence Yahya might consider talking with them.”
Nixon said Farland was the man on the spot. Hence he should not be ordered to say certain things to Yahya. He suggested checking any ideas
with Farland. “We don’t have to give him the final say because we might come up with some good ideas here, but we ought to check with him,”
the president added.
On 12 August, the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad warned that Pakistan was very sensitive about contacts between the U.S. officials and the
Bangladesh representatives. The embassy advised the State Department to keep such contacts at a low level and as unofficial as possible.
The next day, Saunders asked Kissinger’s clearance to send a cable to the New Delhi and Kolkata posts, advising them about making contacts
with the Awami Leaguers. He said it remained unclear what the Bangladesh representatives were “really fishing for”. He noted Qaiyum’s and

Chashi’s different proposals. Qaiyum’s wishes were “along the lines of a settlement on the basis of something less than independence,” but
Chashi’s approach “was based on the opposite outcome of total independence.”
Saunders did not question why there were two approaches. He merely instructed the U.S. missions to make no commitments for future meetings
with the Bangladesh representatives, without first checking with the State Department. He advised to limit the scheduled meeting on 14 August
largely to another low-key listening exercise. He, however, authorized to probe the question of the Awami League’s willingness to negotiate for
less than independence.
“We must not get into a position where our contact with the Bangladesh representatives will be misunderstood or misread by them or
Islamabad,” the cable advised. Yet Saunders saw “some value in at least keeping our option open of informally talking with the Bangladesh types,
but we need control and we will need to square ourselves with Yahya before this goes further.”
The cable indicated the State Department would next consider informing Yahya of the contacts and passing along whatever seemed worthwhile.
On 14 August, Nixon wrote to Yahya to advise him to enlist the support of East Pakistan’s elected lawmakers for a national reconciliation – a
step he said “will be important in countering the corrosive threat of insurgency and restoring peace to your part of the world.” In addition, Nixon
said, continued progress on the political front would “mean that our own counsels of restraint in New Delhi will have a greater chance of success.”
He also disclosed that Farland and Williams would “share with you some additional thoughts on these subjects.”
Qaiyum met again with the consular officer on 14 August. He “reaffirmed that he was acting under instructions from his foreign minister who was
prepared to accept a negotiated settlement that provided for less than complete independence. Qaiyum emphasized that only Mujibur Rahman
could negotiate on behalf of the people of East Bengal, and only he could get them to accept a political settlement.”
The next meeting between the political officer and Qaiyum took place on 19 August. Qaiyum had sought an urgent meeting with the officer. He
told the diplomat he had briefed the Bangladesh cabinet on his contact with the United States. The cabinet had instructed him to convey the
message that it appreciated the U.S. efforts and was willing to accept any settlement negotiated by Sheikh Mujib. The cabinet requested advice
from U.S. experts on dealing with the problem.
“Although we have discouraged Awami League MNA [member of the National Assembly – Pakistan’s parliament] Qaiyum from initiating
contact with the consulate general, he sent a message to the political officer on
19 August urgently requesting a meeting the same night. He explained that he was leaving the next day for Agartala and had important information
to convey prior to his departure. As there was inadequate time to check with the department, the political officer agreed to see him to continue the
“listening session,” the consulate reported to the State Department on 20 August.
The cabinet met in the evening of 16 August. Present were Nazrul Islam, Tajuddin Ahmed, Moshtaque Ahmed, Finance Minister M. Mansoor
Ali, and Home Minister A.H.M. Kamaruzzaman. Qaiyum, the only other person present, was asked to describe his contact with the consulate
general. He was excused after being told the cabinet would consider what he said and later give further instructions.
On 17 August, Qaiyum met with Moshtaque who said the cabinet had several points it wished to convey to the Americans. Qaiyum had taken
notes during his conversation with Moshtaque, which he referred to while talking with the political officer. He told the officer about two hopeful
signs: the report that Mujib’s wife was taken to West Pakistan, and Hilaly’s public comment that Mujib would not be summarily shot.
Qaiyum explained Mujib’s wife had been a moderating influence on him. She was instrumental in persuading Mujib to remain in Dhaka on 25
March in the hope that he would be able to reach a compromise with Yahya, even at that late date. The cabinet suspected that the U.S.
government was somehow responsible for these encouraging events, Qaiyum explained, and thus wished to voice appreciation.
The cabinet decided that any agreement reached between Mujib and Yahya would be acceptable to it, provided it was arranged through the
“proper channels.” By the proper channels, Qaiyum meant the U.S. government’s participation in arrangements leading to a formal pact. The
cabinet opposed any deal negotiated via the Soviets such as the Tashkent Declaration.
The cabinet discussed the Indo-Soviet treaty and felt that it could lead to East Bengal being “swallowed by the Indo-Soviet combination.” It
asked for U.S. expert advice for the Bangladesh government to cope with this problem, in particular, as well as the overall East Bengal situation.
Qaiyum elaborated, saying Bangladesh had no experts and lacked adequate funds; he said it was not in a position to figure out how to tackle its
problems and was therefore soliciting America’s advice.
The cabinet wanted Moshtaque to visit the United States with a delegation of three or four other Bangladesh representatives to discuss ways of
solving their problems with U.S. officials. The Bangladesh leaders sought Washington’s cooperation in facilitating this trip. Qaiyum said the foreign
minister understood that he could not be received officially in America because of its potential to create diplomatic issues with Islamabad.
Qaiyum said there were both hardliners and softliners in West Pakistan. Both the groups wanted to keep Pakistan intact. Hardliners, such as
General Tikka Khan, thought that this could be done through a harsh but brief military repression. Softliners, represented by Admiral S.M. Ahsan
and General Yakub Khan, believed that Pakistan could remain together by making an honorable settlement with the Awami League. Now that the
hardliners had failed, there might be a scope for the softliners.
Qaiyum personally favored complete independence for East Bengal, but he and most other Bangladesh representatives would willingly accept
some sort of a confederation for East and West Pakistan. Explaining the cabinet position on this, he said the cabinet members “believe that Mujib’s
life is more valuable than independence.”
On the question of recognition, Qaiyum said, “Everyone understands that if India recognizes Bangladesh, everything is finished.” By this he
meant the recognition would permanently close the door on the possibility of a compromise solution. He also believed that if Mujib was executed,
the Bangladesh government as currently constituted would collapse. The cabinet had resisted efforts from the left-wing extremists to form a united
front. If Mujib died, it no longer would be able to resist this pressure, and the united front would be formed, which would be quickly dominated by
the leftists.
Qaiyum said he and the majority of his colleagues were anticommunists and rightists. They wanted to save themselves. The only way they could
envision doing this was to work out a compromise in the near future. Qaiyum said some day there must be a settlement. From the personal
standpoint of the Awami Leaguers, they hoped it would be the one in which the United States, rather than the Soviets, was involved.
The political officer told Qaiyum that he would report this conversation to Washington but the consulate general was not “authorized to enter
into any sort of ‘negotiations’ with him.” Qaiyum said he understood, but nevertheless said the cabinet appointed him on 16 August as the point of

contact with the U.S. government.
“We told Qaiyum, frankly, what we reported to the United States was at a considerable variance with the ‘hardline attitude’ openly taken by
other Bangladesh representatives. We suggest it might be useful if the Bangladesh government found additional ways of their desire for negotiated
settlement known,” the consulate reported to Washington.
Qaiyum replied he could get signatures of 375 MPAs and MNAs [members of provincial and national legislatures, respectively] on a statement
attesting to their agreement to seek a negotiated settlement. He also offered to have the foreign minister draw up a document explaining their
position and present it to the Americans.
When Qaiyum talked to the political officer in Kolkata, the U.S. relief coordinator for East Pakistan discussed the idea with Yahya in
Islamabad. During the meeting with Williams on 19 August, Yahya refused to deal with anyone under the Awami League banner. The next day,
Farland cabled Kissinger that Williams’ effort to persuade Yahya to reinstate the outlawed Awami League proved to be an “out and out
nonstarter”.
Still, America decided to persist. On 22 August, in a telegram cleared by Sisco, Irwin and Kissinger, Washington authorized the embassy in
Islamabad to inform Pakistan’s Foreign Secretary Sultan Khan about the contacts with the Awami League “on [the] off chance that the Qaiyum
proposals might provide a glimmer of hope for a negotiated political settlement”. The embassy was instructed to stress that the American officials
had just listened to Qaiyum, but formed no judgment on the value of his proposals. America was not seeking to be a mediator, but was willing to
help “as a friend”.
Two days later, Farland requested a private conversation with Yahya after a formal session on narcotic drugs issues with Ambassador David H.
Popper, who was stationed in Cyprus and fighting to combat drug abuse.Farland told the general that many Awami League legislators “were
seriously amenable to the acceptance of an agreement which would maintain the integrity and unity of Pakistan, within the general concept of the
so-called ‘six points,’ if such an agreement could be somehow reached between Mujibur and Yahya.”
“I told Yahya that in making mention of this I wanted him fully to understand that the U.S. government had taken no initiative whatsoever in
gathering this information nor was the U.S. government seeking to play a mediatory role between the government of Pakistan and the outlawed
Awami League,” Farland reported to Washington. “Conversely, I stated that the U.S. government had consistently maintained a diplomatic stance
of non-involvement and had in no way sought out or solicited contacts with the ‘Bangla Desh government’ representatives. However, I noted
Yahya’s many conversations with me during which he emphasized his hope for a return to normalcy and his additional hope that with such a climate
he could turn power back to the people. Since the U.S. government was now privy to this information, I thought that in the interests of the much-
sought-for peace, I should bring it to his attention.”
Yahya was pleased with the ambassador’s gesture.
“Yahya’s reaction was favorable and positive,” Farland wrote to Washington. “He was most happy that I had provided him with this type of
intelligence” and he felt that the United States had been correct in its political and diplomatic posture. Farland added, “Yahya hoped our officials,
with their customary care and exercise of discretion, would maintain appropriate contacts.”
Farland asked Yahya if he saw any major obstacle to a select Pakistan government members’ meeting, unpublicized and on neutral ground in a
foreign country, with key people for whom Qaiyum indicated he spoke. “Yahya replied he would favor such a development wholeheartedly, asking
that in case such a contingency developed, I keep closely in touch with him on this matter generally,” the envoy reported.
Farland then gave his interpretation of the developments, saying several forces were at play: (a) “At least some of the Bangladeshers are
realizing that their independence would be sorely limited by the interests of India; as such independence may be an illusion; and (b) Yahya may be
coming to the conclusion that his appetite wasn’t commensurate with the bite he took.” The second point referred to his unleashing the military on
the Bengalis. In any event, he added, the foregoing represented a glimmer of light amidst the encircling gloom and a hoped-for vindication of U.S.
policy vis-à-vis Pakistan.
On granting Moshtaque a visa to visit Washington, Farland told the State Department he opposed the idea. “To do so would almost inevitably
raise concerns here about our good faith in not encouraging the separatist movement,” the ambassador reasoned. The State Department had
sought the U.S. Embassy’s idea on the suggestion put forward by Qaiyum that Moshtaque be granted a visa to visit Washington to meet with the
U.S. officials there.
While Farland sounded upbeat, on 26 August the CIA gave a negative outlook for the secret talks.
“Although Yahya Khan says he would be agreeable to talks between the representatives of Islamabad and Bangladesh, for the purpose of
seeking a political rapprochement, such negotiations remain unlikely as there is no prospect for the release of the East Pakistan leader Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman,” the agency said in a report.
“Although he has reportedly decided against executing the East Pakistani leader, it is unlikely he would consider halting the trial and releasing
him. The Awami Leaguers, however, have consistently said that Mujib would have to participate in any final settlement, and they would probably
be reluctant to agree to any talks without prior assurance that his release would at least be a subject of discussion.”
Based on the CIA’s input, the State Department backtracked on the talks. On 31 August, it sent a telegram to the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan,
saying, “We do not, however, believe that the time has come for the United States to play any mediatory role.” The department added, “There
may be some merit in carrying out the present honest broker role one step further, i.e., by helping the two sides communicate with each other on
arrangements for a meeting on neutral territory for an exploratory session on the possibility of serious negotiation.”
Washington further advised Farland to verify Qaiyum’s bona fides; the best way to do that was to contact Moshtaque directly. “If he, in effect,
verifies the content of the approaches previously made by Qaiyum, we would then want to inform him that the substance of talks with Qaiyum had
been passed to President Yahya. We would also inform Moshtaque Ahmed that Yahya showed interest in a meeting of Pakistan government and
Bangladesh representatives.”
“Should reactions from both sides to a meeting prove favorable, we could then examine the question whether further U.S. role in providing the
communication link between them would be necessary or desirable,” the State Department advised.
Farland endorsed the State Department’s scenario, indicating he would put forward the suggestion in his meeting with Yahya on 4 September.
The department specifically told the consulate in Kolkata that if Farland received Yahya’s approval, the post should at the earliest opportunity

contact Moshtaque to arrange a meeting in a neutral country. If the subject of Moshtaque’s visa surfaced, Rogers advised the consulate to say the
request had been referred to Washington. He should be given no encouragement. If Moshtaque was out of India, the department told the consulate
to report to Washington his whereabouts at the soonest possible time.
When Farland met with Yahya on 4 September, he told him, “It might be useful to attempt to verify Qaiyum’s bona fides, and we thought the
best way to do that was through a direct contact with (Moshtaque).” If Moshtaque verified the validity of Qaiyum’s approaches, Farland
continued, “We would propose to tell him that the substance of Qaiyum’s talks with us had been passed to Yahya, who had shown interest in a
possible meeting (of the two sides).”
Yahya readily accepted Farland’s proposal and told the ambassador that Moshtaque was one of the true moderates among Mujib’s followers.
Yahya recalled that during his talks in Dhaka in March, Moshtaque had on one occasion voiced his concern that some of Mujib’s men were
adopting positions that were too radical.
Farland told Yahya the Americans would pass back to him Moshtaque’s reaction, particularly if he wanted to meet with the Pakistan
government officials. Yahya suggested such a meeting might take place in East Pakistan. Farland said Moshtaque had been thinking of going to
Britain, so London might be a better site. Yahya raised no objection. Farland advised Washington to instruct Kolkata to promptly contact
Moshtaque.
On 8 September, when the Senior Review Group met, Sisco disclosed that America was trying to persuade the Bangladesh leaders to seek a
political solution under one Pakistan. “We think the six points are within the ballpark. We sent the cable to the Bangladesh leaders at Yahya’s
request.”
In Kolkata, meanwhile, things took a sharp turn. When the consulate general tried to make an appointment with Moshtaque, it learned that the
Bangladesh cabinet’s position had hardened. It was now taking the position that only Mujib could deal with Pakistan. Thus the leaders in-exile
opposed talks at this stage.
As a precondition to open talks, the cabinet demanded two things of Yahya: (a) he must free Mujib and return him to East Bengal; and (b) he
must proclaim a general amnesty for all national and provincial lawmakers and others connected with the Bangladesh movement – essentially a
return to status quo ante 25 March. Qaiyum, nonetheless, promised to suggest to Moshtaque that he speak to the consulate officers.
Tajuddin Opposes Talks With Yahya
Qaiyum said the conditions had changed considerably since his last meeting with the political officer two weeks earlier. He said the cabinet met on
28 August to hear his report and discussed the feasibility of sending Moshtaque to America; it failed to reach a conclusion, however. All the
cabinet members approved the idea of negotiations with Pakistan, except for Tajuddin Ahmed.
“I believe he is turning leftist,” Qaiyum remarked.
Later that day, the cabinet began several meetings with D.P. Dhar, India’s foreign policy planning chairman. Dhar put intense pressure to form
an all-party advisory committee. The Awami Leaguers unanimously opposed the notion, pointing out the massive victory they scored in the
December elections.
Dhar, who was India’s ambassador to Moscow, was mostly interested in giving Moscow-oriented leftists, Muzaffar Ahmed of the National
Awami Party and Moni Singh of the Bangladesh Communist Party, a voice in Bangladesh affairs. He said “our friends – the Russians” insisted on
such participation in return for their continued support of both Bangladesh and India.
The impression left with the Bangladesh cabinet was that if they did not accede to the request, arms supply and other Indian support would
cease, Qaiyum observed. “When you are so heavily dependent on one friend,” he remarked, “you do what he asks.” Later, Qaiyum wondered
whether U.S. financial or military assistance might be available to Bangladesh. The U.S. diplomat indicated no optimism on the matter.
Dhar’s meeting with the Bangladesh leaders was followed by a visit from Kaul on 6 September, who apparently nailed down the bargain and
had it leaked to the press on 7 September. Qaiyum reported that he was visited three times by Aruna Asaf Ali, a leader of India’s Afro-Asian
Solidarity Committee. A top Soviet backer, Ali tried to persuade Qaiyum to support the inclusion of the leftists into the Bangladesh picture.
On 8 September 1971, several Indian newspapers carried stories about the formation of an all-party advisory committee, called the National
Liberation Front, whose members included the following: the entire cabinet; Syed Nazrul Islam; Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhasani, the pro-
Beijing National Awami Party leader; Muzaffar Ahmed, Moni Singh, Manoranjan Dhar, of the Pakistan National Congress; and Mukti Bahini
commander General MAG Osmany. Qaiyum told the consul that the panel was not yet formed, nor had its membership been decided.
After Dhar’s visit, Qaiyum went to Meghalaya, Mymensingh and Tripura, for meetings with Bangladesh MNAs and MPAs. At the meetings and
in separate discussions with “General” Khalid Musharraf, former East Bengal Regiment major and a Mukti Bahini Eastern Sector commander,
Qaiyum found a near-unanimous opinion that only Mujib could talk with Pakistan. They all agreed to accept any deal that Mujib might reach with
Yahya.
In the evening of 8 September, Qaiyum returned to Kolkata and reported to the cabinet his findings, except for the complaints that the
government was ineffectual. Qaiyum did not attend the cabinet discussions, and Moshtaque later told him, “Things have changed.” The cabinet
opposed holding talks while Mujib remained imprisoned
Qaiyum told the officer that as Mujib’s “close friend” he knew that Mujib did not want independence. He said Mujib had repeatedly told this to
the Pakistani leaders before 25 March and begged them to let the MNAs sit down to discuss the constitution rather than initiate rash military
moves that could destroy the nation.
“They didn’t listen,” he said sadly, “I still don’t understand them.”
Asked to outline the cabinet’s previous preconditions for negotiations, Qaiyum sketched four points: (a) free Mujib; (b) a settlement on the basis
of Mujib’s six points; (c) the Pakistani army’s departure from Bangladesh; and (d) Bangladesh’s security to be guaranteed by the U.N. security
force and not by the Pakistani army. He quickly added, however, that those conditions were no longer considered to be within the competence of
the cabinet to levy. The cabinet’s current position was a two-point demand, namely, free Mujib and return him to East Bengal to reduce tensions,
and grant a general amnesty to all MNAs, MPAs and others connected with the Bangladesh movement.

“Then we can sit down and talk,” he said. “The two people who are qualified to negotiate with the Pakistanis are the Sheikh and Kamal
Hossain, and they are both locked up in West Pakistan.”
Qaiyum repeated a scenario wherein Nixon, Yahya, Gandhi, Mujib and possibly Heath, would meet to settle the issue. “They could solve it in
half an hour,” he said, “but it will take us, alone, years of hard fighting.”
The political officer saw no real chance of the holding of such a summit, but wondered if a meeting between him and Moshtaque might help.
Qaiyum asked rhetorically what good such a meeting would do in the present circumstances, but then said he would put the question before
Moshtaque on 10 September and inform the consulate of his reaction. Qaiyum added he would suggest to Moshtaque that such a meeting might
help in securing Mujib’s release.
The officer said he was in no position to offer any hope that a meeting would provide any progress on that subject, but he would be happy to
hear any ideas Moshtaque might have. Beyond that, he said, all he could offer was to report Moshtaque’s remarks to Washington. Qaiyum
murmured, he would see what he could do, but warned that in any discussion with the U.S. officials, Moshtaque would take a “hardline” stance
and demand freedom for Mujib and complete independence for Bangladesh.
Commenting on the conversations with Qaiyum in August and September, the consulate general wrote to Washington: “In reviewing the record
of the past conversations with Qaiyum, it appears to us that the latest discussion has nearly brought us full circle. While it represents no advance
over the earliest known Bangladesh position, neither does it represent a basic retreat. It is clear that the Soviets or their Indian lieutenants have
taken advantage of the situation to attempt to move in to put their men on the ground in Bangladesh.”
On 15 September, the consulate general sent yet another dispatch to Washington about a meeting a day earlier between a political officer and
Qaiyum. Qaiyum told the officer that Moshtaque had discussed with his cabinet colleagues a proposed meeting between him and the political
officer. The cabinet questioned the meeting’s purpose, and Moshtaque asked Qaiyum to find out why the officer wanted to speak to him. The
officer replied he had been instructed by Washington to discuss the Bangladesh position directly with Moshtaque, and implied he might
subsequently have something to say to the foreign minister.
Qaiyum agreed on the importance of the meeting. If Moshtaque remained reluctant to meet, he added, he would approach Tajuddin Ahmed or
Nazrul Islam to take his place.
On 16 September, the officer met with Qaiyum again. He was told Moshtaque still questioned the need for a personal meeting and wanted to
know what would be discussed. The officer replied he intended to listen to anything Moshtaque would discuss.
Two days later, the State Department told the Kolkata mission that Qaiyum’s reluctance or inability to produce Moshtaque for the meeting
indicated “considerable cooling of Moshtaque’s initiative”. While there might be many reasons for this development, the mission should not seek to
lead the unwilling Bangladesh representatives into negotiation. Washington also dismissed Qaiyum’s alternative suggestion of meeting with Tajuddin
Ahmed or with Nazrul Islam, who were presumably not the instigators of Moshtaque’s initiative.
“If, however, he should on his own produce appointment with one or both, hold the option open and report the soonest so that” the State
Department could consider what use might be made of such contacts. “We do, however, see the point in continuing to seek a meeting with
Moshtaque if for no other reason than to verify whether Qaiyum’s reporting of Moshtaque’s earlier and current positions has been accurate,” Irwin
advised the consulate general.
The State Department also suggested that the post “continue to discreetly seek contact with Moshtaque via any appropriate channel available”.
On 20 September the consulate reported the Bangladesh leaders were divided over whether or not to meet with the U.S. officials. Qaiyum sent
word through a messenger that while Moshtaque and Tajuddin were not interested, Nazrul Islam was “keen” to meet. The State Department gave
the mission a green signal to meet with the acting president, at least to find out if Bangladesh had any interest in a negotiated settlement and if it had
what its demands were at this stage. The mission was also advised to let Nazrul Islam know that Washington had passed on to Yahya “word of
possible Bangladesh interest in negotiation and that the latter’s reaction was one of interest.”
A week after receiving this instruction, the consulate general indicated that it was “stymied” in its efforts to arrange a meeting with Nazrul Islam.
The only channel to the acting president was through Qaiyum. Qaiyum sent a message that Syed Nazrul was still keen to talk to a political officer
but was seeking permission from the Indian government to do so.
India Warns Nazrul On Talks With U.S.
In the afternoon of 23 September, Qaiyum met again with the political officer. He reported that India had learned about the secret contacts and
warned the acting president that talks with America could be a problematic matter. Ashok Ray of the External Affairs Ministry asked Nazrul Islam
on 21 September if the Bengalis were talking with the Americans. Nazrul gave an affirmative reply.
Ray then cautioned Nazrul Islam that the political officer was an “experienced and extremely clever diplomat,” who would attempt to manipulate
the acting president and Bangladesh policy. Ray said that while India had no objection to such meetings, he would suggest that if the Bengalis
wished to hold meetings, they should be arranged by India. New Delhi would advise them during those meetings because the Bengalis were “not
fully adept to hold discussion with sophisticated U.S. government representatives.” Ray implied that the Indian officials would accompany the
Bangladesh leaders at such talks.
Nazrul Islam told Ray that no cabinet minister had yet met any U.S. official and that he would have to consider the matter. Nazrul Islam and
Qaiyum later discussed Ray’s remarks at length. They decided the acting president would meet with the political officer at the earliest opportunity,
“whether Ray says so or not.”
Qaiyum and Nazrul blamed India for the current internal dissensions within the Bangladesh government. “We are fed up with this attempt to
control our actions,” Qaiyum told the political officer. He expressed the opinion that India wished to prolong the current situation. This caused the
Bangladesh government to worry, as it would help of Maulana Bhasani and his fellow leftists. Bhasani was attempting to “linger this situation” to
gain time to organize his followers and forces. Qaiyum and Nazrul Islam believed that an early solution of the Bangladesh problem was the only
way for the Awami League to maintain its leadership.
Qaiyum worked very hard to prevent a trip by Moshtaque to the U.N. General Assembly in New York, apparently because he did not want the

Bangladesh foreign minister to travel on an Indian passport. He told Tajuddin Ahmed that it would be an insult to the Bangladesh government to
have Moshtaque go to New York using an Indian passport, as other members of the delegation planned to do. He argued that it made no
difference if unimportant members of the delegation used Indian passports, but for the foreign minister of Bangladesh to do so would be considered
ludicrous in the eyes of the world community.
“We are not, and do not wish to be, a colony or state of India. We want to be independent,” declared Qaiyum.
When the diplomat asked what Qaiyum meant by “independent,” he replied he personally would not press for immediate independence for
Bangladesh. In his view, what was more important was that Sheikh Mujib be freed. Mujib could settle the internal Bangladesh dissension within
twenty-four hours and every Bengali would agree to any solution Mujib might reach, whether this meant independence, regional autonomy, or
some other arrangements, such as continued East Bengal’s association with West Pakistan. He added he believed Nazrul Islam had the same
views.
Hossain Ali Arranges Moshtaque-U.S. Parley
On 28 September Moshtaque met with the political officer in Kolkata for some ninety minutes. Prior to that, Moshtaque had been looking for a
way to contact the United States, but was unsure how. When Time magazine’s Dan Coggin interviewed him on 26 September, he asked the
journalist for advice on how to get in touch with Washington. Coggin suggested that he contact the U.S. consul general or a political officer.
Following Coggin’s advice, Moshtaque asked Bangladesh High Commissioner M. Hossain Ali to arrange a meeting. Ali called the political
counselor to ask if he wished to talk with the foreign minister. The officer replied he did, if the foreign minister wished to talk to him. Ali said
Moshtaque did, and scheduled an evening appointment. Ali, who had known the political officer through diplomatic circles, met him at the high
commission. Moshtaque arrived five minutes later. He introduced the officer to Moshtaque and then left the two alone for an hour of private talk.
He rejoined them for the last thirty minutes.
Moshtaque opened the conversation by asking the American for a precise outline of U.S. policy vis-à-vis Bangladesh. Moshtaque bluntly asked:
“Why are you killing us?” He blamed America for the East Pakistan events since 25 March because of Washington’s continued support for Yahya
Khan. He, nonetheless, said Bangladesh wanted close ties with the United States and hoped Washington would find it to be in its own interest to
help arrange peaceful independence for Bangladesh.
Moshtaque warned that the time was running out for America to step in and help avoid a leftist takeover of Bangladesh. He had no desire to talk
directly to Pakistan, he said, and made a request for the U.S. government to speak to Yahya for the Bangladesh government. He asked for an
official response to his requests as soon as possible and expressed a desire to discreetly maintain a direct channel with the political officer. He said
he assumed there would be no other channel, as he himself had not authorized any other. He knew, however, that other well-intentioned
Bangladesh leaders had contacted U.S. officials to find out the “mind of the Americans”, and might again do so.
When the officer asked what Bangladesh expected from Washington, Moshtaque replied, “Stop helping Yahya. Stop helping kill my innocent
people. You have practically forced my people into the lap of the extremists. What is our crime? You must put pressure on Yahya to stop. You
have minimized my population, one million of them are dead. Another nine million have been forced to flee to India and Burma, where they are not
wanted. You have done this with your arms, your money, your food, your transport, your medicines – all of which have been used by Yahya’s
troops against us. I don’t like to speak this way to a representative of my old friend, but you asked me what we expect from the great democratic
United States. I hope you don’t mind if I speak frankly. I have studied your policy. You are not weak. You can tell Yahya ‘don’t use our arms.’
Only you can do that.”
The officer replied he had not come to argue the U.S. policy with Moshtaque, because that would merely involve long wrangle and polemics.
Rather, he had come to hear the foreign minister’s views.
Moshtaque quickly agreed that propaganda arguments were useless, saying he was a practical and realistic man. He said he was neither a
communist nor a communist sympathizer. “I am a conscious anticommunist. That means I am a much more dedicated anticommunist than ordinary
anticommunists.” He said America could, by following its present policy, help the extremists win out in Bangladesh and deny all its democratic
victory. “It is the United States upon whom Yahya now leans. If you want to, you can make him see what is the right thing to do,” he said.
Moshtaque said Bangladesh was forced into accepting the communists on the consultative committee. The first notion was to form a war
council, which was quickly rejected by him and other leaders. “Next, they wanted to form a liberation front, which I also resisted as hard as I
could,” he said. But he was forced finally to accept the lowest common denominator: the consultative committee. It was only an advisory body, he
said, “but we will have to accept more in the next six months if you don’t intervene. We want your shoulder to lean on.”
At this point, the officer told Moshtaque the Americans were informed by a Bangladesh source that the Awami League leaders, specifically
Moshtaque, had wanted to speak to the U.S. officials in early August and had expressed a desire to talk to Pakistan, too.
The political officer’s remarks caused Moshtaque to pause for a moment and think. After pondering, he replied that he had always wished to
talk to the United States, “our great friends” in hopes that it was still not too late to seek U.S. assistance. “We wanted you to help us preserve our
democratic structure.” He said the Bangladesh government wanted American protection from the Pakistanis and “others,” as well as help in
ensuring that “no one interferes in our affairs.”
Moshtaque told the American that he saw no value in his talking to Pakistan. “I know Yahya. I know him to be a good man and I think he
knows that I am a good man, but only you can influence him. I never thought he would do this. He will not listen to me now,” Moshtaque said. He
said Yahya might not be his own man right now. He suspected Yahya might be somewhat circumscribed by certain people and events.
Moshtaque asked the United States to make a fresh effort to push Pakistan to release Mujib. He then presented the officer with a list of
Bangladesh desires. He did not wish to be held accountable for his precise wording because he was inexperienced in diplomacy and must later
obtain the cabinet approval for the exact formulation. His list included three principal demands: (a) full independence for Bangladesh; (b) release of
Sheikh Mujib; and (c) after independence, massive long-term economic assistance from America to help reconstruct the nation.
He said that if it turns out to be impossible to reach a peaceful settlement, the Bangladesh government would pursue war for independence until
it won, “despite your guns.” He realized the Bangladesh movement might get radicalized in such an eventuality. He said he knew that the Soviets
were trying to take over, but added the Bangladesh government had no other choice. At this juncture, Moshtaque called in Hossain Ali and asked

him to note down the list of Bangladesh’s “desires” he had given to the officer and read them back “so that we understand each other fully”.
To cement his contacts with the Americans, Moshtaque wanted to go to the U.N. General Assembly session in New York. He had hoped to
meet Rogers at the session, but as it turned out, he told the envoy, the U.S. government prevented Rogers from going.
When the officer asked to elaborate since he had heard of no visa application from the foreign minister, Moshtaque said he had been told
Washington would find his presence in New York highly embarrassing. Since he did not wish to embarrass his “old and great friend,” he had
decided not to go.
Moshtaque said the Bangladesh High Commission was the most feasible location for meeting from all standpoints, because the Indians “can’t
look over our shoulders.” The officer’s arrival at the Bangladeshi High Commission, as well as his departure later, were handled discreetly. He was
met at the gate by Hossain Ali and gave his name to no one else. In parting, Moshtaque tightly grasped the officer’s hands with both of his and
said, “I hope we meet again soon. I hope the United States will come to our aid.”
Moshtaque impressed the U.S. diplomat as intelligent, clever, pragmatic, basically friendly, and reasonably articulate. He certainly did not
appear as hazy as reported by British MP Peter Shore, but he was admittedly handicapped by his inexperience in foreign affairs. He relied heavily
on his staff of professional foreign service officers. Moshtaque never admitted using Qaiyum or Chashi as the channel to the U.S. government,
though his comments implied he had sought the use of both those sources, and perhaps others, to gather knowledge about U.S. intentions and
policies. His use of those sources was an attempt to steer clear of the Indians and the Soviets. Moshtaque’s statement and list of demands
indicated that he wanted Washington to be involved in the settlement effort and post-settlement problems, rather than as a channel to Yahya. He
gave no indication that he wanted to talk with Yahya, according to a report the U.S. consulate general sent to Washington.
Despite Moshtaque’s expressed willingness to meet with Yahya, the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad continued to support a U.S. role in promoting
contacts between Bangladesh leaders and Pakistan. But it opposed Washington’s involvement as a mediator. It also opposed passing on to Yahya
the objectives put forward by Moshtaque.
On 3 October Qaiyum told the officer that the Mukti Bahini had planned to dispatch 40,000 to 60,000 men into East Pakistan before
November. He met with the officer to pass on a message from Syed Nazrul Islam seeking a rapid response from the United States to Moshtaque’s
28 September démarche.
He said Nazrul Islam was in control of the Bangladesh government, but Islam insisted that only Sheikh Mujib could negotiate on behalf of
Bangladesh. Qaiyum said the Bangladesh officials needed permission from India to talk with Pakistan. Any claim to the contrary by India was “a
lie,” Qaiyum added.
In Washington, the State Department decided to rebuff Moshtaque’s idea that America talk with Yahya for Bangladesh. It instructed the U.S.
mission in Kolkata to meet with Moshtaque to report back the U.S. views and tell him that Washington had no desire to place itself between
Pakistan and Bangladesh. America wanted the Bangladesh leaders to present their views directly to Pakistan to explore the possibility of a
negotiated settlement.
The department also told the embassy in Pakistan not to engage in any deeper discussions with Yahya about the Bangladesh leaders, but rather,
to advise Yahya to establish contacts with the Bangladesh representatives in New York, London and elsewhere.
By September end, the Bengalis had hardened their attitude on the talks with Pakistan. Qaiyum’s initial idea was thrown out, and they wanted
nothing short of total independence. On 30 September, Nixon and Kissinger met at the White House with British Foreign Secretary Sir Alec
Douglas-Home and British Ambassador Earl of Cromer. Douglas-Home noted the importance of making contact with the Bangladesh leaders for
a political settlement.
Kissinger responded: “We have been in touch with the Bangladesh people in Calcutta. And, we were trying to set up a meeting between the
Bangladesh people and the West Pakistanis outside of India. And we had Yahya’s agreement to that. And, the Indians have now totally thwarted
it. They made it hard for these people to deal with us. They’re forcing them to check everything with them. They are padding demands, which are
totally incapable of fulfillment.”
Nixon also felt that the Indians were preventing a settlement: “They’re playing a game here that I think is wrong. I think they’re deliberately
trying to make it insoluble.”
Later in the conversation, Kissinger said: “The Bangladesh people are actually quite eager to talk. At first, they were willing to settle for
autonomy, and as we all know autonomy would produce independence. There is no other way it can go. Now the Indians have escalated their
demand into total independence immediately.” He said Yahya would never agree to such a demand. “There has to be a face-saving formula and a
transition period.”
On 7 October, Kissinger held a Washington Special Action Group session. When he asked Johnson to discuss East Pakistan’s situation, the
under secretary said it was “a mess.” He, however, reported one new development: The Shah of Iran had met with Yahya “and pressed him
strongly to reach a political settlement.”
Johnson also told the group that “we have been in touch with the Bangladesh people and have tried to encourage the development of a dialogue
between Bangladesh and West Pakistan, but they are insisting on complete and unconditional independence immediately.”
Kissinger: “You mean that’s their starting point.”
Johnson: “Yes, their initial position. Mujibur is the key. If Yahya would release Mujibur and make a deal with him . . .”
Kissinger cut him off: “I think that’s inconceivable! Unless Yahya’s personality has changed 100 percent since I saw him in July.”
Johnson: “I agree that it’s unlikely, but we have had some indications.”
Van Hollen disclosed that Farland had recently proposed to Yahya to make a deal with Mujib and what was “interesting that Yahya did not
take the usual negative attitude,” an indication that the Pakistanis could be planning to reach an agreement with Mujib. “But this is highly
speculative, and I think we must assume the contrary until we get more evidence.”
The State Department concluded on 7 October that Yahya’s political steps, which excluded the Awami League, failed to provide a basis of a
settlement acceptable to the Bengalis. To create a political evolution, it suggested that “our next step should be designed to promote the beginning
of a dialogue between the government of Pakistan and the Bangladesh leadership.” It determined it could use two possible channels: India and
Bangladesh representatives in Kolkata and elsewhere. The problem was that the Bangladesh leaders only wanted independence and Mujib’s

