16 
Gandhi Goes to Washington
n 11 October, Jha met with Kissinger to discuss Gandhi’s visit to Washington. Before discussing serious matters, Kissinger told the Indian
ambassador that a U.S. military plane would be provided to bring Gandhi to the Andrews Air Force Base from New York, as Jha had
earlier requested.
When the two turned to serious issues, Jha quickly blurted out a question in an effort to sway the administration from its pro-Pakistan position.
He asked what interest America had in keeping East Bengal a part of Pakistan.
Kissinger replied that Jha had misunderstood U.S. policy. “We had no interest in keeping East Bengal a part of Pakistan,” Kissinger began.
“We did have an interest in preventing an outbreak of war and preventing that issue from turning into an international conflict. As for the rest, we
would not take any active position one way or another.”
Jha pointed out that India was facing tremendous pressures.
Kissinger shot back, saying some of those pressures were self-generated.
Jha, unsurprisingly, blamed Haksar and Kaul for India’s trouble with America. Haksar, he said, was on his way out; maybe Kaul, too. But it
was difficult to tell who would replace him and whether the replacement would be any better. “If we played our hand intelligently,” Jha said, “it
>would even turn out that India might now look for a compensating move to take towards the United States.”
Kissinger promised to reciprocate such gestures in kind, but sounded a note of caution: “We would certainly be ready, but it was important for
India not to be playing with the president. If it turned out that some of our reports were correct, that India was using the visit to the president to
cover an imminent attack on Pakistan, our relations would not recover so soon.”
As Gandhi’s trip approached, the White House started receiving word about India’s concerns that Nixon might mistreat the prime minister. On
29 September Kissinger received a phone call from the former U.S. ambassador to India, John Kenneth Galbraith. He had recently met with
Gandhi, who expressed to him her anxiety about the kind of reception she would receive in Washington. Galbraith said that one of her assistants
told him that “she was afraid of some brush-off at the White House, which would be very damaging.” Galbraith urged that Nixon send a personal
note “saying he is looking forward to her visit, getting better acquainted, understanding her problems on the subcontinent.”
Kissinger assured Galbraith that Gandhi would be received with “special courtesy,” and that the type of note Galbraith suggested had already
been sent to the prime minister. Nixon had written to Gandhi, saying he was looking forward to wide-ranging discussions.
On 8 October Jha met with Kissinger again. The ambassador began the conversation by discussing Gandhi’s upcoming visit. He had noticed
some coolness on the part of the protocol team and wanted an assurance that the prime minister would receive a warm welcome in Washington.
Kissinger reassured Jha of a cordial reception. He then telephoned Robert Mosbacher, the State Department protocol chief, in Jha’s presence to
make sure the ambassador heard that Kissinger had given instructions about the need for a Grade-A treatment for the Indian premier.
Gandhi met with Nixon in the White House on 4 November. Haksar and Kissinger were the only two aides present at the two-hour discussion.
While Nixon met with Gandhi in the Oval Office, U.S. and Indian advisers met in the Cabinet Room. Sisco headed the American team, which
included Keating, Van Hollen, Saunders, and Schneider. Kaul headed the Indian delegation, which included Jha and Maharaja Krishna Rasgotra,
minister for political affairs at the Indian Embassy in Washington.
Nixon suggested to Gandhi that they use the first session to discuss the situation in South Asia and the second session for a discussion of
broader issues, including China, the Soviet Union, and Southeast Asia. Gandhi agreed and expressed India’s admiration for Nixon’s skill in
handling the Vietnam situation and his initiative to establish a normal relationship with China. However, Gandhi feared that Nixon’s China move
posed a serious threat to India's security.
Gandhi observed that America’s each move had been carefully thought-out and well-designed. Nixon said he expected much criticism
domestically from more conservative elements opposed to the normalisation of relationships with China. On the other hand, he was convinced that
the steps had to be taken to bring stability to Asia, which could best be done when the parties could communicate – and this had been his initial
objective.
Nixon then moved right into the situation in South Asia, cautioning Gandhi that an Indo-Pak war would be unacceptable from every perspective.
For this reason, America’s Pakistan policy had been shaped by an imperative to retain influence with Islamabad. He assured Gandhi the United
States had discouraged military actions by Pakistan and would continue to do so.
Addressing the East Pakistan issue, he said Yahya appointed a civilian governor in East Pakistan at America’s urging. Nixon then listed the
results his policies had squeezed from Yahya: Yahya’s amnesty and his promise to welcome back both Hindu and Muslim refugees were among
them. He also cited Yahya’s pledge not to execute Mujib; Yahya’s agreement to pull some military units back from Pakistan’s western border; and
his vow to hold direct discussions with cleared Awami League leaders. Besides, the president noted Yahya’s willingness to meet with a
Bangladesh leader from India and to consider our America’s suggestion that Mujib be allowed to designate the representative.
He said he understood India’s concerns about the refugees, but “the United States could not urge policies which would be tantamount to
overthrowing” Yahya. “It is recognized that Mujib is a core factor in the situation and that unquestionably in the long run Pakistan must acquiesce in
the direction of greater autonomy for East Pakistan, but the situation is extremely fragile and Yahya’s flexibility is very limited in the short run.
Unquestionably Mujib’s fate is an essential aspect of the problem and ultimately he will have to play a role in East Pakistan’s future. However, this
depends largely on the way events proceed in the shorter term. The greatest danger of all would result if either side were to consider that the
military action could provide a solution that only a historical process can settle. Should India resort to force of arms, the current balance suggests
that it would succeed in a military sense but in a political sense there could be no winner.”
He said the military action’s consequences were “dangerous”. In this regard, he said, India’s agreement with the Soviet Union was understood

by his administration, but India must recognize that it was unpopular in America. It must, therefore, affect the U.S. government’s general attitude.
Should the situation deteriorate to war, it could extend beyond India and Pakistan. The Americans would not understand if India were to attack
Pakistan. While Washington could not expect India to determine its own policies based solely on U.S. attitudes, these attitudes should be taken
into consideration, Nixon suggested.
Nixon then asked Gandhi if Yahya could really survive if Mujib were released at that point in time. Gandhi avoided an answer to this question.
She stated that India was not being driven by anti-Pakistan motives. India had never wished to destroy Pakistan nor cause it to be permanently
crippled. Rather, India sought to restore stability in the region. Recalling the genesis of the subcontinent’s Partition, she noted that the solution,
largely dictated from abroad, had left the peoples restive and dissatisfied.
Nixon agreed that the Partitioning had contributed to a permanent instability.
Gandhi observed that many harbor the feeling that her father had let the country down by accepting the Partition along the lines ultimately
reached. Nevertheless, once the decision had been taken, it was accepted. But the Partitioning generated a persistent “hate India” campaign,
resulting in successive conflicts in 1947 and 1965.
Following India’s Independence, the freedom movement leaders formed the country’s government. At the same time, the loyalist or pro-British
factions formed Pakistan’s government. Pakistan proceeded to imprison or exile the Independence movement leaders. Baluchistan and Northwest
Frontier provinces had a strong desire for greater autonomy. There had been a long history of separatist politics in Pakistan, which had not
necessarily been supported in India. Yahya was mistaken in trying to suppress Mujib. India had always reflected a degree of forbearance towards
its own separatist elements. The pattern had been clear. West Pakistan had dealt with the Bengalis in a treacherous and deceitful way and had
always relegated them to an inferior role. As the situation worsened, India attempted to alleviate it by maintaining communication with all the
parties.
Nixon noted that many of the tactics being employed by the Bengalis were worsening the dilemma. For example, it was difficult to understand
their motives in harassing and sabotaging the flow of humanitarian aid being carried in ships to Chittagong Harbor. Also, there was a perception
that because guerrilla activity of that type must involve sophisticated training and equipment, India must be training and arming these guerrillas.
Gandhi Tells Nixon Pakistan Unity “Unrealistic”
Gandhi took issue with Nixon’s comment. She said there were, of course, continuing accusations that India had instigated the guerrilla movement
and continued to support it. However, the realities were that it was no longer realistic to expect East and West Pakistan to remain together, as the
pressures for autonomy were overwhelming.
She said Yahya continued to speak of a “Holy War”. It might well be that the presence of Indian forces along Pakistan’s frontier had deterred
the initiation of military action by Pakistan thus far. This tense situation had influenced India towards entering into a treaty with the Soviet Union as
a means of creating an additional deterrent. Stability in India was an important objective to the Soviet Union and, therefore, Moscow had long
pressed for a political solution. Many in India had opposed the Soviet treaty and a majority of the parliament was concerned about it, too.
Nixon asked Gandhi for her views on how a solution could be achieved. Gandhi again avoided an answer, instead reiterating that her major
concern was how the situation affected India itself. The crucial issue remained the future of Mujib, who was the symbol of the imperative for
autonomy.
Nixon expressed his understanding for India’s problem in undertaking the displacement of forces and noted that Yahya had indicated his
willingness to undertake some pullback. If India now believed that such a step would not contribute to the lessening of tensions, it would be
necessary for the United States to reconsider its efforts to effect such a pullback by Pakistani forces.
Gandhi did not address Nixon’s proposal to consider withdrawing forces.
However, India’s external affairs secretary responded to the proposal during the Gandhi-Rogers meeting on 5 November. In that meeting, Kaul
said a withdrawal without political settlement would incorrectly suggest that the crisis was coming under control. Rogers responded that the
political settlement would be difficult under the threat of an imminent war. If war started, there could not be a political solution. On the other hand,
without a political solution, war was likely to start, the secretary of state added.
Gandhi replied that India doubted whether Yahya actually desired a political solution. But both Rogers and Sisco disagreed, saying they
believed that the military ruler of Pakistan sincerely sought a solution; that he, in fact, felt that he had to have one.
To counter that view, and prove Yahya’s lack of sincerity, the Indians presented a detailed recent history of East Pakistan’s events. When
asked what evidence America had that Yahya, in fact, sought a political solution, Rogers presented none. He only said he wanted to make it clear
that the United States had done all it could in this regard. Haksar intervened to say this was not a matter in dispute between America and India.
When the Indians questioned Yahya’s motives, they did not mean to castigate the United States. It was just an attempt to reach an understanding
with Washington about East Pakistan.
After the Rogers-Gandhi meeting, Kaul told Sisco that if India “could be assured that there had been contact with Mujib and that Mujib, free of
coercion, had designated an individual to negotiate with Yahya, India could give this proposal its cautious support.”
On 5 November, Nixon discussed with Kissinger his conversation with Gandhi. Kissinger’s overall assessment was that “the Indians are
bastards anyway. They are starting a war there . . . To them East Pakistan is no longer the issue. Now, I found it very interesting how she carried
on to you yesterday about West Pakistan.”
Kissinger felt, however, that Nixon had achieved his objective in his talks with the Indian premier: “While she was a bitch, we got what we
wanted too . . . She will not be able to go home and say that the United States didn’t give her a warm reception and, therefore, in despair she’s got
to go to war.” Kissinger judged that Gandhi’s objective had been thwarted: “She would rather have had you give her a cool reception so that she
could say that she was really put upon.” Nixon agreed: “We really slobbered over the old witch.”
Kissinger felt that nothing of importance had been conceded on matters of substance: “You slobbered over her in things that did not matter, but
in things that did matter, you didn’t give her an inch.” Nixon and Kissinger agreed that during the conversation the next day with Gandhi the
approach the president would take was to be “a shade cooler”, allowing her to do more to carry the conversation than had been the case in the

initial conversation.
Nixon and Gandhi met in the Oval Office at 11:20 a.m. the next day for the second round of their talks. Kissinger and Haksar also attended.
Nixon opened the dialogue by outlining the objectives of his planned China trip. Then the conversation, which lasted an hour, became a virtual
diplomatic tour d’horizon, touching on many trouble spots of the world, but with scant reference to South Asia.
As America began pondering its next move in the light of the unfolding events, on 20 November Kissinger wrote a memo to Nixon, quoting the
U.S. ambassador to Pakistan. Farland had said Yahya felt that “Mujib was not the key to negotiations but rather Indira Gandhi held ‘both the key
and the lock’.” According to a telegram Farland sent to Washington, Yahya declined to permit Mujib to designate a Bangladesh representative
who could speak on his own behalf and negotiate for the Bangladesh movement with the Pakistanis. On the other hand, his government would be
happy to meet with the Bangladesh representatives under other conditions as he had said before – only those without a charge against them could
meet, if they renounced the Awami League banner. He sketched his scenario for a political settlement through the promulgation of a constitution in
mid-December, convening the National Assembly on 27 December and the transfer of power “several weeks” thereafter. Then the new civilian
government could, if it wished, deal with Mujib and Bangladesh.
Farland had the impression that Yahya believed he was being boxed in by many pressures on him from home and abroad. For the first time he
sensed agitation in Yahya. The ambassador thought that Yahya had decided that his political plan was the only means of extricating himself from an
untenable military and economic situation inflamed and fueled by India.
Regarding the situation in India, Kissinger incorrectly suggested in his memo to Nixon that Gandhi was attempting to lower the political
temperature, for the time being, at least. She seemed prepared to wait for some unspecified period to see whether the international community’s
efforts to get Yahya into a dialogue with the Awami League were successful before initiating a more decisive action. Gandhi remained, as before
her trip to Washington, less hawkish than the country as a whole and that she apparently continued to work to avoid a major war.
The American intelligence community, however, painted a sharply different picture, saying that despite her dovish public posture, Gandhi was
going full-steam ahead with her plan “for a possible military intervention in East Pakistan”.
India Beats War Drum
Upon her return from Washington, Gandhi embarked upon marching ahead on the war path. On 16 November, she sent a letter to Nixon, giving a
hint that India could soon make its military move to end the East Pakistan crisis and expressing her dismay over the U.S. actions.
“I hope that the vast prestige of the United States and its wisdom, which you personify, will be used to find a political solution acceptable to the
elected representatives of East Bengal and their leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman,” she wrote. “On my part, I shall make every effort to urge
patience on our people. However, I would be less than honest if I were not to repeat that the situation in which we find ourselves has long been an
unbearable one.”
She took issue with the U.S. initiative to get the Security Council involved. “I am somewhat concerned to learn of efforts to involve the Security
Council. However well-intentioned these may be, I have little doubt that any public debate at this stage will lead to a hardening of attitudes, which
would make the task of reconciliation an extremely difficult one. This is part of the common experience of many countries. Such a move would
obstruct the path of the solutions which we jointly seek.”
Washington failed to grasp the full extent of Gandhi’s message. On 19 November, Hoskinson and Saunders prepared a briefing for Nixon on
South Asia. It said Gandhi was “attempting to lower the political temperature,” at least for now. “She seems to be telling the Indian people and the
world that, while she has no intention of reducing the pressure on Pakistan by withdrawing Indian troops from the frontiers or reducing support to
the guerrillas, she is prepared to wait for some unspecified period to see whether the international community’s efforts to get Yahya into a dialogue
with the Awami League are successful before initiating more decisive action.”
It noted that comments from Indian and foreign observers suggested Gandhi remained “less hawkish than the country as a whole and that she
apparently continues to work to avoid a major war.”
However, the briefing added, “our intelligence indicates that complementing this public posture is continuing planning for possible military
intervention in East Pakistan and serious incidents, reflecting an aggressive Indian posture in support of the guerrillas, continue to flare up along the
East Pakistan border.”
The report also cautioned that some official U.S. observers believed that the Indian and guerrilla pressures on the Pakistan forces could be
gradually building up to a point at which they would be goaded into counteractions, which could precipitate a full-scale war.
On 22 November, Cushman told Kissinger that press reports from Pakistan indicated India had attacked East Pakistan in the Jessore area with
two infantry divisions supported by armor. Even if the reports were exaggerated, the size of Indian incursions was apparently increasing. Yahya did
not want to fight a war he knew Pakistan would probably lose, but Cushman concluded the general might soon decide that he had no choice but to
do so.
The reports sparked debates in Washington as to the goal of increased military actions in the border. Irwin said Pakistan was probably
overplaying the situation, while India was underplaying it. “We think increased participation by Indian regulars is designed either to put enough
pressure on Yahya to get a more favorable political situation or to try to provoke a Pakistani attack on India and thereby put Pakistan further in the
wrong in the eyes of the world. We believe the first reason is more likely than the second.”
He suggested that the United States go back to Yahya on the basis of his latest conversation with Farland, which Washington “found somewhat
disappointing with regard to Mujib”. He supported getting a U.N. resolution, saying it would put pressure on India and help avoid a war.
Kissinger took issue with the last suggestion, noting that India would go to war unless Pakistan met its political demands.
Sisco then reminded the team, “Our objective is to try to discourage war on the subcontinent.”
Kissinger replied, “We can do that by giving India what she wants. We can also do it by discouraging India from using military force to break up
Pakistan. The Indians are trying to break off East Pakistan in a fashion so traumatic as to bring West Pakistan to collapse.”
Sisco’s replied: “I think we can assume India will keep the pressure on, both militarily and politically.”
Kissinger said: “I’m not sure they want Mujib to settle the situation in East Pakistan; I think they want the situation to collapse.”

Irwin suggested that the United States go back to Yahya and tell him, “if he were willing to talk to Mujib, it might possibly dilute the military
pressure on East Pakistan.”
Sisco opposed the idea, saying, “If the Indian military activity is confirmed, I don’t think it would be wise to go back to Yahya to press him on
the Mujib talks.”
On that same day, 22 November, Pakistan claimed in radio broadcasts that India, “without a formal declaration of war, has launched an all-out
offensive against East Pakistan.” The attack was concentrated in the Jessore sector and included infantry, armor, and aircraft.
Kissinger initially reported it in a telephone conversation with Nixon at 12:45 p.m. of 22 November. The fighting had flared up in several other
locations along the East Pakistan border, but India dismissed the reports as “absolutely false”. India reported that several Pakistani planes had
intruded into its airspace and that the Pakistanis were trying to increase tension and create a “warlike situation.” Some Indian radio broadcasts
disclosed that a “concerted” guerrilla offensive was underway.
“At this point, we have no independent evidence, but it seems apparent that there has been a major incident,” Kissinger told Nixon. He then
offered possible explanations of what might have happened. The Indians might be supporting a major guerrilla offensive, he said, or they might have
begun a joint action that would continue with the Indian regular forces seeking control of a major area rather than one of the smaller border areas
that had been the object of actions over the past few weeks. Or Pakistan might have decided that war was inevitable and could have decided to
accuse India of having begun it, to free itself from whatever reaction they may feel necessary.
Nixon ordered to cut aid to both India and Pakistan, making good on his threat. Kissinger panicked: “We haven’t completely cut it to Pakistan
yet. That might put them over the brink.”
On 23 November, Kissinger convened the Washington Action Group, where Cushman summarized reports of the fighting. Pakistan alleged that
Indian armed forces had penetrated eight miles into East Pakistan in the Jessore area. Other information, however, indicated that the Indian and
Mukti Bahini forces had attacked in strength, but they had not pushed back the Pakistani forces around Jessore.
Yahya told Farland in Islamabad that India had initiated offensive operations against Pakistan, with the Indian spear-heads directed against the
Chalna and Chittagong ports in East Pakistan. In the Chittagong sector, the Indian forces had penetrated twenty miles into Pakistan. In response,
the general was declaring a national emergency.
Yahya detailed the attacks in a letter delivered to Nixon on 23 November saying Pakistan would mount a vigorous defense of its territory.
Yahya still hoped to avoid an all-out war, but added that the Indian attacks in East Pakistan were pushing Pakistan to the point of no return.
Kissinger asked Cushman if the flareups were “a limited operation or will they keep going?”
Cushman replied, “It looks like a limited operation to us.”
On 24 November, the group met again. America was still getting conflicting Pakistani and Indian versions of what was going on, but had little
doubt that regular Indian troops had indeed entered Pakistan.
“Is there any doubt in the mind of anyone in this room that the Indians have attacked with regular units across the Pakistan border?” Kissinger
asked. “And, if there is, does it make any difference? Can we possibly believe that these are the guerrillas attacking across hundreds of miles, with
tanks and aircraft – that this is an indigenous movement?”
Samuel DePalma, assistant secretary of state for International Organization Affairs, was the first to reply: “There is no question that these forces
are armed and supplied from the outside, but we can’t make an airtight case in the United Nations.”
The other officials present then added their own views.
Kissinger: “The question is what hard data we have to support whatever action we want to take. We have no doubt that India is involved and
that they are probably across the border. But we need something to nail down the exact nature of their activity and we need it in a day or two.”
Moorer: “They may be making a distinction between their regular forces and their border security forces.”
Irwin: “What do you think their purpose is? Are they trying to cut off supplies? Are they primarily supporting the Bangladesh guerrillas, or are
they planning to go further? Are they putting forces in to take and hold territory or to protect the Bangladesh?”
Moorer: “Initially to support the Bangladesh, and then to whip the hell out of the Pakistanis. The Bangladesh are moving to the border where the
Indians can assist in attriting [sic] the Pakistanis.”
Kissinger: “So our situation is that we don’t know enough now to do anything, and by the time they are in Dacca, it will be too late to do
anything. In these circumstances, we should move early rather than later, since if we are late, any move we make will be ineffectual. That is our
dilemma.”
Moorer was confident that the Indian forces were inside the East Pakistan border, but he did not think they had the drive to penetrate deeply.
Irwin said they could cut two vital supply routes with only a short penetration, something that they had not done yet.
Moorer said, however, that they lacked enough forces for a deep penetration. “I think they’re trying to open up the Paks so the guerrillas can
defeat them. The Paks have only a limited reinforcement capability. The Indian Navy could prevent reinforcement.”
Kissinger asked, “Do you seriously believe India wants reconciliation? Don’t they control the situation?”
Sisco replied, “In answer to your first question, No, I don’t. I was merely stating one option – the transfer of the problem by Yahya to Bhutto.
Another option is for Yahya to deal with Mujib directly.”
Kissinger: “Why can’t Bhutto deal with Mujib?”
Sisco: “He might, but there is considerably less prospect of success. Not only are the Bengalis very reluctant to deal with Bhutto, but Bhutto and
Mujib are potential rivals. The likelihood of a Mujib-Bhutto reconciliation is considerably less than the Bengalis agreeing to talk to Yahya.”
Kissinger: “But that assumes that the difficulty is between East and West Pakistan. Nothing India has done indicates that they want to see a
reconciliation between East and West Pakistan.”
Sisco: “I don’t think Mujib’s objective in March was complete separatism or independence. Even now, I don’t think some form of loose
confederation between Yahya and Mujib is impossible.”
Kissinger: “So, India having attacked Pakistan, the logical conclusion is that we should squeeze Yahya to talk to Mujib. What the Indian troops
can’t achieve, we should achieve for them. That’s the implication of what you’re saying.”

Sisco: “I have asked myself why the Pakistanis haven’t already moved into the United Nations. It would seem to be very attractive to them,
particularly since they are the weaker power and there is a possibility that the United Nations could dampen the immediate military situation. But,
to be a reality, the Security Council would have to defuse the situation and would immediately get into the question of political accommodation. If
Yahya is not able to move toward Mujib directly, why should he not use the United Nations as a facade?”
Kissinger: “Unless he doesn’t want to do it at all.”
Sisco: “I agree. He has three options: Do it directly with Mujib; do it through the United Nations; don’t do it at all. If East and West Pakistan
can’t get together, the United States can live with an independent East Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “We don’t give a damn.”
Sisco: “However, Yahya, by going to the United Nations, will have internationalized the situation which he has maintained is an internal matter.
In these circumstances, he would be forced to deal with Mujib.”
Kissinger: “Does anyone seriously believe India wants a reconciliation between East and West Pakistan?”
Sisco: “I believe India would be willing to go along if Mujib were restored to power by peaceful means. India doesn’t want war. If Mujib were
back in power, he would organize an East Pakistan government and it wouldn’t be long before it was a separate entity or independent. However,
Mujib, in a confederal tie with West Pakistan, would have as much fly-paper attraction for the West Bengalis as would an independent East
Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “You say that a chance of reconciliation exists more under Yahya than under Bhutto. Therefore, the four weeks before Yahya turns
over to Bhutto must be used.”
Sisco: “I say they could be used. If power is turned over to Bhutto, we will have more war in the subcontinent. The Indians have the upper hand
– they will get East Pakistan one way or another. What are our interests? Maybe we can live with a war for three or four weeks. We won’t
become involved, and I don’t think the Russians or Chinese will, either. But we don’t want one power to dominate in the area, and the defeat of
Pakistan would certainly strengthen the Soviet position.”
Kissinger: “You say an opportunity exists to use Yahya to get a reconciliation. But we know that any reconciliation won’t last since Mujib will
go separatist in any event. We tell the Pakistanis ‘let’s have a reconciliation.’ Then we tell the Indians ‘why fight, since you are going to get it
anyway.’ Yahya may say ‘if we’re going to lose anyway, why me? Why not Bhutto?’ ”
Sisco: “Maybe it doesn’t make any difference. If we stay out of it, the situation will evolve by military means rather than peaceful means.”
Kissinger: “That’s a phony. Everyone is for peaceful means, but do you honestly believe there is any chance of getting India to desist militarily? If
the situation were reversed and the Pakistani troops were moving into India, the New York Times , Washington Post and the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee would be committing mass hara-kari , and there would be marches on Washington. When you say we should work for a
peaceful settlement, are we going to help India grab what they want? Maybe we should, but don’t say we have the choice of peace or war.”
Sisco: “But India has the upper hand – they are stronger than Pakistan. I have not put this in terms of choosing.”
Kissinger: “What do you recommend we do?”
Sisco: “We should do nothing for the moment.”
Kissinger: “The president, the secretary of state and I have told the Indians there will be consequences if they start war.”
Packard: “But what can we do? I don’t see that we have any effective leverage on India.”
Kissinger: “We can cut off aid. We can move diplomatically.”
Packard: “Fine – we should, but with what likelihood of success? We don’t know. One alternative would be to back up the Pakistanis, but we
have to evaluate the chance of success and the price of failure.”
Kissinger: “We don’t have to back up the Pakistanis. It’s not outrageous to ask that Yahya be given four weeks to try to adjust the political
situation in East Pakistan. What is India doing other than pressing an attack on East Pakistan with a view to settling the hash of West Pakistan?”
Following the meeting, the Nixon administration intensified diplomatic efforts to avoid an all-out war. Through a secret channel, Kissinger told
Farland that America would send a strong note to Gandhi for India’s failure to respond to the U.S. proposal to withdraw troops from the border.
Gandhi, before she went to Washington early November, told Heath that India had reservations. Washington also contacted Germany, asking
Chancellor Willy Brandt to express his concern to India over the escalating tensions. In addition, Beam was asked to convey to the Russians,
America’s concern.
“We will continue to follow the situation very closely and you can assure Yahya that the president is personally involved in all aspects of the
problem. Please keep me informed via this channel of any additional steps that you believe should be considered here,” Kissinger told Farland.
The same day, Rogers summoned Pakistan’s ambassador to urge Islamabad not to begin a war, noting he had earlier given the same message to
India. The secretary said he had just returned from a long meeting with Nixon, who felt very strongly on the “need for maximum restraint,” a
message that apparently came a little too late. India’s plan was obvious when the top Indian officials, including Gandhi and Swaran Singh,
repeatedly dismissed America’s proposal for a troop withdrawal, but Washington was so deeply engaged in its own strategy that it read little in it.
Rasgotra, during his meeting with Rogers on 24 November, said he offered no suggestions when the secretary said America would take it seriously
if war broke out. The Indian envoy admitted that India and Pakistan were giving two different versions of the situation, but defended New Delhi,
saying it was India that informed America of the situation “as it saw it”. Rasgotra denied the facts of an article published on 25 November in The
New York Times, saying that reporter Sydney H. Schanberg had seen the Indian forces crossing borders into East Pakistan. He acknowledged
that skirmishes had taken place but insisted that India had no interest in precipitating a war – a statement that Washington had, by then, no reason
to accept at its face value.

17 
East Pakistan Burns, Yahya Snoozes
lthough the noose was tightening around Pakistan, Yahya failed to fully appreciate the gravity of the situation even as late as November. In
a weekly bulletin on 19 November the CIA said, “Despite the growing Mukti Bahini strength, it is doubtful that Islamabad yet feels under
significant pressure to negotiate a settlement even approaching the rebels’ demand for immediate independence.”
Yahya, rather, proceeded with his version of the solution to the Bengali problem. He set for December the elections to the seats deemed
vacated by certain members of the banned Awami League. He managed to convince seven parties to form a coalition that would dominate the
National Assembly. Nurul Amin, a pro-Pakistani Bengali, headed the group. Such a government would have almost no support in East Pakistan,
but the Americans concluded that the general had no other options. The CIA said: “Yahya would have difficulty in preserving his own position
were he to deviate markedly from his established course.”
By that time, the U.S. intelligence had become convinced that the Bengalis would accept nothing short of total independence, even if their
leaders hammered out a deal with Yahya. “Even should Yahya be able to open negotiations with the imprisoned Bengali leader, Mujibur Rahman
would be repudiated by the guerrillas, if he were to settle for anything less than immediate and complete independence.”
This assessment mimicked a report on Yahya that Williams had given two weeks earlier, saying the military strongman was growing increasingly
isolated from the events in the East. Williams had met Ghulam Ishaq Khan, the cabinet secretary, on 27 October. Khan believed the army’s
reporting from East Pakistan had been misleading the president about the recent developments there.
Yahya’s growing isolation and the military’s misleading information had in fact been reported earlier by M. M. Ahmad, the general’s economic
adviser. He said the Pakistan army in East Pakistan had gained nearly autonomous control of the province, working in many respects independent
of Yahya’s policies and direction. Islamabad had firm control over only foreign affairs affecting East Pakistan. Yahya’s isolation was evident from
several facts, Ahmad reported: First, the army commanders in the East pursued independent military operations. Second, the army governed the
province behind the facade of puppet civilian Governor A.M. Malik and his cabinet, who relied completely on the army for their personal security.
And, finally, Yahya lacked independent means of observation and verification of East Pakistan’s events.
Yahya, however, held a vastly different view of what was happening in East Pakistan. He had told the Americans on 28 October that his East
Pakistan “civilianization” plan under Malik was succeeding in stabilizing the political situation. When elections had filled the vacated Awami League
assembly seats, the “political accommodation” for a loyal provincial government in East Pakistan would have been completed. Yahya believed the
political stability after elections would defeat India’s strategy of supporting the insurrection. Gandhi would then have nothing in hand to achieve her
objectives except the recourse to war. The myth of East Pakistan’s growing political stability was fed to Yahya Khan by his civilian governor and
army commanders who painted a grossly inaccurate picture of the actual situation.
The reality was that army policies and operations – behind the facade of a civilian government – were alienating the Bengalis. The seeds of
rebellion were not only those sown by India. “The wide gap between the myth of growing stability as seen by Yahya Khan and the reality of
political deterioration was most striking from comparing my recent visit to East Pakistan, [during] 21-26 October to observations made during the
earlier August 19-25 trip,” Williams reported.
Although Yahya installed a puppet civilian governor, the province was run by the military. Major General Rao Farman Ali Khan was the army’s
civil affairs specialist with ten years of service in the East. He sat in the Governor’s House and ran the province for the governor. Williams said,
“My call on General Farman Ali Khan [on] 25 October interrupted a meeting with some ten of his military colleagues. They were, he said, selecting
the men who would be elected in the next provincial elections.”
Farman Ali described the guerrilla insurgency level as “somewhat intensified but manageable” because the newly trained guerrillas entering from
India feared to take action. Over 1400 guerrillas had entered the Dhaka district in the previous thirty days but only a few had chosen to fight. He
acknowledged, off the record, that this was due to the terroristic reprisal policy. He also admitted that terror and reprisal had an “unfortunate effect
on Bengali attitudes”. But, he said, “all army commanders had concluded that the insurgency was more of a problem in areas where the army had
been too lenient and had not demonstrated cleanup operations.”
The Pakistani army, according to the Americans, was one of the most highly disciplined and professional infantry forces in the world. Despite
orders from Islamabad not to engage in terrorist operations against the civilian population – and repeated assurances to the U.S. officials to this
effect – the Pakistani army commanders continued terror raids, even within the environs of Dhaka and in sight of its large foreign community,
Williams noted.
Farman Ali said the army would leave fighting the guerrillas to the newly armed Bengali “Rasikars,” numbering some 60,000. The Rasikars,
raised at village levels for guard duty with only ten days’ training, did not constitute a disciplined force. However, they were a destabilizing element
– living off the land, able to make life-and-death decisions by denouncing collaborators and openly pillaging and terrorizing villagers without
restraint from the army. With the villagers caught between the Rasikars and the guerrillas, law and order broke down rapidly in rural East Pakistan.
Hence, the rural population was moving either to the already overpopulated cities, or to India. The flow of Muslim refugees to India had recently
increased – many of them small landholders and farmers, who were normally the more stable political elements.
Farman Ali estimated that at least eighty percent of East Pakistan’s Hindu community had left. Off the record, he spoke of about six million
refugees who had gone to India. He anticipated another 1,500,000 would probably go “before the situation settles down”. One and a half million
was a reasonable estimate of the number of Hindus still in East Pakistan.
With the army’s autonomous control from March 1971 of that year, Yahya’s hold over East Pakistan was limited to mainly foreign affairs,
including managing relations with the US. Yahya took all the official American suggestions seriously and formulated them into major policy
statements. It was “public-relations diplomacy”, so to speak. It was important, however, not to confuse the form with the substance. Elections,
political accommodation and amnesty – all these were fine policy pronouncements. But their implementation remained with the army commanders

in East Pakistan, who were apparently immune from foreign influences.
Meanwhile, reports of continuing clashes along the Indo-Pak border reached Washington. Indian troops had attacked to silence the Pakistani
artillery action. They might still be on the Pakistan side of the border, the American intelligence reported on 10 November, and the Pakistanis might
be seriously considering a retaliatory attack.
Immediately, Sisco summoned both the Indian and Pakistani ambassadors to the State Department.
Major General Nawabzada Agha Mohammad Raza, who became Pakistani ambassador in Washington in November 1971, told Sisco that
Pakistan had every intention to avoid beginning hostilities. Indian tactics were clear, however; i.e., to provoke Pakistan into steps that would give
New Delhi an excuse to start war, he contended.
Sisco told Jha, “We are fearful that this kind of crossing would tempt and invite the Pakistani retaliatory action, and we, therefore, hope India
would take some step to de-escalate the situation.”
Jha asked if America had obtained independent confirmation of the reports in the press. Sisco replied that Washington was satisfied with their
authenticity. Rasgotra, who accompanied Jha, countered that the Indian official spokesman had twice denied the reports, but the embassy had no
further information.
On 15 November, Kissinger met with Sultan Khan, Pakistan’s foreign secretary, in the White House. The national security adviser had a
relaxed dinner the night before at the Pakistan ambassador’s residence, along with Saunders. His conversation began with a background of the
previous night’s dinner discussion.
Kissinger first asked about the outcome of Khan’s meeting with the secretary of state. Khan said Rogers was interested in learning how to start
a political process involving Mujib within the limits that Yahya felt constrained him. He did not elaborate if a definite plan had been floated.
Apparently referring to his previous evening’s conversation, Kissinger responded that because Farland would meet Yahya soon, he saw little
need to seek a clarification on that point until he had heard from Islamabad. The other question that had come up was, what could he convey to the
Russians?
Khan said that whatever was known to the Indians would also be known to the Soviets. He referred to a Washington Post article from New
Delhi, based on a leak from the Indian side, that Yahya was willing to talk with the Awami League. The article said India must first approve of any
such negotiations. He said India did not want to approve such negotiations, to begin with, and so the media leak was designed precisely to kill the
idea. He felt that the determining factor would be what actually happened on the borders over the following week or so. He said Pakistan had
exhausted the process of accepting suggestions. He listed those that Pakistan had accepted – from the offer for a unilateral military pullback
through the willingness to negotiate with Bangladesh leaders. He did not see what else Pakistan could do, although Pakistan would always be
receptive to U.S. suggestions.
Kissinger suggested that Pakistan could benefit from a comprehensive statement of everything it had done. The Indians had a monopoly of
getting out the situation’s one-sided picture. Presenting a clear picture that Pakistan had done its share could serve as a brake on the military action
and a one-sided justification for it.
Khan said he wondered whether one statement could provide a brake for such a momentum. India had created a position for itself where one
statement might be unable to do that. However, the one possible hope he saw was help from the Soviets in restraining the Indians.
Asking Sultan Khan and Raza not to repeat this to the State Department, Kissinger told them he had talked to the Soviet ambassador in the
morning on other business. He had cautioned the Soviet ambassador that America took “the gravest view” of the South Asian situation. An
outbreak of war there would not be understood in Washington. If the Soviets were thought to have engineered such a war, the US-Soviet relations
would worsen.
Khan suggested the Soviet ambassador could be asked what Moscow saw wrong in supporting the U.S. proposal for a military pull-back.
Kissinger replied he knew what the Indian answer would be – that Pakistan should first withdraw from the East Pakistan border. The foreign
secretary said that would be fine if India were to pull back from that border and end its support for the guerrillas.
Kissinger said he would raise the point. He then returned to the issue of Mujib, saying that he was not pressing the foreign secretary at all but
simply needed to understand Pakistan’s position as clearly as possible. Kissinger asked whether he had understood Khan correctly the night
before – that over a period of months Pakistan could show more flexibility towards Mujib.
Khan said, in the absence of instructions from Yahya, he could only say that once a civilian government was formed and if it failed to get the
cooperation of the Bengalis, it would have to devise measures for improving that support. The government of that day would have to deal with this
issue. If the provincial government said it was not getting the response from the people that was required, it would have to take this question up
with the central government. He said he had to note that the feeling in the armed forces remained high against Mujib, so even a civilian government
would have to weigh carefully any action taken in connection with Mujib.
Kissinger personally believed that whatever demand was met there would be another from the Indian side. The Indians had made Mujib central
in their estimate of what it would take to resolve the situation. Kissinger said Mujib would “be devoured by the process” in Kolkata if he were
released. But many people perceived him to be central to a solution, so it would be extremely helpful to have an authoritative statement from
Yahya on Mujib over the next six months. He said he constantly confronted interpretations of Yahya’s views, but he would prefer not to be
“fighting a rear-guard action” for the general, without really knowing his views.
Khan replied that it would be important to know Yahya’s views if the situation arose “where we might have some ideas on how to transform
some aspects of the situation into a concrete proposal.” He said it was extremely important to avoid telling the Indians of Pakistan’s positions
because they would leak them to embarrass Yahya.
Kissinger then took the foreign secretary in to see Nixon for seven or eight minutes. When they returned they agreed Khan would speak with
Yahya and make his own personal assessment on Mujib, which would be sent via the backchannel to Kissinger, who noted the issue might be
moot if India and Pakistan started war.
During the meeting, Nixon briefed Sultan Khan on his talks with Gandhi, assuring him “we talked very directly” with her. Regarding U.S. policy
to deal with the crisis, Nixon said, “What we are trying desperately to do is not to allow this terrible tragedy, the agony that you’re going through,
[to] be a pretext to start a war.” “The important thing,” he added, “is we know, I know, that this is one of those terrible problems that, frankly,

must be solved by political solution, it must not be solved by force. We simply want to play a role that will be helpful. We will try to restrain to the
extent that we have any influence with the Indians. We will do everything we can to try to help you in your cause. That’s where we stand here.
How, what we can do – what we can do, of course, is limited by the circumstances. We don’t control the Indians. That’s accurate. The fact that, if
you, if there’s any more – I would I’d like [sic] to give you more encouragement than this, but I’d like to be totally honest.”
India To Start War If Mujib Hanged
When Kissinger asked Cushman at the Washington Special Action Group meeting the next day about the South Asian situation, the CIA man said
India and Pakistan had fought many clashes along their borders. Major hostilities could occur at any time with little warning. The guerrillas were
increasingly effective in East Pakistan, controlling about thirty percent of the rural areas. Tensions had increased as the Indian border guards and
army troops joined in the fighting between the Pakistan forces and the guerrillas. On the western front, both sides had made preparations in
anticipation of war. The Soviet Union had done little to moderate India. China was unlikely to help Pakistan to a significant degree.
Speculating on what India’s plan could be going forward, Sisco said Gandhi’s speech in parliament on 15 November would give a clear sign if
New Delhi intended to start war.
Kissinger: “Is it your judgment that war could come very quickly if she strikes the wrong note on Monday [15 November] with the parliament?”
Sisco: “If she decides to continue the pressure on Yahya, I think there is likely to be an intensification of the present situation. The Indian
strategy has been to continue the pressure on Yahya and to suck Pakistan in militarily so that the principal onus for starting a war would fall on
Pakistan. Any one incident where the Pakistanis retaliate can provide a casus belli .”
Kissinger replied, “We will encourage a political evolution. But we will not support the Indian strategy to force the pace of such evolution so that
West Pakistan can’t survive.” He then turned to Sisco and said, “When you started your movement toward Bangladesh, India immediately
escalated their demands so that they were not possibly fulfillable in the existing framework.”
Sisco: “India has had one demand – which they have made consistently and unchangingly – release Mujib, since he is the only man Yahya can
negotiate with.”
Kissinger disagreed: “No, they started by saying Yahya must talk to the Awami League leaders and he must not kill Mujib. Then when they got
an agreement to that, they escalated to the position that Yahya must talk to Mujib.”
Sisco said Gandhi seemed most interested in Yahya’s possible willingness to consider meeting with a representative designated by Mujib.
Kissinger asked, “Do you think that is a real proposition? What is it that will deter India? I suppose we will know on Monday.” He then added,
“I could be wrong, but my instinct tells me that Yahya didn’t consider this as a serious proposal but more as a last resort.”
Sisco suggested reporting the results of Nixon’s talks with Gandhi directly to Yahya. “We should tell him India seemed interested in the third
alternative and ask how he feels about it.”
Kissinger differed again, saying Gandhi “didn’t indicate much interest in anything in her conversations with the president. She spent most of her
time telling him that Baluchistan should never have been made a part of Pakistan. When he asked her about the military withdrawal, she said she
would let him know the next day, and she didn’t even have the courtesy to mention it again.”
Kissinger then asked, what should Washington do if war broke out?
Sisco proposed getting a U.N. resolution passed to “seek some sort of restraining order. I am under no illusion about the practical effect of such
a resolution or that it will be an easy exercise. But I think it is important that we go public before the balloon goes up. After it blows up, we will be
in the Security Council anyhow to get a ceasefire. With this in mind, I’d like to preposition a few things. We have started drafting a resolution and a
scenario for a move into the council. This would, of course, be the first test of the Chinese communists, and I would expect them to be helpful. Of
course, this puts the Soviets in a helluva position. They would be confronted in the council with the same reality as we are. I would see this as a
preempting move.”
Kissinger: “What would the resolution say?”
Sisco: “It would call on both sides to refrain from further activity to exacerbate the situation. We would have to weigh very carefully whether we
wanted to call for everyone to stop shooting. A ceasefire would be very complicated. The issue between India and Pakistan would be easy, but
we have the argument that what is going on in East Pakistan is a liberating movement, so we would have to be very careful. But I think it would be
important to air the issue, bring out the facts, get some speeches and get the council to say everyone should keep their shirts on.”
Kissinger: “What would be the operational significance of a U.N. resolution?”
Sisco: “I don’t overestimate the significance. Of course, it can’t prevent war.”
Kissinger: “What about timing? At what point would we say we have made all the moves?”
Sisco: “That could come later.”
Kissinger: “A Security Council resolution doesn’t do a damned thing. What could it do?”
Sisco: “It would draw the world attention to the situation, expose the facts, including what is happening militarily, and clarify where the
responsibility lies.”
Kissinger: “Both sides would claim the other side has made the first move. The Pakistanis aren’t so stupid as to challenge India militarily now. If
war starts, it would have to be by India.”
Sisco: “Any restraining order would obviously be pointed more toward India.”
Kissinger: “What if the Indians say they can’t control the situation – that only the Pakistanis can control it? Wouldn’t this give them another
excuse to go to war to defend the U.N. resolution?”
Sisco: “A restraining order wouldn’t reinforce India’s justification for going to war.”
Kissinger: “But India will say their troops aren’t doing anything and that it is the Pakistanis who aren’t obeying the ceasefire.”
Sisco: “I don’t overestimate the practical effect of a U.N. resolution, but what is the alternative?”
Kissinger maintained that if Gandhi “wanted a way out, we should try to give it to her. But we have broken our backs to help her and what has

she done? She hasn’t accepted one thing we’ve offered. She has said friendly things about the president, but they were not related to what he said.
She’s merely trying to jockey us into a position as the villain of the peace. The question is how are we restraining her by giving her two-thirds of
what she wants and letting her use that as a basis for the next move? We should just say that the use of force is not justified.”
Sisco said Washington would make it clear in the council that the Indians had refused every offer.
Kissinger: “Would you want to go into the council by next Tuesday [16 November 1971] – the timing makes a difference. Would you see the
debate as being on military intervention or on political atrocities?”
Sisco: “The debate would have to cover both.”
Turning to Cushman, Kissinger asked: “What do you think?”
Cushman: “We think there is a good chance that these acts are designed to provoke war. They may, however, be to assist the guerrillas so that
they can solve the problem themselves. Things might become clearer after Gandhi’s speech before parliament on 15 November.
The discussion then turned to how Pakistan would act. General John Ryan, the Air Force chief, asked what assurance America had that the
Pakistanis would not preempt the situation and move against the Indians.
Kissinger: “If they will lose East Pakistan politically anyhow, why not lose in a war?”
When Sisco remarked that if there was a war, “we will have to come to an understanding on the non-involvement of the major powers,”
Kissinger responded: “India doesn’t need to involve anyone else to beat the Paks.”
Sisco did not think the big-power involvement was likely. “The Russians will drag their feet if India is winning and if they have made up their
minds to shear off East Pakistan. If war starts, there is no question but that the Indians have the preponderant strength.”
Kissinger: “In the West as well as the East?”
Ryan: “In the West, too. The Paks are outnumbered three to one. The Indians have better air equipment, too.”
Sisco: “The Paks are no match, and Yahya knows it.”
By mid-November, Kissinger had realized he needed a clearer picture of the situation to decide the future course of action. He sent a
“backchannel message” to Farland on 15 November.
“The president would appreciate it if you could give us in this channel your personal assessment of the situation in South Asia,” Kissinger wrote
to Farland. “We are receiving conflicting views as to the situation and how it is perceived by Yahya Khan. Some say he is desperate and cannot
continue for long to control the situation and, therefore, he would welcome our pressing him to a political solution. Others doubt this view.”
Kissinger noted that the State Department thought Yahya was serious about talking with anyone chosen by Mujib. “Is this assessment accurate
in your judgment?” he asked Farland.
Farland had reported to the State Department his conversation with Yahya on 2 November. Yahya had said he did not view the Awami League
as a “nefarious institution”. If purged of its “secessionist leaders”, he saw “no obstacle to its revalidation by the forthcoming civilian government”.
Yahya was willing to engage in substantive discussions with the Bangladesh representatives who were in a position to act constructively.
When Williams returned to Washington from East Pakistan, he gave a damning report on Yahya’s grip on the situation in East Pakistan. When
Kissinger briefed Nixon on Pakistan, based on information provided by Williams on 16 November, he told Nixon the Pakistani army was “nearly
autonomous” in its operations in East Pakistan, “with Yahya having only decreasing control over his government’s policy in East Pakistan”.
“Two key advisers to President Yahya told Williams that Yahya is increasingly isolated from events in East Pakistan,” Kissinger added. “The
recently appointed civilian government is really run by a major general who is the military adviser to the governor.”
Kissinger noted that reprisal operations continued to focus against Hindus. “These observations suggest that it may be time to add a new chapter
in our strategy toward Pakistan. The strategy laid out in August for trying to reduce the flow of refugees by humanitarian assistance has worked to
the extent that we have helped stave off a major famine and, therefore, a major new flood of refugees. That strategy has revealed, however, that
the current level of refugees stems not from hunger but from a continuing deterioration of law and order as the rural population is caught between
the guerrillas and the army along with its local allies.”
If Yahya’s own electoral process and the practices of his army would not win wide enough support to defuse the guerrilla campaign, the
question then would arise what other political steps he might take to establish a viable political alternative to the guerrilla’s demand for
independence. “Unless he can devise such steps, he may face the prospect of losing East Pakistan in a war, which could have repercussions for the
integrity of West Pakistan as well,” Kissinger told Nixon.
On 18 November Farland replied to Kissinger that Yahya was not interested in discussing a political settlement with Mujib’s designee, but
continued to be interested in talks. Yahya said he would grant “white flag” passage to and from West Pakistan, but would not meet with a
Bangladesh representative who had been judged guilty of a major crime.
Farland said Yahya was determined to go ahead with his own plan for a “political solution”, a plan that clearly displayed how detached from
reality Yahya had become. He believed he had a viable plan, which called for convening parliament on 27 December and transferring power to a
civilian government within two weeks thereafter. Little did he know he would not be in the President House till 27 December.
“He gave me the impression he was zealously anxious to extricate himself from a deteriorating situation by stepping down, thus accomplishing his
prime objective, i.e., the transfer of power. From our conversation, I seriously question if he will deviate from what he has as his blueprint.”
Yahya’s ineffectiveness to pull the province out of its predicament by military action had become clear to the Americans by the end of
November. They had also realized – albeit very belatedly – that they might need to shove rather than push to get the Pakistani military ruler into
action to yield desired results. But Washington apparently failed to grasp how little precious time it had left to make its moves to dissuade India
from military action that New Delhi was about to embark upon. This handicap suggested the Nixon administration’s poor understanding of New
Delhi, despite reportedly having intelligence sources in top places in the Indian capital.

18 
Agha Khan Formula:
Unique Solution Missed?
ill November end, America had expected to resolve East Pakistan’s crisis through dialogue. The Americans kept nurturing this idea based
on assessments from several sources, including top U.N. officials.
One such official was Prince Sadruddin Agha Khan, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. Upon his return from a trip to New
Delhi and Islamabad, he offered what was termed as a realistic and practical solution to the impasse. On 23 November, he told Sisco the only way
out was a Mujib-Yahya talk. Sadruddin said India wanted to avoid war and would accept whatever solution the Awami League accepted. If
Gandhi returned from the foreign tour with some kind of assurance that other governments would put pressure on Pakistan, she could use this
argument to counter hawks who demanded recognition of Bangladesh and all-out war. From his conversation with Dhar, Sadruddin had sensed
the Bangladesh leaders were splitting into factions and getting out of India’s control. Dhar could no longer guarantee to Gandhi that the Bengalis
would follow the Indian line.
The U.N. official reported that India’s leaders pressed him to work for a political solution in Islamabad. India had taken great pains to make
sure his visit was not exploited in the Indian press and to ensure that he would go to Islamabad with a clean slate. Sadruddin noted that in his field
trips to Assam and Meghalaya, he was very much aware of the rising communal and tribal tensions. He thought the recent Jessore operation was
to test India’s ability to use the Mukti Bahini with India’s support to put pressure on Yahya.
Sadruddin had told Rogers and Sisco on 24 June that unless a quick political solution was found, South Asia could be the new Vietnam. The
Bengalis and the Punjabis were polarized, with no sympathy between them. Extremists in East Pakistan – the Naxalites – were using fear against a
“foreign army” to strengthen themselves, which could result in an extended guerrilla warfare. India was quite worried about this. Gandhi’s inner
cabinet had decided not to recognize Bangladesh, not to go to war with Pakistan but to support the “Mukhti Fauj”. Thus India opposed the
proposal for U.N. presence on the East Pakistan border. India sought international relief but did not wish to have foreigners wandering about the
border areas. Sadruddin said some East Pakistanis would return if they had an element of guarantee. The others would return with simply a return
to peace in East Pakistan, if only because of the “continuous squalor” of the Indian refugee camps.
He faulted India for the “inconsistency” of its policy. On the one hand, India complained about the presence of six million refugees and insisted
they must return; on the other hand, it imposed conditions for their return, such as negotiations with Mujib. He said India was not following a logical
and pragmatic path. He said India seemed uninterested in repatriation. It was important that India not insist upon political solution as a prior
condition for the return of the refugees. By political solution, India apparently meant Mujib’s return.
Quoting Yahya, Sadruddin said that those elected members of Awami League who were not “criminals” should come forward and lead the
people of East Pakistan so that he could hand over power to them. He intended to announce a Turkish-type of constitution providing for
substantial army control. But Sadruddin feared that it would not be enough; he should withdraw the army. Yet he could not do so in the border
areas so long as India supported infiltration. He favored keeping up the pressure on India to moderate its position on refugee return; control
Bangladesh elements and stop infiltration.
Sadruddin said that when he met with Gandhi, she was very “hawkish.” She sought to impress him with the seriousness of the situation, saying
“we may have to resort to other means.”
Rogers said Swaran Singh had also used the terms “special measures” or “another option” when he was in Washington. Rogers had replied that
if he meant military means, “we thought this would be a very great mistake. Swaran Singh then backed away from this implication.”
Sisco told Sadruddin the United States had indicated its willingness to continue to support the refugees financially and conveyed a new proposal
to India for the withdrawal of forces that would allow Yahya to take the first step if India would reciprocate. He also mentioned that Washington
had told Gandhi that Yahya was willing to talk to the cleared Awami Leaguers and Bangladesh representatives based in Kolkata.
“We stressed the importance of starting the process of dialogue. We recognized that a political accommodation could not take place without
Mujib. We also recognized that the crucial proposal was in the area of political accommodation and that it fell short of the Indian position. We
think Mrs Gandhi felt we gave her something which enabled her to adopt a restrained position on her return,” Sisco said, giving an incorrect
reading of the Indian prime minister’s mind.
Commenting on the military situation, Sisco said information was hard to come by, but substantial fighting was involved at the division and
brigade level. Activity was a mixture of the Mukti Bahini and Indian forces, including tanks, artillery and airplanes. It put the Pakistanis in a difficult
position, since they were weaker than the Indians. If they reacted in the West, it would enable India to place the onus for starting the war on
Pakistan’s head.
Sisco asked for Sadruddin’s view of the Security Council action. Sadruddin said it might be a good idea since it would open up the East
Pakistan problem for international discussion. The debate would go into the Indo-Pak problem as well as the root cause. He said he thought it was
a great shame that the United Nations had to wait until war broke out before tackling problems in the Security Council.
Sisco noted the Security Council meeting might lead to a restraining order, which could be a form of pressure for a political change in Pakistan
as well. Sadruddin said India might welcome the Security Council action, particularly if it felt that an all-out war with Pakistan would not pay.
Sisco wondered whether the Mukti Bahini victory, in which an East Pakistan regime friendly to India came to power, would not be in India’s
interest. Sadruddin said the situation would get out of hand and the Indians would be unable to the control the situation – a statement that mimicked
the line profoundly believed in Washington.
Sadruddin said it was his assessment that Mujib might not want an independent Bangladesh. His assessment was based on long meetings he has
had with A.K. Brohi, Mujib’s defense counsel. Although Yahya claimed he could not deal with Mujib because the Bengali leader would be killed

