parleys in Dacca in March with the true desire to work out differences or whether they were merely stalling for time, while bringing in military
reinforcements. The truth may be a mixture of the two. We believe that Yahya continued to prefer a political solution acceptable to all the major
parties. On the other hand, it was doubtless considered at least prudent to beef up the military presence in the East wing as a contingency
measure.”
In fact, other accounts – including the ones given by the Americans – indicated Mujib and Yahya had reached a deal, in principle, on 21 March.
Their respective delegations then started working on the details of wording. The same day, Bhutto arrived in Dhaka, worried about the tentative
deal and determined to derail a final agreement. Surrounded by his personal bodyguards, all bearing machine guns, Bhutto occupied the eleventh
floor of the Intercontinental Hotel. He turned down the tentative deal. On 24 March, Mujib’s advisers accepted the pact with minor changes to the
power transfer document as suggested by the president’s economic adviser.
On 25 March on the second anniversary of Yahya’s takeover, Mujib waited patiently for a call from Yahya’s advisers to set a time for the final
meeting in the afternoon. He became suspicious when he heard that Yahya’s economic adviser had left for West Pakistan in the morning. In the
afternoon, Bhutto told a news conference in Dhaka that he opposed Mujib’s six-point program. At 5:45 p.m., Yahya left the heavily guarded
president’s house and secretly boarded a plane for West Pakistan. The moment a message flashed Yahya’s safe landing in West Pakistan, the
generals in Dhaka issued the fateful order to begin the military operation.
At about 1 a.m., three military vehicles filled with soldiers under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Z.A. Khan, reached Mujib’s house. Khan,
later authored The Way It Was , an account of the military action in East Pakistan, published in 1998. Khan had come to Dhaka on 23 March
from Comilla, where he was stationed, to discuss a command problem. Upon his arrival, he was asked to report to the martial law headquarters
where Colonel S.D. Ahmad told him Mujib was to be arrested the next day and he had to make the necessary plan as the leader of the operation.
He was told to see General Rao Farman Ali in the morning of 24 March for a formal order. Farman Ali told the colonel the arrest would take
place in the night of 25 March. But Z.A. Khan and Farman Ali differed on how to carry out the arrest, and the colonel took his case to General
Osman Mitha, who was appointed deputy commander by Tikka Khan. Mitha took the colonel to General Hamid Khan, who upheld Z.A. Khan’s
decision and ordered General Farman Ali to provide the needed help. Hamid Khan ordered the colonel to take Mujib into custody alive, and
cautioned that Z.A. Khan would be held responsible if Mujib was harmed.
When the soldiers reached Mujib’s house, they started firing randomly. From the second floor, Mujib shouted: “Stop firing!” but the shooting
continued. One man was killed. Putting his wife and children into a room for safety, Mujib shouted again, this time loudly, “Stop firing!” When the
firing subsided, the colonel entered the house. Finding no one downstairs, he went upstairs and found Mujib standing outside the room, which was
closed from inside. One soldier hit him on his face. When the colonel asked Mujib to accompany him, he asked if he could say goodbye to his
family. He went into the room and came out quickly and then walked with the colonel to the military vehicles parked in front of his house.
Mujib then told the colonel he had forgotten his pipe. The colonel went back into the house with Mujib to bring his pipe. By then Mujib had
summoned back his courage, realising that the military would not harm him, and scolded the colonel: “Why didn’t you call me and come? I am
always here.” The colonel replied the military wanted to show him he could be arrested. Mujib remained in the Dhaka cantonment for a week
before he was flown to West Pakistan.
The Americans remained convinced till the end that Mujib did not want to break Pakistan. He would have possibly opted for a confederation
even in November, if given an option. “I don’t think Mujib’s objective in March was complete separatism or independence. Even now, I don’t
think some form of loose confederation between Yahya and Mujib is impossible,” Sisco told Kissinger on 24 November 1971, in Washington.
Sisco also believed India would accept a peaceful solution if Mujib were given power. India, he said, did not want war. “If Mujib were back in
power, he would organize an East Pakistan government and it wouldn’t be long before it was a separate entity or independent.”
Bhutto, who watched from his hotel his country burning into history, left Dhaka on 26 March in the morning. He eventually sought to salvage
Pakistan by proposing a compromise with Mujib in a Security Council resolution three days before Dhaka fell, but his move came way too late. He
had put the final nail in Pakistan’s coffin by pursuing his misguided ambition to rule the country. Yahya played his part – perhaps unwittingly – by
joining Bhutto’s “duck shooting” party in Larkana, Bhutto’s hometown, after his difficulty with Mujib, a steadfast devotee of the Bengalis”
emancipation. The top Pakistani generals, who doubted Mujib’s patriotism and viewed the Bengalis less than true Muslims, aided Pakistan’s
demise by misleading Yahya into a military adventure they mistakenly believed could easily put out the fire ignited by the Bengali revolt.
The Americans blamed Bhutto for the collapse of the Dhaka talks. “Bhutto’s own intransigence was the primary factor in prompting Yahya to
crack down on the Bengalis in March 1971,” commented William Spengler, U.S. consul general in Lahore. He made the remark while commenting
on a speech made by Bhutto in Gujranwala on 4 April 1975. In that speech, Bhutto claimed Mujib’s six-point program was authored by
foreigners, an indirect reference to India. Drawing a parallel to East Pakistan, Bhutto alleged the politicians in Baluchistan and the Northwest
Frontier Province were hatching a conspiracy with foreigners – in this case Afghanistan – to further break apart whatever remained of Pakistan. It
was a time when Bhutto faced a strong challenge to his power from Baluchistan and the Northwest Frontier Province.
Bhutto’s claim generated a sharp reaction from the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan. Bhutto’s Gujranwala speech, ostensibly aimed at “squabbles with
domestic opposition, represented the initiation of a campaign to present the public with a calculated explanation that his 1969-71 activities were
designed to prevent West Pakistan from disintegrating. However, we would expect the opposition to note his conspicuous skirting of his role in the
collapse of the Yahya-Mujib negotiations and charge him with the major responsibility for the split-off of the East wing,” Spengler observed in a
cable to the State Department on 7 April 1975.

4 
Kissinger's Diplomacy:
Tryst with Failure
ong before the Awami League’s landslide victory in the nation’s first free election, American foreign policy experts had predicted Pakistan’s
possible partition. The historic poll, they felt, put the final nail on Pakistan’s coffin, as it gave the Awami League an absolute majority in
parliament.
An American intelligence estimate in October 1970 said: “Pakistan’s domestic political prospects are clouded. A constituent assembly to be
chosen in December 1970 may lead to a new, elected government. But such a regime’s life expectancy is open to question. Over time, East and
West Pakistan seem more likely than not to become separate nations. Partition would hurt both economies, but the West wing would soon
recover, while the East would stagnate.”
Despite the forecast, the State Department was divided on America’s posture towards Pakistan. The department’s top policymakers viewed
the East Pakistan situation vastly differently from what many diplomats in the field witnessed. Washington’s policy machinery was slow to come to
terms with the brewing crisis, although the Americans did not completely take their eyes off South Asia.
On 6 March, a day before Sheikh Mujib made his historic address in Dhaka, Kissinger chaired a meeting of the Senior Review Group, a panel
comprising senior civilian and military officials, to discuss the Pakistan crisis.
Fourteen officials gathered around a table: four from the State Department, two from the Defence Department, two from the Central Intelligence
Agency, two from the Joint Chiefs, and four from the National Security Council staff.
State Department officials included: U. Alexis Johnson, under secretary for political affairs, the third-highest official at the State Department;
Christopher Van Hollen, deputy assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs; William Spengler, country director for
Pakistan and Afghanistan at the State Department; and Thomas Thornton, member of policy planning staff at the State Department.
Pentagon representatives included: James S. Noyes, deputy assistant secretary for International Security Affairs; and Brig. General Devol Brett,
director of Near East and South Asia. From the CIA came Director Richard Helms and David H. Blee, chief of Near East and South Asia
Division.
Colonel Richard Kennedy, member of the National Security Council staff, Saunders, Hoskinson, and Jeanne W. Davis, director, National
Security Council staff, Vice Admiral John Weinel, assistant to the Joint Chiefs chairman, and Colonel James Connell, of the Joint Chiefs, also
attended.
Opening the discussion, Johnson remarked that he believed all major players – the United States, the Soviet Union and India – had no interest in
breaking up Pakistan. Even if America did have an interest, he said, it had no control over the events and very little influence to affect its course.
Johnson felt that if America put off a decision on East Pakistan for a few days, Washington would not face an immediate problem.
The group found itself grappling with two serious questions: If Mujib told the United States he would unilaterally declare independence and
asked what Washington’s attitude would be, America would then face the issue of what to say. On the other hand, if Yahya used force against
East Pakistan, America must decide what attitude to adopt.
If Yahya used force, he could deploy 20,000 soldiers, including 12,000 combat troops, in a hostile land of 75 million Bengalis. It would result in
a bloodbath “with no hope of West Pakistan re-establishing control over East Pakistan.”
“In this event, we would be interested in bringing about a cessation of hostilities, but the question of whether we or others should take the lead
remains to be seen. We are talking with the British this afternoon about the situation,” Johnson revealed.
Dark Clouds Over Pakistan
The Americans saw dark clouds over Pakistan’s skies. “While we have maintained a posture of hoping the country can be brought together and its
unity preserved, the chances of doing so now are extremely slight. It is only a question of time and circumstances as to how they will split and to
what degree the split is complete or may be papered over in some vague confederal scheme,” Johnson offered.
He planned to give the U.S. missions in Dhaka and Islamabad a flavor of the group’s thinking and to instruct Dhaka to stall if Mujib approached
the consul general seeking recognition of a new East Pakistan regime.
“In general, we would like to see the unity preserved. If it cannot be, we would like to see the split takes place with the least possible bloodshed
or disorder. If Mujib approaches us, we will have to walk a tightrope between making him think we are not giving him the cold shoulder and not
encouraging him to move toward a split, if any hope remains for a compromise.”
Van Hollen, deputy assistant secretary of state, revealed that the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad had learned that Yahya had already resolved to
use force to control East Pakistan. But he believed that West Pakistan might accept something short of a unilateral declaration of independence,
eliminating the need for using force.
The Americans painted another scenario under which Pakistan’s two wings would run their own affairs, giving Mujib control in the East and
Bhutto in the West. Kissinger saw no problem to go along with such a solution if West Pakistan accepted it. But if the West rejected, then America
again would face the issue of recognising East Pakistan as a new country.
The Americans were convinced of Mujib’s popularity because of his massive election victory, which had given him 167 of 169 parliament seats
allocated for East Pakistan. He was considered friendly towards America, as his mentor, H.S. Shurawady, who was Pakistan’s prime minister in
the 1950s. On the contrary, Bhutto was “almost unparalledly unfriendly” to Washington.

Johnson opposed Pakistan’s use of force: “On the autonomy, if West Pakistan does not accept that solution and seeks to use force, I think we
would want to discourage the use of force. We would do the same in the event of a unilateral declaration of independence.” Because Mujib had
campaigned on East Pakistan’s full autonomy, America feared he could leave Pakistan, if the military rulers refused to grant him autonomy.
Kissinger played the devil’s advocate, asking Johnson, “Why should America do anything at all?”
Johnson explained what was at stake: “If the West Pakistanis use force, there will be a bloodbath or, at least, a situation of great turmoil in East
Pakistan. If it is quickly over, there would be no problem. But if it continues, there would be problems. The Indians, and possibly others, might feel
impelled to intervene if it continued.”
Johnson’s response elicited more questions from Kissinger. “What would we do to discourage use of force? Tell Yahya we don’t favor it?”
Johnson answered: “We would first go to the British to try to get them to take the lead. We shouldn’t take the lead.”
Despite drawing doom and gloom scenarios, the Americans remained convinced that keeping their mouth shut was the best course of action, at
least for the moment. They feared that Yahya would turn against America, because Pakistan suspected Washington of favoring East Pakistan’s
independence. “If we tell Yahya to call off the use of force, it will merely fuel this suspicion,” Van Hollen noted.
Kissinger reminded the group of the position being taken by President Nixon, who was preoccupied with establishing ties to China with Yahya’s
help. “The president will be very reluctant to do anything that Yahya could interpret as a personal affront. When we talk about trying to discourage
the West Pakistan intervention, we mean try to get another country with a history of concern in the area to do it. Would they do it in both our
names?”
Johnson persisted with his line of thinking: “We’ve just begun to look for someone to do it, if necessary. How it is done and the degree of our
association will be decided at the time. Our objective is to discourage the use of force.”
Kissinger continued with his probing questions: Would Yahya soon be gone?
“Not necessarily,” answered Van Hollen. “He could still remain as president, with Bhutto wielding all effective political power.”
Yahya had played off Bhutto against East Pakistan. Kissinger offered a scenario: If East Pakistan became independent, Bhutto would control
West Pakistan
Even if that happened, Van Hollen added, “Yahya will continue to represent the military establishment, which is a significant political force in
West Pakistan. He may retain some limited residual power.” The following exchange of views then transpired:
Kissinger: “In any event, we can’t neglect him.”
Johnson: “No.”
Kissinger: “Let’s keep that in mind.”
Johnson: “It would be most unwise to do anything to prejudice our relations with Yahya. To whatever degree he remains and has power, we
should do what we can to help him.”
Kissinger: “Would it make any difference if we suggested to West Pakistan that use of force would be unwise? You understand I don’t mind
having another country taking the rap.”
Johnson: “When we say ‘discourage‘ or ‘participate in discouraging’ we don’t mean pound the table and tell them they can’t do it. We mean
discuss it with them.”
CIA’s Helms had a different take. While most of the members of Nixon’s foreign policy team viewed Pakistan’s crisis as serious stuff, the CIA
boss labeled it merely as a family squabbling. “We don’t want to get into a family fight,” Helms said
But Kissinger would not drop the ball altogether: “If we could go in mildly as a friend to say we think it’s a bad idea, it wouldn’t be so bad. But
if the country is breaking up, they won’t be likely to receive such a message calmly. If we can get the British to do it, I wish them well!”
Johnson concurred. “We can’t reach a decision now on how to proceed. If we can get someone else to take the lead, okay. If not, we will have
to decide whether we want to do anything. I am not proposing we do anything, but it is a course of action we may have to consider.”
Kissinger: “I think we all see the pros and cons clearly. Alex [Johnson] and I will talk after his talks with the British. Every department will be
consulted before we make any move. We will also have a chance to take the issue before the president, if necessary.”
Van Hollen argued that the British might be very reluctant to do anything. However, if London agreed, it would have some advantages,
“because the Pakistanis are not as suspicious of the British as they are of us.”
Kissinger wondered whether sending the American ambassador in to argue against using force did not buy the United States “the worst of
everything. Will our doing so make the slightest difference? I can’t imagine that they give a damn what we think.”
Helms agreed: “My visceral reaction is to keep our distance as long as we can.”
Kissinger said Johnson would talk to the British if Mujib made a conciliatory speech on 7 March. He then wondered: “What if they declare their
independence? Will we get an immediate recognition request?”
Johnson thought Mujib could seek America’s recognition, “but we don’t have to rush. We can see what Mujib says in his approach to us. We
shouldn’t be the first to recognize. We will want to consult with the British first since they have interests in both East and West Pakistan.”
Van Hollen suggested consulting with Japan, West Germany and France.
Johnson advocated against America being the first nation to recognize East Pakistan’s independence: “We will want to recognize eventually, but
not be the first.”
Kissinger wanted to know what the U.S. consul general in Dhaka should do if the East Pakistanis sought America’s recognition.
He would refer to Washington, Van Hollen suggested.
Kissinger then asked whether Washington should consult with India if a military situation developed. “I wonder whether we should do that. I can
see that, if there is a threat of Indian military intervention, we might wish to advise them that we think it unwise.”
Van Hollen: “The prospect of Indian intervention is very slim in the early stages.”
Kissinger thought the Chinese were unlikely to intervene militarily.
Van Hollen wanted to explore how the United States would act if a real bloodbath developed, something comparable to the Biafra situation,

grabbing international attention.
Both Kissinger and Johnson opposed imposing sanctions on West Pakistan or recalling the U.S. ambassador from Islamabad, but the group
came to no conclusion as to what should be done.
They all agreed, though, that very little could be gained by the U.S. diplomatic intervention. The best posture to take was to do nothing that
Yahya might find objectionable. The choice was basically between continuing on this course, at least until the situation jelled, and weighing in with
Yahya to prevent a bloody civil war.
Kissinger based his do-nothing approach on two premises: (1) “It is not necessary for us to shift now to a more activist approach since Yahya
knows we favor unity and is doing everything possible to achieve a political settlement.” (2) “It is undesirable for us to intervene now since we
could realistically have little influence on the situation and anything we might do could be resented by the West Pakistanis as unwarranted
interference and jeopardize our future relations.”
He, however, was fully cognisant of the downside to his policy of sitting idle.
“The main cost of following this approach,” Kissinger elaborated, “is that it may jeopardize our future relations with East Pakistan if it becomes
independent. On balance, however, it is a more defensible position to operate as if the country remains united than to take any move that would
appear to encourage separation.”
On 13 March, Kissinger told Nixon in a memo that an immediate outbreak of violence between East and West Pakistan had been avoided, but
“the prospects for reconciliation and settlement remain poor.” Nixon put a check mark on the memorandum to indicate he saw it.
By mid-March, the Americans had become increasingly convinced that Yahya would use force to keep Pakistan’s unity, if necessary. They saw
danger signs in Yahya’s actions. One hint came from his decision to replace the military governor in East Pakistan with a general who was more
tough, General Tikka Khan. The other was the harsh tone he took in his 6 March speech, sending out an explicit warning that force would be used
against any move for separation.
America also took as clue Pakistan’s troop reinforcement in the East wing through Sri Lanka. Yahya might personally lean towards conciliation,
but he must answer to the dominant hardliners in his army who favored a crackdown on the Bengalis.
Washington also saw a hardening of attitude on the part of the Awami League. While Mujib refrained from an open declaration of
independence, his 7 March speech conveyed a harsher tone. It seemed apparent that his retreat was tactical, Kissinger told Nixon in his memo.
“His speech last Sunday would suggest an effort to achieve his goal by gradual assertion of power without risking a direct confrontation with the
army that might follow a unilateral declaration of independence,” Kissinger’s memo noted.
Mujib quite openly took issue with Yahya, claiming that his Awami League was the only legitimate source of authority in the country. The
Bengali leader’s posture prompted the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad to advise Washington that Mujib’s goal remained unchanged – East Pakistan’s
“emancipation” from West Pakistan’s domination.
Kissinger interpreted “this could still conceivably mean full provincial autonomy within a united Pakistan.” But it was just as likely, if not more so,
that Mujib had concluded the freedom he sought was only attainable by outright independence.
Kissinger then outlined various possible steps Yahya could undertake and summed up by saying: “In short, the Pakistan crisis is far from over
and could suddenly flare up again.”
A short time later, East Pakistan plunged into a river of blood. When Kissinger briefed Nixon after the military crackdown on 26 March 1971,
he advised the president to wait on deciding whether to ask Yahya to stop the bloodshed.
“It is probably a bit early to make this decision today because we do not yet know whether calm will be restored in the East or whether the
pattern of violence will continue and broaden. This, therefore, seems a decision for the next two or three days,” Kissinger told Nixon.
On the issue of how to respond to a definitive announcement of East Pakistani independence, Kissinger noted that “our consul general has
standing instructions to refer any such question to Washington. The issue might remain unclear for some time if the military re-establishes control in
the cities and the resistance moves to the countryside. On the other hand, our response will set the tone for our relationship with both the wings.”
He promised Nixon to send recommendations after a meeting of the president’s top foreign policy advisers. Kissinger held a meeting of the
Washington Special Action Group (WSAG) later in the day. When he was told the military arrested Mujib after his talks with Yahya had
collapsed, Kissinger asked what would happen next.
Van Hollen was the first to offer his views: “The ability of the West Pakistani forces to maintain law and order in East Pakistan over the long run
approaches zero. They may be able to control Dacca, but the Awami leadership will move to the countryside.”
Despite the possibility of an escalation of fighting looming in the horizon, the group agreed America needed to do nothing for the moment.
Kissinger told the group that Nixon refused to be “in a position where he can be accused of having encouraged the split-up of Pakistan. He does
not favor a very active policy. This probably means that we would not undertake to warn Yahya against a civil war.”
Kissinger then queried, how the United States would act if it were asked to recognize East Pakistan’s independence. Despite the sharp turn of
events, no new line of thinking had evolved.
Van Hollen advocated a “go-slow” approach.
Kissinger: “I talked to the Indian ambassador the other day. He said that the Indians preferred Pakistan to remain united because of the pressure
an independent Bengal would create” on the on-going communist movement in West Bengal.
Later in the day, Kissinger briefed Nixon: “Our embassy believes that the military probably has sufficient strength to assert immediate control
over Dacca and other major cities, but is not capable of maintaining control over an extended period.”
After reviewing East Pakistan’s situation, on 26 March the WSAG recommended continuing the policy adopted earlier – the United States
should not get involved in the dispute between West and East Pakistan.
Particularly, it suggested, the United States should avoid being in a situation where it could be accused of encouraging Pakistan’s breakup. The
panel agreed America should delay any action on the recognition of an independent East Pakistani, should it receive such a request.
American diplomats traced the motivations behind the Pakistani military action in East Pakistan to the events at least as far back as the creation
of Pakistan in 1947. The CIA prepared an assessment 19 January 1971, on the future direction of Pakistan’s foreign policy. The study highlighted

the two wings’ opposing goals: East Pakistan, seeking economic justice for the Bengalis, hoped for better relations with India; West Pakistan,
preoccupied with Kashmir, pursued a hostile posture towards New Delhi.
For the Bengalis, Kashmir was neither an emotional nor an especially urgent issue. During the 1970 election campaign, Mujib gave mere lip
service to Kashmir’s self-determination. Privately, he urged the issue be put on the back burner in order to first address East Pakistan’s pressing
matters.
“We believe that normalization of relations with our neighbors would be to the best advantage of our peoples,” Mujib had told the nation in a
broadcast in 1970. He wanted to resume trade with India and get water for East Pakistan from India. East Pakistani jute was shipped to Kolkata
via Singapore. Assam could no longer export agricultural products by river through East Pakistan. East Pakistan imported coal from fields
thousands of miles away in China, instead of Indian fields only a few hundred miles away.
“Mujib and most East Pakistanis would not view India in the same light as have Pakistan’s rulers,” the CIA report noted, predicting how
Pakistan would conduct foreign policy if Mujib became prime minster. “Because of their struggle for provincial autonomy, the Bengalis of East
Pakistan see domination from West Pakistan as a more immediate threat to their independence than India, and considerations, such as competition
with New Delhi for international prestige, have been irrelevant to the Bengali cause.”
U.S. Turns a Blind Eye to Massacre
Still, the Americans believed that the principle of a better deal for the East wing had won increasing acceptance in West Pakistan, even among
hardliners, such as the military leadership, for whom Pakistan’s integrity was the summum bonum . This was reflected in Yahya’s protracted
efforts to achieve an acceptable political basis for the transfer of power. This was the assessment of the American ambassador – turning a blind
eye to the March massacre – terming it as a natural course of action by a government to keep order in a country by cracking down on a group that
flouted the law.
“Yahya’s use of the military force in East Pakistan on 25-26 March, precisely two years after he replaced Ayub as president, came after a
period of several weeks during which Mujib and his Awami League had in effect been ruling East Pakistan through a parallel government,” he said.
“The orders promulgated and enforced by the Awami League amounted to a rebellion against the established government in the eyes of the West
Pakistanis. The destruction of Pakistan flags and their replacement by Bangladesh standards and impediments placed in the way of civil and military
activities in East Pakistan could have been described as acts of insurrection.”
Morally abhorrent though it might be, Farland continued, a pragmatist one could not but accept such measures in trying times.
“We can hold no brief for what seems to have been the brutal, ruthless and excessive use of force by the Pak military not only in putting down
the limited resistance but in seeking out and destroying presumed opponents in East Pakistan. Incidents involving wanton military force, which the
consul general in Dacca and others have reported, arouse our indignation, and we can appreciate the sense of horror felt by witnesses at the scene.
Since we are not only human beings but also government servants, however righteous indignation is not of itself an adequate basis for our reaction
to the events now occurring in East Pakistan. The constituted government is using force against citizens accused of flouting its authority,” the
ambassador justified.
The American embassy in Islamabad supported continuing the same do-nothing policy even after the crackdown. Although the crisis had
“changed the course, but problems remain essentially internal to Pakistan,” the embassy maintained. “In this embassy’s view, deplorable as the
current events in East Pakistan may be, it is undesirable that they be raised to the level of contentious international political issue.”
Farland’s views guided the Nixon administration until the fighting eventually engulfed India nine months later.
On 21 April, Farland sent a back-channel message to Kissinger, supporting America’s pro-Yahya policy despite stiff opposition from the U.S.
diplomats posted in Dhaka. He argued that the United States “would be expected to make early financial commitments far beyond” what it could
afford, if East Pakistan became independent. Farland dismissed the notion that America’s opposition to an independent East Pakistan would
antagonize the Bengalis for too long, an apprehension some policymakers cited to buttress their position to lean on Yahya.
“Advocates for a pro-Bangladesh posture also argue that Bengali goodwill will be irreparably lost unless the United States immediately changes
its policy from that which has been declared to that of support for an independent East Pakistan,” he said. “This argument certainly would be valid
as far as many individual Bengalis are concerned, but given the premise that Bangladesh does come into being some time in the future, I submit that
the economic and administrative needs will be so great that the U.S. government friendship and aid will be eagerly sought after by the new
government.”
The Nixon administration’s initial policy after the crackdown was based on its concern about the stability of the region, which was geopolitically
significant in terms of the Soviet Union and China. India was of potentially greater significance than Pakistan. Therefore, in formulating U.S. policy,
the relative preeminence of American interests in India was an underlying factor in the decisions that Washington made. As a result, on an
operational level, America wanted to keep a close relationship with India and reasonable relations with West Pakistan, while avoiding steps that
could irreparably damage a yet-undefined future relationship with East Pakistan. Three major ingredients were behind the strategy that America
followed since the civil war started: restraint, international aid, and political accommodation.
Washington advised both Islamabad and New Delhi to exercise restraint to avoid an all-out war. On the Indian side, this reinforced restraint,
although contingency planning for war continued. America’s counsel was somewhat less successful in Pakistan.
America put considerable effort into lessening India’s refugee burden. Washington considered it to be the most likely cause for war between
India and Pakistan. To this end, America offered grants and loans to India and actively promoted the relief effort of the United Nations. On the
Pakistani side, Washington promoted an international relief effort to help the refugees return home. Islamabad initially responded slowly, but later
embraced it.
The Nixon administration urged Yahya to move as fast as possible with political accommodation in East Pakistan. Recognising the complex and
sensitive issues involved and the fact that Yahya might have had only limited political flexibility, Washington refrained from attempting to spell out
the details beyond the need to deal with political leaders. However, these efforts bore no meaningful results.
On July 8, Kissinger met with Yahya in Islamabad, but did not prepare a record of his conversation. In his memoirs, he wrote that Yahya was

oblivious to his perils. Yahya and his colleagues felt that India did not want war. They were convinced that they would win, if India really attacked.
When Kissinger pointed to India’s advantage in numbers and equipment, Yahya, who claimed to be directly descended from the lineage of warrior
nobles who fought in the elite armies of Nadir Shah, the Persian adventurer who conquered Delhi in the eighteenth century, “answered with
bravado about the historic superiority of Moslem fighters”.
Upon his return to Washington, Kissinger prepared a memo for the record on his trip to Asia. A copy of this report was sent to Rogers, who
was then staying in the Western White House in California.
“Most are still talking about the importance of a political settlement in East Pakistan, but I sense an increasing judgment that Yahya does not
have the capacity to bring this off, certainly not on his present course. There seems to be a growing sense of the inevitability of war or at least
widespread Hindu-Muslim violence, not necessarily because anyone wants it but because in the end they fear they will not know how to avoid it,”
Kissinger wrote.
Based on his conversation with Singh during his visit to New Delhi, Kissinger concluded that India would accept a settlement excluding Mujib.
“In a brief private session, he told me that India would not insist on a settlement involving the jailed East Pakistani leader, Mujibur Rahman, but
would be satisfied if Pakistan could come up with a solution that is nonmilitary and noncommunal; i.e., is not biased against the Hindus.”
Kissinger’s trust in Singh was misplaced. India could not have possibly supported a settlement without Mujib because no other Awami League
leader could pull off a deal with Yahya that would win the approval of the Bengali masses. And, unless the Awami League assumed power in East
Pakistan, the traumatized Hindus would not have returned home, a situation India was reluctant to live with. Kissinger’s warning on war, though,
fell on deaf ears in both India and Pakistan; neither side took it seriously. India had already made up its mind that an independent Bangladesh
served its interests best by creating a condition conducive to the repatriation of the refugees and eliminating its arch enemy once and for all.
Pakistan, on the other hand, mistakenly believed India would not wage a war against a country that was supported by a communist giant and a
superpower. Even if New Delhi was foolish enough to embark upon such a misadventure, Yahya miscalculated that his brave Muslim warriors
would prevail against the Hindu soldiers, whom he perceived to be timid.

5 
Blood Telegram:
Diplomatic Revolt in East Pakistan
he United States, which initially decided to maintain a hands-off posture in the East Pakistan conflict, got a wake-up call when Archer
Blood, the U.S. consul general in Dhaka, sent a telegram to Washington on 28 March 1971, on the Bengali massacre. He questioned the
wisdom of America’s do-nothing policy that ignored the dire situation on the ground.
“Here in Dacca, we are mute and horrified witnesses to a reign of terror by the Pakistani military,” he vented. “Evidence continues to mount that
the martial law authorities have a list of Awami League supporters whom they are systematically eliminating by seeking them out in their homes and
shooting them down.”
In addition to the Awami Leaguers, student leaders and university faculty were also among those killed by the military. With the military’s
support, non-Bengali Muslims systematically attacked poor people’s quarters, murdering the Bengalis. Dhaka’s streets swarmed with the Hindus
and others seeking to flee the city. The envoy reported that many Bengalis had sought refuge in the homes of the Americans, most of whom were
extending them shelter.
“The full horror of Pak military atrocities will come to light sooner or later. I, therefore, question continued advisability of the present U.S.
government posture of pretending to believe the government of Pakistan’s false assertions,” Blood fumed.
“We should be expressing our shock, at least privately to the government of Pakistan, at this wave of terror directed against their own
countrymen by the Pak military. I, of course, would have to be identified as the source of information and, presumably, the government of Pakistan
would ask me to leave. I do not believe the safety of the American community would be threatened as a consequence, but our communication
capability would be compromised.”
The consulate general reported that the army was setting houses on fire and shooting people as they emerged from the burning houses. On 30
March, the mission reported that the army had killed many apparently unarmed students at Dhaka University.
The U.S. Embassy in Islamabad concurred with the recommendation to express the consulate’s sense of horror and indignation at the “brutal,
ruthless and excessive use of force by the Pak military,” but opposed any action by Washington. Farland advised: “In this embassy’s view,
deplorable as current events in East Pakistan may be, it is undesirable that they be raised to [the] level of contentious international political issue.”
When Nixon, in a telephone conversation on 29 March, briefly discussed with Kissinger the reports of atrocities in East Pakistan, he agreed
with the position taken by Farland. “I wouldn’t put out a statement praising it, but we’re not going to condemn it, either,” Nixon told Kissinger.
Nixon discussed Pakistan’s crisis with Kissinger from San Clemente, California. When he asked if there was anything of interest, Kissinger told
him, “Apparently, Yahya has got control of East Pakistan.”
“The use of power against seeming odds pays off,” Kissinger added. “All the experts were saying that 30,000 people can’t get control of 75
million. Well, this may still turn out to be true, but as of this moment it seems to be quiet.”
Nixon commented: “Well, maybe things have changed. But hell, when you look over the history of nations 30,000 well-disciplined people can
take 75 million any time. Look what the Spanish did when they came in and took the Incas and all the rest. Look what the British did when they
took India.”
Kissinger: “The Bengalis have been extremely difficult to govern throughout their history.”
Nixon: “The Indians can’t govern them, either.”
Kissinger: “Actually, the Indians whom one normally would expect to favor a breakup of Pakistan aren’t so eager for this one. Because they’re
afraid that East Pakistan may in time, or East Bengal may in time, have an attraction for West Bengal with Calcutta and also that the Chinese will
gain a lot of influence there.”
Kissinger ended by saying, “And that, I think, is a good chance.”
Kissinger talked with Nixon once again the next day. Nixon still favored continuing America’s do-nothing strategy. “The main thing to do is to
keep cool and not do anything. There’s nothing in it for us either way,” the president told his national security aide.
The day Blood sent his report from Dhaka, Hoskinson of the National Security Council, prepared a memorandum for Kissinger, painting a
gloomy picture for Pakistan. East Pakistan’s situation apparently had taken another turn for the worse, he wrote. Having beaten down the initial
surge of resistance, the army now appeared to have embarked on a reign of terror aimed at eliminating the core of future resistance. At least, this
seemed to be the situation in Dhaka. “We have virtually no reliable information on the situation in the other major cities or what is going on in the
countryside where most of the population resides.”
Echoing Blood’s views, Hoskinson’s report also questioned the wisdom of ignoring the atrocities. Should America express “our shock at least
privately to the West Pakistanis?” he asked. Citing Blood’s telegram, he said, “the time has now come to approach the West Pakistanis.”
Hoskinson said the Indians were clearly nervous about the situation, but unlikely to intervene. However, Gandhi faced pressure and “we know
that they are dusting off their own contingency plans.” He advocated closer consultations with India. “When tensions are high in the subcontinent,
there is always a chance that another irrational move could ignite a larger and even more serious conflict. Is now the time, as our contingency plans
would seem to suggest, to begin closer consultations with New Delhi?”
He recommended that Kissinger put Pakistan on his agenda for discussion at the next meeting of the Senior Review Group, a panel of
policymakers in Washington. But there was only a passing discussion of the issue when the group met on 31 March.
During the meeting, Johnson informed Kissinger that Secretary of State William Rogers felt that the “sentiment in India may force the Indians to
be the first to recognize Bangladesh – unless Ambassador Keating beats them to the punch.” Kenneth Keating was then America’s ambassador to

India.
Lieutenant General Robert Cushman, deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency, said Pakistan’s situation posed a problem for India and
raised a question whether or not New Delhi should support the Bengalis.
Kissinger responded by saying that India would suffer from an independent state in East Pakistan. It could create problems in West Bengal,
where a communist insurgency had by then caused a big headache for New Delhi. He then asked how the Pakistani soldiers would fare in the
countryside in East Pakistan; could 30,000 troops control the 75 million Bengalis?
Cushman made a dire prediction: The situation “could be very bloody.”
Kissinger then asked whether the Bengalis in the countryside were politically conscious and whether they would fight against the Pakistani
soldiers.
David Blee, head of CIA’s Soviet division, replied: “The Bengalis are extremely politically conscious, but they are not fighters.”
Johnson argued that, ultimately, 30,000 troops would be unable to control 75 million Bengalis.
Blee added the Bengalis would seek help from India.
When Kissinger asked if India would help, Blee pointed out that a huge 400 out of 525 members of the Lok Sabha [the lower house of India’s
parliament] had signed a petition demanding recognition for East Pakistan as an independent nation.
Cushman observed: If India did not, the Chinese would aid the Bengalis.
Blee agreed. China right now supported West Pakistan, but Beijing could change its policy.
Kissinger asked whether Pakistan would execute Mujib.
Pakistan might do so, Blee said.
Kissinger asked Blee if professor Abdur Razzak of Dhaka University had been killed. “He was one of my students” at Harvard, Kissinger
recalled.
Blee said: “I think so. They killed a lot of people at the university.”
Seven days after the Dhaka massacre, on 3 April the secretary of state told Nixon that East Pakistan’s situation had seriously deteriorated over
the last ten days. What exactly happened on the night of 25-26 March after the military crackdown in Dhaka might never be known because
reports were conflicting and first-hand evidence was scarce, Rogers said, adding that the U.S. consul general in Dhaka estimated that between
4000 and 6000 people were killed in the city over the next several days.
Extensive damage was done to Dhaka University, pro-Awami League newspaper offices and to Hindu settlements in Dhaka. Chittagong also
suffered considerable damage and fatalities. A semblance of normality had returned to Dhaka, but small-arms firing could still be heard at night in
residential areas where the Americans lived. Some foreigners had already narrowly escaped with their lives. Most shops remained closed. A very
small portion of the civil servants were at work in government offices. It was impossible for foreigners to leave the vicinity of Dhaka or Chittagong,
where most of the nearly 750 Americans in East Pakistan lived.
East Pakistan’s future would depend upon the Pakistan armed forces” ability to maintain an effective military control. Thus far, the Awami
League resistance groups had gained little momentum. However, the memo warned, over time these resistance elements might be able to mount a
large-scale rebellion with possible covert support from the Bengali elements in India. The key question, Rogers wondered, was whether the events
had made it unlikely – or impossible – for Pakistan ever again to assert effective political influence over the East.
“During the period immediately ahead we may be faced with a number of difficult policy decisions. These include our political reaction to the
events in East Pakistan and various aspects of our economic assistance and military supply programs for Pakistan,” the secretary told Nixon.
“Blood Telegram” Criticizes Nixon Policy
Soon afterward, on 6 April, the U.S. mission in Dhaka sent a telegram to the State Department in which twenty diplomats voiced their concern
over Washington’s position on East Pakistan. The message was later dubbed as the “Blood telegram” after Archer Blood, then the U.S. consul
general in Dhaka.
“Our government has failed to denounce the suppression of democracy. Our government has failed to denounce atrocities. Our government has
failed to take forceful measures to protect its citizens while at the same time bending over backwards to placate the West Pak dominated
government and to lessen likely and deservedly negative international public relations impact against them. Our government has evidenced what
many will consider moral bankruptcy, ironically at a time when the U.S.S.R. sent President Yahya a message defending democracy, condemning
arrest of the leader of the democratically elected majority party [incidentally pro-West] and calling for an end to repressive measures and
bloodshed,” the telegram said.
“In our most recent policy paper for Pakistan, our interests in Pakistan were defined as primarily humanitarian, rather than strategic. But we have
chosen not to intervene, even morally, on the grounds that the Awami League conflict, in which unfortunately the overworked term genocide is
applicable, is purely internal matter of a sovereign state. Private Americans have expressed disgust. We, as professional public servants, express
our dissent with the current policy and fervently hope that our true and lasting interests here can be defined and our policies redirected in order to
salvage our nation’s position as a moral leader of the free world.”
Blood, who himself had expressed grave concerns in his previous memo, endorsed the message, but did not sign it.
“I believe the views of these officers, who are among the finest U.S. officials in East Pakistan, are echoed by the vast majority of the American
community, both official and unofficial. I also subscribe to these views but I do not think it appropriate for me to sign their statement as long as I
am principal officer at this post. My support of their stand takes on another dimension.”
“As I hope to develop in further reporting, I believe the most likely eventual outcome of the struggle underway in East Pakistan is a Bengali
victory and the consequent establishment of an independent Bangladesh. At the moment, we possess the good will of the Awami League. We
would be foolish to forfeit this asset by pursuing a rigid policy of one-sided support to the likely loser,” he ended.
Blood gave the telegram low classification. In his 1979 book, White House Years , Kissinger said the consulate general deliberately gave the

low classification to encourage a broad circulation in Washington. The distribution limitation was later added to the telegram in the State
Department.
Blood’s telegram won support from several American officials. Seven specialists at the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs wrote
to Rogers on 6 April, saying they shared the views expressed in the telegram. Farland supported the principle that the mission staffers had the right
to express their views on the problems facing the United States in the Pakistan crisis. The embassy had also raised serious concern about the
developments in East Pakistan. Farland suggested that Washington review its policy that excluded interference in Pakistan’s domestic affairs.
On 7 April the State Department replied to the consulate in Dhaka. Sisco, the assistant secretary of state, drafted the telegram and Rogers
approved it. Responding to the complaint that Washington failed to denounce the Pakistani military actions, Sisco blamed conflicting reports about
the atrocities for the lack of sufficient response. He, however, asserted the State Department had been vocal – the department spokesman had
made statements between 26 March and 5 April voicing concern about the “loss of life, damage and hardship suffered by the people of Pakistan.”
But none addressed the atrocities reported from Dhaka.
The cable from Dhaka infuriated Washington, especially the secretary of state. Rogers vented his frustration with Kissinger during a telephone
conversation on 6 April.
Rogers: “I wanted to talk about that goddam message from our people in” Dhaka. “Did you see it?”
Kissinger: “No.”
Rogers: “It’s miserable. They bitched about our policy and have given it lots of distribution so it will probably leak. It’s inexcusable.”
He then asked Kissinger to keep the telegram from Nixon and hold on to it. “I will appreciate it. In the first place, I think we have made a good
choice,” Rogers said.
Kissinger promised to help: “Unless it hits the wires, I will hold it. I will not forward it.”
On 10 April 1971, Blood sent yet another dispatch in which he explained the specific reason why the staff members in Dhaka objected to the
Nixon’s administration policy to support Yahya against the Bengalis.
He wrote that Washington had promised in a 2 March document on the U.S. posture towards Pakistan that “if a West Pakistani intervention
becomes imminent or actually occurs, we would have an interest in doing what we could to avoid bloodshed and restore peace, and to prevent the
conflict from escalating beyond a purely East-West Pakistan clash. We should be willing to risk irritating the West Pakistanis in the face of such a
rash act on their part, and the threat of stopping aid should give us a considerable leverage.”
“We concur with this proposal but are concerned that it seemingly has been ignored,” Blood fumed. “Our dissent with the current policy stems
largely from a disagreement with our colleagues” analysis of the current situation.”
Blood said the staffers in Dhaka questioned “Yahya’s bona fides in seeking a political solution that would incorporate minimal Bengali demands.
Yahya’s 1 March postponement of the National Assembly session for an indefinite period was taken here as vindication of Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman’s contention voiced at the 3 January rally that “politics in Pakistan has been politics of conspiracy.”
Not only the Americans but also many Pakistanis suspected Yahya’s talks were a camouflage to prepare for the military crackdown. Once such
skeptic was Mumtaz Daultana, president of the Pakistan Council Muslim League. He considered Yahya” s moves in the post-March 1 period as a
charade, the consul general noted, adding that “we outlined our prognostication that the military repression of the moderates would radicalize them
and force them to ally with the extreme left.”
The Americans in Dhaka took exception with Farland’s line that “since we are not only human beings but government servants, however
righteous indignation is not of itself an adequate basis for our reaction to the events now occurring in East Pakistan.”
“In a country wherein our primary interests defined as humanitarian rather than strategic, moral principles, indeed, are relevant to the issue.
Horror and flouting of democratic norms we have reported are objective realities and not emotionally contrived. It is inconceivable that the world
can mount a magnificent relief effort to save the victims of last November’s cyclone disaster on one hand and on the other condone the
indiscriminate killing of the same people by essentially an alien army defending interests different from those of the general populace.”
Blood also castigated Farland’s contention that the situation should be viewed simply as a “constituted” government using force against citizens
accused of flouting its authority. “Although existing as de facto government, at least in West Pakistan, the extra-constitutional martial law regime of
President Yahya Khan is of dubious legitimacy. [How many votes did Yahya obtain?]”
He questioned how the martial law administration could describe the freely elected representatives of 73 percent of the voters of East Pakistan
as “miscreants.” Ironically, the consul general noted, most of the countryside of East Pakistan apparently were in the hands of these miscreants.
“We do not see the issue as a distinctly internal one. Aside from international moral obligations to condemn genocide [of Pakistani Hindus,
although by Webster’s definition the term likewise seems applicable to Awami League followers who are being hunted down with a vengeance],
geographical realities also enter the equation. The conflict has definite colonial versus anti-colonial aspects. Previous examples of people of one
region fighting for freedom from the domination by people of another physically discontiguous territory historically have been glorified as
revolutions, wars of national liberation, anti-colonial wars, etc. In defiance of geography, as well as ethnic and linguistic differences inveighing
against the unity of Pakistan, we continue to be blinded to the reality of the situation. People of East Pakistan want to live as a free people of a free
country, preferably within Pakistan, but, if given no other choice, outside it, they want to participate in deciding their own destiny. Even our
forefathers fought for similar ideals. Thus, we find the view that “deplorable as current events in East Pakistan may be, it is undesirable that they be
raised to the level of a ‘contentious international issue’ is a woefully inadequate reaction to the events. This contrasts sharply with the more decisive
reaction of the Russians, who for their own reasons went on the public record with a message to which many of us could subscribe on grounds [of]
both national interest and morality. To us, an independent ‘Bangla Desh’ is now inevitable.”
To the end, Blood said that since the above statements were written, the staffers had sensed that Washington, Islamabad and Dhaka had started
talking on approximately the same wavelength. So, there shall be no rebuttal from Washington and Islamabad to this rebuttal, he urged.
“These are matters which can best be discussed over a drink with friends and colleagues when the opportunity next presents itself,” he said,
adding that the dissenters were motivated by their desire to try to influence changes in U.S. policy towards Pakistan. He promised to soon send
policy recommendations to this end.
Blood’s cables infuriated the White House. Nixon recalled Blood from Dhaka and assigned him to the State Department’s personnel office,

despite Kissinger’s concession that “there was some merit to the charge of moral insensitivity.”
Blood, who died in Colorado in 2004 at the age of 81, was honored by his colleagues in 1971 with the Christian A. Herter Award for his
“initiative, integrity, intellectual courage and creative dissent.” The Archer K. Blood American Center Library at the U.S. Embassy in Dhaka
honors his memory in an independent Bangladesh that he prophesied and supported.
Why did America continue to support Pakistan despite having full knowledge of these atrocities?
In his memoirs, Kissinger wrote that the dissent cable presented a dilemma for the administration. “The United States could not condone a brutal
military repression,” and there was “no doubt about the strong-arm tactics of the Pakistani military.” He attributed the administration’s decision not
to react publicly to the military repression in East Pakistan to Nixon’s desire to protect “our sole channel to China”.
Peter Constable, country director of Pakistan at the State Department, provided an official explanation in a testimony after the war. He told the
House Committee on Foreign Affairs in 1973 that when the East Pakistan tragedy began, America developed a policy that had three objectives: to
provide humanitarian aid, to encourage a political settlement, and to prevent war.
“Throughout the crisis period, the United States was constantly alive to the dangers that increasing tensions between Pakistan and India could
lend to an outbreak of war with a potential for a larger conflict that could threaten world peace,” Constable told the House panel, headed by
Congressman Donald Fraser.
On the political front, Washington sought to use its influence through quiet diplomacy to advance a political accommodation, a reference to the
secret talks in Kolkata with Bangladesh leaders to arrange a compromise with Yahya Khan. Individual elements of the U.S. strategy, such as in
gaining Yahya’s assurances that he would not execute Sheikh Mujib, produced positive results, but “the overall effort at political accommodation
was cut short by the eruption of a full-scale war between India and Pakistan,” he added.
Fraser would not buy Constable’s rationale for Nixon’s tilt against India.
“Let me ask this,” he said. “Suppose, the United States had been a neighbor of Bangladesh instead of India. With at least hundreds of thousands
of persons being slaughtered and millions of refugees crossing the boundaries, is it your view that the United States would have felt that the
massacre in Bangladesh was none of its concern and it should refrain from any intervention because it was an internal domestic matter?”
Constable budged. “We would view such a situation along our own borders with a great sense of alarm.” He said Nixon refused to criticize
Yahya publicly because he felt “that would be counterproductive.” He rather chose to “work through quiet diplomacy and we did make an effort
through quiet diplomacy. We had continuous talks with the leadership of the government of Pakistan as well as the leaders in India and with some
of the Bengali leaders who were in the Bangladesh government in Calcutta working toward a solution, which we thought was a viable way to end
the violence in East Pakistan.”
Many in the Nixon administration, including Kissinger, blamed the president’s China policy for the disastrous posture, but it is hard to take that
explanation at face-value if one thoroughly studies the entire picture. America’s disdain for India could be traced to the pre-Partition time as far
back as 1942 – when a U.S. technical mission invited by the Indian government to investigate India’s industrial resources, to recommend
production of war materials, came under harsh criticism in the Indian press. America often faced accusations, even during British rule, that it
interfered in Indian politics. President Roosevelt’s personal envoy Colonel Louis Johnson faced such a charge during the Cripps Mission (The
Cripps mission was an attempt in late March 1942 by the British government to secure Indian cooperation and support for its efforts in World War
II, with a promise to grant India self-rule after the war. The mission was headed by Sir Stafford Cripps, a senior left-wing politician and
government minister in the War Cabinet of Prime Minister Winston Churchill). Ironically, the Americans consistently sought to avoid these types of
accusations. It was America’s traditional strategy to avoid charges of interference, coupled with Nixon’s personal anti-Indian mindset, that guided
the administration not to press Yahya despite pleas by its diplomats to do so. Kissinger also erred in his judgement that Pakistan’s military would
quickly crush the Bengali rebellion and eventually find it wise to let East Pakistan become independent.

