Nixon: “Threaten to move forces or move them, Henry, that’s what they must do now. Now, goddammit, we’re playing our role and that will
restrain India. And also tell them this will help us get the ceasefire.”
He indicated that he did not want to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union that China would reject. Kissinger agreed: “If we stay strong,
even if it comes out badly, we’ll have come out well with the Chinese, which is important.”
Nixon: “Coming back to this India-Pakistan thing, have we got anything else we can do?”
Kissinger: “I think we’re going to crack it now.”
Nixon: “Well, the Indians will be warned by the Chinese, right?”
Kissinger: “Well, I’ll have to find out tonight.”
Nixon: “You do your best, Henry. This should have been done long ago. The Chinese have not warned the Indians. They haven’t warned them
that they’re going to come in. And that’s the point, they’ve got to warn them . . . All they’ve got to do is move something. Move their, move a
division. You know, move some trucks. Fly some planes. You know, some symbolic act. We’re not doing a goddamn thing, Henry, you know
that. We’re just moving things around, aren’t we?”
Kissinger agreed: “Yeah.”
Nixon: “These Indians are cowards, right?”
Kissinger: “Right, but with Russian backing. You see the Russians have sent notes to Iran, Turkey, to a lot of countries threatening them. The
Russians have played a miserable game.”
Looking ahead, Nixon asked whether the United States should recognize the emerging political reality in East Pakistan. “What do we do about
that? Are we going to just say . . . Indian occupation or Bangladesh? Or what? Are we going to oppose the Bangladesh recognition? What’s our
position? Is anybody involved on these things?”
Kissinger responded: “After the Brezhnev letter came yesterday, we sent a copy of it to Yahya . . . And now Yahya has come back with a
proposal saying ceasefire, negotiations for mutual withdrawal, and negotiations to settle the political future . . . And then what will happen on
Bangladesh, Mr. President, is that whatever West Pakistan and these people work out we will accept. But we will not be in the fore, in the front.”
Nixon: “Whatever West Pakistan works out with whom?”
Kissinger: “The negotiations on East Pakistan.”
Nixon: “But India will not agree to negotiations on East Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “Yeah, but the Russians have already agreed to it. So what will happen, let’s be realistic, what will happen is that the representatives
of East Pakistan will demand independence. And in practice I think that is what West Pakistan will then agree to. But then it won’t be us who have
done it. This will solve the problem of do we recognize Bangladesh against the wishes of the Pakistan Government.”
Nixon: “We must never recognize Bangladesh . . . until West Pakistan gives us the go ahead.”
Kissinger told Nixon on 10 December that “the war in the East has reached its final stages.” He said the Indian forces had encircled Dhaka and
were preparing for the final assault if the Pakistan forces in the capital refused to surrender.
Pakistan forces’ resistance elsewhere in the province appeared on the verge of total collapse, although they continued to hold some isolated
areas. Faced with this desperate situation, the top Pakistan military official in Dacca had called on the United States to arrange: (a) peaceful
transfer of power to the “elected representatives of East Pakistan”; (b) an immediate ceasefire;
(c) repatriation of the Pakistani forces to West Pakistan; (d) repatriation of all other West Pakistani personnel who desire to leave; (e) the safety of
the others settled in East Pakistan since 1947; and (f) a guarantee of no reprisals.
In the West, the Indians seemed to be successfully repulsing Pakistan attacks in Kashmir, but showed no signs yet of initiating a major offensive
of their own. In the Lahore and other areas to the north, the Indian air attacks were concentrating more heavily on communications, the power
infrastructure and more direct military targets. Some observers thought that the purpose of these heavy air attacks was to soften up West Pakistan
for an all-out Indian ground offensive as soon as the situation was under control in the East. There were some unconfirmed reports that the Indians
might already be beginning the process of shifting aircraft and troops to the Western front.
On the sea, the Pakistanis had apparently given up trying to contest the approaches to their ports in both the East and West. The Pakistanis,
from Yahya on down, were charging that Soviet technicians were aboard the OSA missile boats that had sunk a Pakistani destroyer and attacked
the Karachi port area.
Kissinger quoted a reliable clandestine source reporting that Gandhi had said that there were “some indications” that the Chinese intended to
intervene militarily. The Indian premier did not reveal her evidence, but reportedly said that the Chinese might create border incidents in the East
before the fall of Dhaka and later take some action in the contested Ladakh area near Kashmir.
“So far, we have no evidence that the Chinese are actually planning such actions,” Kissinger told Nixon.
U.S. Gives Soviets Veiled Ultimatum
After a meeting with the Soviet chargé, Yuli Vorontsov, on 10 December, Kissinger reported to Nixon that the Soviets clearly understood
America’s resolve. He had underlined the significance of the understanding President John F. Kennedy had with President Ayub Khan in 1962
about helping Pakistan. The Agreement of Cooperation signed by the United States and Pakistan on 5 March 1959, stipulated that in case of
aggression against Pakistan the United States would “take such appropriate action, including the use of armed forces, as may be mutually agreed
upon” to help Pakistan at its request.
On 26 January 1962, President Kennedy reaffirmed America’s commitment in a letter to President Ayub: “As a firm ally, Pakistan is entitled to
the re-affirmation you have requested of the prior assurances given by the United States to Pakistan on the subject of aggression against Pakistan.
My government certainly stands by these assurances.”
“I showed him the secret treaty. I said now I hope you understand the significance of this. It isn’t just an obligation. It will completely defuse the
Democrats because they are not going to attack their own President. So I said when the President yesterday spoke of an obligation he was

speaking of a Kennedy obligation.”
The Soviet diplomat assured Kissinger that within an hour this message would be on Brezhnev’s desk. “And, I told him we’re moving some
military forces, but it will not be visible until Sunday night . . . In effect, it was giving him sort of veiled ultimatum.”
Kissinger then predicted a ceasefire resolution to be approved in three days – on 12 December or 13 December. He said: “I think that the
Russians will agree with us to call for one.” The Chinese would accept such a proposal, he assured Nixon, “because we’ve got Yahya. What we
are proposing to the Russians, Yahya gave us.”
Nixon had written to Brezhnev on 10 December, suggesting a ceasefire in the West. “If this does not take place, we would have to conclude
that there is in progress an act of aggression directed at the whole of Pakistan, a friendly country toward which we have obligations,” Nixon told
Brezhnev. Nixon proposed an immediate joint appeal by Moscow and Washington for a complete ceasefire.
Kissinger was to meet with Vorontsov at 11:58 a.m. He outlined a modified U.S. proposal for a settlement. It no longer called for a withdrawal
of Indian forces, but stipulated a ceasefire and standstill agreement to be monitored by U.N. representatives in Pakistan’s both wings. After the
ceasefire, negotiations were to take place for troop withdrawals and the satisfaction of Bengali aspirations. Kissinger also conveyed to Vorontsov
the text of Nixon’s letter sent to Brezhnev on 10 December. Kissinger briefed Nixon on the meeting shortly thereafter, saying Vorontsov needed
no further proof of U.S. resolve.
“We got the message loud and clear from the president yesterday.” Kissinger quoted Vorontsov as saying, adding, “I can tell you informally that
if they are not working through the night now in Moscow, they are not doing their duty.”
Nixon said: “If Brezhnev does not have the good judgment not to push us to the wall on this miserable issue . . . we just may as well forget the
summit.” Kissinger’s judgment was that “by Sunday night or Monday” [12-13 December] there would be an acceptable ceasefire. He said: “I
think that the Russians will agree with us to call for one.” The Chinese would accept such a proposal, he assured Nixon, “because we’ve got
Yahya. What we are proposing to the Russians, Yahya gave us.”
On 13 December, the day Moscow vetoed for the third time an American resolution at the Security Council for a ceasefire, the Soviet Union
informed the White House via the hotline that “we are conducting a clarification of all the circumstances in India. We will inform you of the results
of the clarification without delay.” A handwritten note on the message indicated Haig received it at 5 a.m. and transmitted the text to Kissinger at
7:37 a.m. “Obviously, we are still in a holding pattern,” Haig commented in his note.
In Islamabad, the U.S. ambassador met with Yahya in his residence at 10 a.m. on 10 December, and conveyed to him Kissinger’s message
regarding the proposed ceasefire. Yahya initially indicated he did not understand exactly what was implied by the message conveyed. After
Farland reiterated salient points, Yahya still indicated strong objections, because “Russia is giving India everything she wants.”
Farland then undertook the hardest “sell job” of his life. “After about thirty minutes, I brought Yahya around to a point where he was making his
own proposition.” Except for the slightly different wording.
Yahya proposed, according to Farland’s message to Kissinger, that India and Pakistan agree to an immediate ceasefire, “and that the United
Nations provide observers to monitor it. Yahya also proposed that India and Pakistan immediately begin talks to settle the war and withdraw
troops, while entering discussion toward a political solution in East Pakistan.”
Kissinger sent word back to Farland that the United States would ask the Soviet Union to join Washington in the ceasefire Yahya approved. He
instructed Farland to tell Yahya that Pakistan should refrain from making additional proposals until America had the opportunity to move within the
above framework.
Kissinger also asked Farland to inform Yahya that Nixon “has made the strongest démarche to the Soviets and included warning to them that
we have obligations towards Pakistan, which will not permit aggression against West Pakistan.”

21 
“Balkanize” West Pakistan:
Why Gandhi Backed Off
s the Indian military marched into East Pakistan, full throttle, and international efforts to stop the fighting gained momentum at the United
Nations, Gandhi found herself between a rock and a hard place. On the one hand, if she advanced her campaign to completely crush the
Pakistani military in the West as she had promised to her cabinet months earlier, she would face a potential fight with Washington and
Beijing and antagonize Moscow, which had wanted to end the war after capturing Dhaka. On the other hand, if she backed off, her colleagues
would give her a hard time and India would lose a rare opportunity to permanently cripple an arch enemy.
On 10 December, Gandhi explained to her cabinet that if India accepted the U.N. ceasefire proposal after the Bangladesh liberation, it could
avoid further complications with the United States and “might also rule out the current possibility of a Chinese intervention in Ladakh.”
India’s Defence Minister Jagjivan Ram and several other military leaders, however, opposed a ceasefire until India had taken certain unspecified
areas of Kashmir and destroyed “the war mechanism of Pakistan”.
Gandhi overruled the opponents, saying that “for the moment India would not categorically reject” the U.N. ceasefire proposal. India would
accept a ceasefire after the Awami League regime was installed in Dhaka.
Many Indian parliament members, both from her own party as well as the opposition, were unhappy with Gandhi’s decision, apparently
unaware of the international pressure she faced to quickly end the war. They wanted India to capture at least Azad Kashmir and Lahore.
Jagjivan Ram, when criticized eventually for the ceasefire, told parliament that the prime minister was the one responsible for such a decision.
He, however, refused to go publicly against her decision. When the members pressed him on capturing Azad Kashmir, he simply responded:
“Enough is enough.”
Gandhi’s decision to abruptly halt the campaign short of her desired goal was not a pleasant one to herself, either. “Madame Gandhi said she
couldn’t forgive her father for leaving Baluchistan out of India, because it was in India’s ‘historic sphere,’ ” Kissinger recalled during a conversation
in the Oval Office with the Shah of Iran on 15 May 1975. If she could not undo her father’s historic mistake, she said, she could at least blunt its
effect by turning Baluchistan into a neutral country, one that would not pose a security threat to India as a united West Pakistan would.
Gandhi’s decision resulted from strong pressure from Moscow, which incorrectly perceived that Nixon meant business when he dispatched the
naval fleet into the Bay of Bengal. In fact, the United States later took credit for saving West Pakistan from disintegration by sending the Seventh
Fleet, which the Americans believed scared both the Soviet Union and India.
“We believe and we have very strong confirmation that those steps were effective in convincing the Soviet Union to influence the Indians to
accept a ceasefire rather than to proceed with attacks against West Pakistan – in other words, to stop short of what had been their goal against
Pakistan,” General Alexander Haig Jr., senior military adviser to Kissinger, told Chou En-lai in Beijing on 3 January 1972.
The Soviet Union told India that it would accept the ceasefire as soon as Bangladesh was liberated. Gandhi told the cabinet that Moscow was
“concerned about the possibility of a Chinese intervention”. Moscow was also feeling the U.S. pressure to bring the war to an end.
If China were to enter the conflict, Beijing knew that the Soviet Union would act in the Sinkiang region. The Soviet air support might be made
available to India in such a scenario, Gandhi was told.
D.P. Dhar, a Gandhi confidant who negotiated the Indo-Soviet Friendship Treaty, was in Moscow to discuss the future strategy with the Soviet
leaders when Nixon pressed Russia to restrain India. Dhar assured the Soviet Union that India had no plans to annex any West Pakistani territory.
Gandhi initially hesitated to end the war after liberating Bangladesh because of her concern that even if New Delhi halted the campaign, Pakistan
might not accept the ceasefire and continue fighting in the West to avenge its loss of East Pakistan. Pakistan’s strategy might have involved
breaking through the Chhamb area, with the Chinese support in Ladakh, in a bid to cut off the Kashmir Valley.
In that case, Gandhi said, the Soviet Union would attempt to convince the United States to accept Bangladesh as a “fait accompli” in the hope
that America would prevail upon Pakistan to accept a ceasefire with an independent Bangladesh. It was even possible that despite its anti-India
stance, China might advise Pakistan to acknowledge the reality that is Bangladesh.
Gandhi concluded her briefing by saying that India would emerge from the war as the dominant power in South Asia and the Indian Ocean.
China would respect India and might even decide to improve relations with New Delhi. On the other hand, Pakistan would lose its economic
power to support a large military complex. The current Pakistani military leadership would not survive the defeat. Gandhi expected China and the
United States to lose interest in Pakistan, and she foresaw a greater pressure for autonomy in Pakistan’s Northwest Frontier, Baluchistan and the
Sind provinces. She hoped a new democratic Pakistan, based on autonomous republics, would emerge, which would desire to be friendly to India.
In Washington, the White House received a letter from Brezhnev that the Soviet charge had dropped by on 9 December at 8:15 a.m. Nixon had
written to Brezhnev three days earlier asking the Soviet Union to influence India to stop the war. Haig, who transmitted a message to Kissinger
along with the letter, felt the Soviets deliberately delayed replying to Nixon to ensure the Pakistani forces collapsed in the East. Moscow did not
refer to Bangladesh or independence in the letter, but had set criteria to have that effect.
“I see no reference in the official Soviet response to the unofficial language used by Vorontsov with you on Sunday, which referred to a one-
Pakistan solution when he confirmed that India had no designs on West Pakistan,” Haig told Kissinger. “Under the formula underlined by the
Soviets, therefore, we have the advantage of a guarantee of preserving West Pakistan, but, at the same time, it is apparent that the Soviets will
insist on conditions in the East, which will be tantamount to the creation of an independent East Pakistan.
“At best,” Haig continued, “we can assume that we have an arrangement which will preserve West Pakistan intact, but it will unquestionably fall
short of what will be an acceptable arrangement in the East to either the government of Pakistan or the People’s Republic of China.”

Brezhnev reiterated Moscow’s position in detail in this letter.
“We stated to President Yahya Khan and the Pakistani government that the only way to proceed is the way of political settlement, and that a
political settlement requires political means. Also, we repeatedly laid emphasis on the essence of the problem to be solved.”
It was clear all along that it would be impossible to get the refugees to return home without a political settlement. That was why Moscow
advised Yahya to speedily take that path.
“Unfortunately, President Yahya Khan and his government did not take our advice. We are still puzzled as to the reason why the Pakistani
leadership did not want to follow the way of political settlement – the way of negotiations. But the fact remains that they preferred to conduct the
affairs in such a way as to make the guns speak and the bloodshed.
“The thing to do now is to stop the war already underway. This requires a ceasefire. But the question arises – what is the best way to achieve
it?” he asked, adding that the logical answer would possibly be “a political settlement, based on the recognition of the will of the East Pakistani
population.”
“Otherwise it is impossible to ensure the respect for the lawful rights and interests of the people of East Pakistan and to create conditions for the
return of the millions of refugees. Without it a ceasefire will not be stable. You already know about this proposal of ours, i.e. to solve together and
simultaneously both questions – of ceasefire and of immediate resumption of negotiations between the government of Pakistan and the East
Pakistani leaders concerning a political settlement in East Pakistan. Those negotiations should, naturally, be started from the stage at which they
were discontinued. We feel that this proposal provides a way out for all, including Pakistan. On the other hand, all would lose – and Pakistan
maybe even more than others – on the way of continuing the war and rejecting a political settlement.”
Kissinger briefed Nixon on Brezhnev’s letter less than two hours after he received it.
“They’re proposing a ceasefire and a political negotiation between Islamabad and the Awami League.” He characterized the proposals as “old”
and added that although the letter was “very conciliatory” it was still “in itself unacceptable”.
He proposed a response: “If this negotiation is within the framework of a united Pakistan, with maximum autonomy for the East, we are willing
to discuss it with them. That will separate them to some extent from the Indians. And, secondly, it will get us a ceasefire in the West, which we’ve
got to have if the West Pakistanis aren’t to be smashed.”
The same day, Helmut Sonnenfeldt, a member of the National Security Council staff, prepared an analysis of Brezhnev’s response, saying the
Soviet proposal “can have no other effect than the dismemberment of Pakistan”. It had “no reference to withdrawal of forces”.
He dismissed the proposal to resume negotiations between Yahya and the “East Pakistani leaders” as without merit, given that India had already
recognized a separate government in East Bengal. “In fact, I think this proposal is a phony – and the Soviets either know it or the news has not
caught up with them. I do not see how Yahya will negotiate with anybody in East Pakistan when the place is practically occupied by India; and I
do not see how the East Pakistanis will negotiate with Yahya when they see victory in their grasp.”
He suggested that instead of sending another letter to Brezhnev, Nixon should discuss this matter with visiting Soviet minister Matskevich and
Kissinger should talk with Vorontsov to supplement the president’s message. He proposed that the United States demand “there must be
categorical guarantees that the Soviets will not support the dismemberment of Pakistan, de facto or de jure; there must be a ceasefire, there must
be convincing evidence that the Soviets are working to restrain the Indians, in word and deed.”
When Haig sent the analysis to Kissinger, he said Sonnenfeldt would draft talking points for the president along foregoing lines, but “he will
soften conditions and language in recognition of our weak position and diplomatic niceties.”
On 11 December, Kissinger summarized the latest developments in South Asia in a memo to Nixon. “Pakistan late yesterday revised the
proposal reported here yesterday morning from Dacca for a ceasefire, repatriation of the Pakistani troops and a transfer of power to the elected
representatives of East Pakistan. The revised proposal contains only a call for ceasefire and guaranteed safety of the military and civilian personnel;
there is no reference to a political settlement or the withdrawal of the Pakistani troops.”
The diplomatic effort, he said, stood still, while Bhutto, who was in New York, awaited instructions from Islamabad. Bhutto told Bush he had
arrived to find conflicting instructions and was seeking a clarification. Indicating a division within the Pakistani government, Bhutto said the first
proposal had “flabbergasted” him and that if it remained the government’s policy he would take the first plane home and not be shackled by it.
The first proposal, according to Pakistan’s U.N. ambassador, had been drafted by a field commander under great strain and it contained “such
unprecedented requests as asking the United Nations to effect a transfer of power” to the Awami League.
Kissinger met in New York with Bhutto, Raza and Shahi, on the day he spoke with Nixon. After that meeting, the Americans concluded that
Kissinger’s ceasefire proposal had been overtaken by events and was too complicated to succeed at the United Nations. Now they decided that
Pakistan would obtain third-country support to introduce a Security Council resolution that would include both ceasefire and withdrawal. But such
a resolution was likely to be vetoed, which would lead Washington to move to accept a simple ceasefire without any linkage to the Soviet
formulation of political negotiation.
Kissinger instructed Farland to urgently meet with Yahya to explain the new strategy.
Farland reported on 12 December that Yahya “expressed his full accord with the procedures suggested” by Kissinger. The military ruler
indicated that Shahi would be instructed accordingly.
In the evening, Kissinger told Nixon he had talked with Bhutto, who said the Chinese had assured him “they were willing to do something and, in
fact, I think that they are going to do something, but they said that they had their doubts about us.”
“They just don’t think that we are firm and they want some word from us what we’re going to do, if the Russians press them. Of course, you
know, I couldn’t help Bhutto,” Kissinger said.
Kissinger also told Nixon that Indian military advances in East Pakistan remained virtually unchecked outside Dhaka. The Pakistani troops
retreated in a disorderly fashion. Even in Dhaka, where many of the survivors seemed to be holding up, morale was low amongst both officers and
enlisted men. The Indian forces were consolidating for the final thrust at the capital city, in the event that ceasefire efforts failed.
On the Western front, the largest tank battles took place in Kashmir. Gandhi’s staff said that as soon as the East Pakistan situation was settled,
India would begin a major offensive against West Pakistan. India hoped to end all major fighting by that month’s end.
In New Delhi, meanwhile, reports were circulating that the Seventh Fleet was moving towards the Bay of Bengal. The Soviets showed no sign

of slackening their support for India. Unconfirmed reports indicated that a Soviet military team would soon visit New Delhi. Potentially more
significant was a trip to Moscow by D.P. Dhar, former Indian ambassador to Moscow and a Gandhi confidant. Dhar went to sound out the
Soviets on India’s intentions towards West Pakistan.
On 12 December, Kissinger gave Nixon another briefing on South Asia, starting out with a message from the U.S. ambassador in Pakistan.
Farland reported that Yahya was prepared to do “anything reasonable under the circumstances”.
At the United Nations, Bush met with the Indian delegation at the foreign minister’s request. During a two-hour conversation, Singh and his
entourage [Kaul, Jha, and Sen] said further U.N. debate would only harden positions and create additional frictions. The United Nations was tied
to precedent and formalistic rites and could not deal with complex issues. If it had to meet in the future, Bangladesh representatives must be
present; such was the reality. Singh explained that India recognized Bangladesh for two purposes: to make clear that India had no territorial
ambitions in East Pakistan and to establish a moderate, elected democratic group to control the Mukti Bahini.
Singh said India had no territorial aims in West Pakistan, either, but cautioned that this commitment was not open-ended. If Pakistan continued
the war and tried to make gains in the West to compensate for its losses in the East, India’s position could change. Singh declined to make the
same unequivocal commitment on Azad Kashmir.
Kaul, India’s foreign secretary, said, “We have no major ambitions.” He noted, however, that even in peacetime, India and Pakistan had talked
about minor rectifications in the border. Both Singh and Kaul repeatedly said that they did not wish to prolong the war.
On 12 December at 11:45 a.m., Kissinger told Vorontsov that the moves made by the United States, such as dispatching the Seventh Fleet to
the Bay of Bengal and calling a Security Council meeting to implement the General Assembly resolution, were “no longer reversible”.
“I want you to understand that. I want us to understand each other,” Kissinger told the Soviet diplomat. “We are calling a Security Council
meeting to ask for implementation of the General Assembly resolution.”
Vorontsov asked, “Do you think that whole situation is that urgent for all these steps? We are talking very actively with the Indians and I think
we will have results in several hours.”
Kissinger: “We had already given all our instructions. I told you we would move this morning and we didn’t get your message till after 10:00 and
it could not be reversed.”
Vorontsov: “Not because of ill-will but just the timing factor of getting messages to and from Moscow.”
Kissinger: “I think this can still be settled on that basis,” a reference to the resolution calling for an immediate ceasefire and repatriation of
soldiers.
Vorontsov: “I am afraid we will have some trouble in the Security Council. We are thinking of everything together: the ceasefire, status [of the]
war, withdrawal of all forces.”
Kissinger: “Your communication doesn’t mention any of these things.”
Vorontsov: “We haven’t yet gotten approval of the Indians but we expect it in several hours.”
Kissinger: “I think all we need is one more round at the Security Council.”
Vorontsov: “Maybe by the time of the Security Council meeting there will be agreement from India. We must cooperate on this matter because
we are now on the same track.”
Kissinger: “Our greatest desire is to cooperate with you. But when we didn’t hear from you I told you that by 9:00 we would move. I told you
on Friday I was holding it up for 48 hours. I was hoping to hear something from you last night.”
Vorontsov: “Well, maybe everything will fall into place.”
Kissinger: “We can still make it fall into place.”
Vorontsov: “We need an agreement. I hope you will not be insistent on a fist fight in the Security Council because we are in agreement now. All
that is needed now is the tactical things. The terms will be acceptable to you.”
Kissinger: “You will find us more than cooperative. Make sure your leaders understand this.”
Vorontsov: “I think they understand.”
Kissinger: “We had no choice but to do this. We had to stand by our allies. Now we will have gone through the exercise.”
Vorontsov: “In the Security Council, Malik might ask to receive instructions since he is waiting for the same thing I am telling you now. If he is
trying to stall it is because of this reason, not because he wants to disrupt anything.” (Adam Malik was the Soviet envoy to the United Nations.)
Kissinger: “Don’t have him introduce it before giving me some advance warning. I am in good communications and if you have a concrete
proposal that had a chance of acceptance make it to me first.”
Vorontsov: “Maybe by 1:00 we will have something.”
Kissinger: “General Haig may go to New York to meet with Bush. In that case call Colonel Kennedy. I will send you right away a copy of the
hot line communication.” Kissinger ended the call.
A few minutes later, he called Vorontsov again: “Yuli, I just talked to the president again. I reported our conversation to him and he asked me to
tell you that we will work it out in a spirit so there are no winners or losers. And so we are not looking for any public humiliation of anybody. We
also believe – and we will use our influence in the Security Council as it evolves to come up with a compromise as far as the U.N. is concerned in
which everybody gives up a little. We are also prepared to proceed on our understandings on which you are working. We want to make sure that
you approach us first so that for now on [sic] we will not take any additional steps beyond what we have told you.”
In the evening, Haig phoned Vorontsov to tell him that Kissinger had “asked me to hold up our Seventh Fleet movements, and we are going to
put that movement in the orbit for 24 hours at a place so it won’t surface – the fact that they are moving.”
Bhutto, Yahya Offer To Give Power To Mujib
On 13 December, Kissinger sent a backchannel message to Farland that Bhutto approached Bush in New York with the suggestion that an

amendment to the Security Council resolution be discussed with the Soviets to get a compromise with the Bengalis.
The revised resolution called upon Pakistan to work out “a political settlement in East Pakistan giving an immediate recognition to the will of the
East Pakistani population within the framework of one Pakistan”.
Kissinger told Farland the revised resolution marked a “departure from the game plan and we are concerned that the introduction of this type of
clause, particularly at this point, could lead to a quick dissolution of our position. The Soviets would veto on one-Pakistan grounds and then would
be locked into a position on political issue and the hope for quick ceasefire would evaporate. For our part we want to stick with the game plan.”
He instructed the ambassador to verify if Bhutto’s idea reflected Pakistan’s position.
Farland consulted Pakistan’s foreign secretary who discussed with Yahya and reported back that, assuming the revised resolution provided for
an immediate ceasefire, Yahya approved the amendment proposed by Bhutto. Sultan Khan emphasized the importance of an immediate ceasefire
to stop what he characterized as the slaughter in East Pakistan.
On 14 December at 3 a.m., Vorontsov delivered to Haig a handwritten message in English that was apparently prepared in the Soviet Embassy
in Washington. Brezhnev sent the message responding to a letter from Nixon.
“The Indian side has expressed the willingness to ceasefire and withdraw its forces if the Pakistani government withdraws its forces from East
Pakistan and peaceful settlement is reached there with the lawful representatives of the East Pakistani population to whom the power will be
transferred and conditions will be created for return from India of all the East Pakistani refugees. At the same time, the Indians have no intentions to
impose their will on the East Pakistani people who themselves will determine their fate,” the message said.
It added: “It would be good if the American side on its part also stressed to the Pakistani government the necessity of embarking on the path
towards a political settlement in East Pakistan on the basis which is now rather clear,” an allusion to the reality on the ground: an independent
Bangladesh.
Later in the day, Kissinger held a meeting with Vorontsov, during which he chastized the Soviet Union for the delay in responding to America’s
communications to the Russian leaders.
Kissinger said that when the crisis in the subcontinent became acute, the United States delayed initiating unilateral action hoping that Washington
could work jointly with the Soviet Union for a solution. Specifically for this reason, America held up military moves and other actions that it might
otherwise have undertaken. Because of the delay, Washington had taken unilateral actions, such as dispatching the aircraft carrier.
“Further delays of the kind we have been experiencing constitute a temporary irritation in U.S.-Soviet relationships and the remarks on the plane
were designed to note the U.S.’s concern. Should the situation continue to deteriorate, it must have an impact on future U.S.-Soviet relationships.
Soviet actions thus far are not consistent with the U.S. government’s conception of the joint U.S.-Soviet action in search of an improved
environment for world peace,” he added, alluding to the detente.
Kissinger’s comments came after Nixon’s remarks to journalists on board Air Force One that the Soviet Union could restrain India. If the
Soviets did not do so within the next few days, Nixon would reassess the entire relationship between Washington and Moscow, including the
summit meeting scheduled for the following May.
Regarding South Asia, Kissinger said that “If all parties could get behind such a resolution then the situation on the subcontinent could be settled
tomorrow.”
Vorontsov asked why the United States “would not be willing to go beyond a resolution calling for a simple ceasefire since this was not
adequate in the Soviet or the Indian viewpoint”.
Kissinger replied that the resolution might be expanded to include withdrawal since the Indian forces had penetrated quite a bit of Pakistani
territory. Thus far, Soviet reactions had been slow and characterized by delaying tactics. The United States had observed that the Soviet
bureaucracy moved with the greatest speed when it chose to do so.
Vorontsov stated that the complication arose when the United States changed the proposals it had made to the Soviets during the previous
week. This was a cause of great concern to the Soviet leaders. Of particular concern was that the United States dropped the reference to a
political solution, which was contained in the language given earlier by Kissinger to Vorontsov.
Kissinger stated this was true, but it was necessary because of Moscow’s failure to respond promptly to the U.S. proposal. Vorontsov said the
problem was obviously not a question of ill will on the part of either Russia or the US, but one of the complexity of the problem.
Kissinger said he must blame the Soviet Union for letting the current situation develop. For example, the arms supply to India and threats to
China – which served as a guarantee and cover for Indian action – caused the difficulty.
Vorontsov replied that the Pakistan had the U.S. armament, some Soviet armament, and some Chinese armament. The real problem was the
result of grievous errors Pakistan made in the East wing.
Kissinger stressed the need for urgent action. Washington was prepared to give up its demand for withdrawal, if the Soviets dropped its
demands for a political settlement. This posed an obvious compromise.
Vorontsov noted that the U.S. departure from its earlier language was what had caused the problem.
Kissinger reiterated that this was forced on the U.S. side because Moscow delayed its answer for a long time. Thus Washington was forced to
move based on its principles.
Vorontsov retorted that when the United States dropped the three essential points contained in its initial proposal, Moscow was greatly
disturbed. The Soviet Union had originally been very pleased by the U.S. move in Dhaka, but then a sudden departure from the political initiative
caused great concern in Moscow. The present problem was that it was time to prevent a bloodbath in East Pakistan and all parties must act. He
suggested that the only viable resolution was the transfer of power to Bangladesh.
Kissinger said the U.S. government could not agree with this kind of resolution.
Vorontsov countered that the question was academic as the East Pakistan government had already resigned.
At that point Kissinger said he would like to summarize his understanding of the situation: The Indians would not attack the West, nor would
they seek to acquire Pakistan territory. They would return to the territorial limits that existed before the crisis – in other words, to a status quo ante.
Vorontsov said that would also be the Soviet Union’s understanding.

Kissinger said the issue then was to get a settlement in East Pakistan.
Vorontsov agreed, noting the need to find a means to prevent a bloodbath.
Kissinger replied the original U.S. statement was an objective one, and not suitable for a U.N. resolution.
Vorontsov agreed.
Kissinger said that the best compromise was something like the UK resolution, which the United States did not like, either. On the other hand, if
the Soviets continued to seek a fait accompli, then the U.S. government must draw its own conclusions from this reality.
Vorontsov asked what Kissinger considered as an ideal solution.
Kissinger replied that Washington knew East Pakistan would not go back to the West. On the other hand, the United States could not legally
accept an overt change in status, and efforts within the United Nations to force the U.S. government to do so must be vetoed. Washington
considered that a fait accompli had occurred in the East and the problem was to proceed from that point.
On the other hand, Kissinger continued, India sought not only to break East Pakistan, but to do so under a mantle of legitimacy. This was more
than the United States could accept. Just two weeks earlier, Gandhi said the situation in East Pakistan was an internal Pakistani problem. Thus,
steps from this point on should be to stop the fighting, Kissinger said.
Why should the United States struggle with the Soviet Union at the expense of its relations with Moscow on an issue like Bangladesh, especially
when there are such heavy issues like the Middle East to be settled between the two sides? Kissinger asked. Furthermore, he said, the United
States was not “anti-India” as some would infer. Certainly, the Soviets knew what the real problem was, Kissinger concluded.
Yahya Appeals To Nixon Again For Help
In Islamabad, Yahya still was in a fighting mood, but worried that India would destroy West Pakistan. On 14 December, he wrote to Nixon
seeking arms. “The Russian proposal about the ceasefire, withdrawal and negotiations has by now clearly been demonstrated to have been only a
hoax,” he wrote. “They are pursuing filibustering tactics in the Security Council. This does not leave any doubt about their aim of making the
military conquest of East Pakistan a fait accompli. The passage of time is clearly playing into the hands of the Russians. We are convinced that,
after acquiring East Pakistan, they would let the Indians turn their might single-mindedly against West Pakistan for which they have already begun
to equip the Indians.”
Yahya insisted that “Pakistan has the will to defend itself, but for this determination on our part to have any meaning, our supply lines must be
kept open and adequate equipment to withstand the increasing Indian power should flow through them while there may still be time. The American
assistance has to assume, without any further loss of time, meaningful dimensions.”
He said the American intervention in the situation did “not only have to be credible but also tangible and meaningful. Time has come for the
United States to go beyond warnings and démarches if its determination to punish aggression across international borders is to have any effect on
the Soviet Union and India.”
Yahya later phoned Farland to tell him that Pakistan immediately needed twenty B57s. Farland merely said he would pass on the request to
Washington, but did not give any assurances.
The same day, the Soviet Union reassured Nixon that India would not attack West Pakistan.
“We are in constant contact with the Indian side. One of the results of these very contacts was the message transmitted to you on 12 December
that India has no intention to take any military action in connection with West Pakistan. We have firm assurances by the Indian leadership that India
has no plans of seizing West Pakistan territory. Thus as far as intentions of India are concerned there is no lack of clarity to which you have
referred,” the Soviet leadership told Nixon.
At the same time, Moscow insisted that “it would be good if the American side on its part also stressed to the Pakistani government the
necessity of embarking on the path towards political settlement in East Pakistan on the basis which is now rather clear” – an independent
Bangladesh.
On 15 December, Pakistan’s foreign secretary summoned Farland to the foreign office at 6 p.m. Sultan Khan told the ambassador that Bhutto
had indicated from New York he was highly pessimistic that any affirmative action would come from the U.N. Security Council. In addition,
Pakistan’s intelligence indicated that India was preparing for an offensive against West Pakistan. For West Pakistan to survive as a nation, it must
receive additional fighter aircraft. The present trickle of MIG-19s and F-104s from Jordan could not stem the tide if India attacked – an event that
Pakistan was then anticipating.
In Washington, Kissinger told Nixon on 15 December that the Russians had guaranteed that “India would not attack West Pakistan.” A solution
might be formalized by a public exchange of letters between Nixon and Brezhnev, he added.
Nixon asked how the Chinese would react to a Moscow-Washington public accommodation.
Kissinger responded: “Oh, the Chinese would be thrilled if West Pakistan were guaranteed.”
Kissinger mentioned about his talks with Vorontsov the previous evening. “I have this whole file of intelligence reports, which makes it
unmistakably clear that the Indian strategy was to knock over West Pakistan,” he said.
During the discussion, they expressed concerns about Jha’s interviews with the American media to sway public opinion.
Kissinger: “After this is over, we ought to do something about that the [sic] goddamned Indian ambassador here going on television every day
and attacking American policy.”
Nixon: “Why haven’t we done something already?”
Kissinger: “I’d like to call the State to call him in. He says he has unmistakable proof that we are planning a landing on the Bay of Bengal. Well,
that’s OK with me.”
Nixon: “Yeah, that scares them.”
Kissinger: “That carrier move is good.”
Nixon: “Why the hell yes... the point about the carrier move, we just say... we got to be there for the purpose of their moving there. Look, these

people are savages.”
He said the United Nations would die “and we cannot have a stable world if we allow one member of the United Nations to cannibalize another.
Cannibalize, that’s the word, I should have thought of it earlier. You see that really puts it to the Indians. It has, the connotation is savages. To
cannibalize, and that’s what the sons-of-bitches are up to.”
Kissinger later told Nixon that Bhutto had declined to give Niazi’s ceasefire proposal to the Indians in New York, according to a memorandum
sent by the national security adviser to the president on 15 December 1971. “Bhutto is apparently being careful to sidestep the onus for the
surrender of East Pakistan,” Kissinger commented.
The latest Indian reports indicated that Dhaka was receiving heavy artillery fire, and three Indian columns had advanced within a few miles of the
city where they were preparing for an attack. He said the Indians were being tough on the transfer of East Pakistan governmental functions to a
new civilian government. The Indians submitted their own draft that included the following: “Recognizes that simultaneously with the ceasefire in
East Pakistan power shall be transferred to the representatives of the majority party elected in December 1970.”
The Pakistanis, meanwhile, had shown a new turn of attitude. They felt that, since East Pakistan was lost, a U.N. resolution legitimizing the
Indian seizure might be unacceptable. Bhutto’s greatest concern was a ceasefire in the West, where heavy fighting continued in Kashmir, but the
principal Pakistani drive appeared to have been blunted. One Indian reserve division was airlifted from the Kolkata area to an undetermined
location on the western front.
Kissinger said a Chinese delivery of additional MIG-19s to West Pakistan might be underway. An undetermined number of MIGs were spotted
flying in the direction of an airfield that had been used in the past as a base for onward flight to Pakistan. He also told Nixon that Pakistan’s U.N.
representative said China would make “an important military move” on 15 December, but no evidence of Chinese troop movements was visible.
Pakistan’s high hopes would remain unfulfilled.
However, since late November, several Muslim countries – including Turkey, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Libya and Egypt – have sent, or were
planning to send, military equipment to Pakistan, including jet fighters and spare parts for Pakistani aircraft. But there was no firm evidence to
corroborate that such equipment had actually been transferred. The CIA reported that a squadron of American-origin Jordanian F-104s was
delivered to Pakistan on 13 December, despite an American embargo on military supplies to both India and Pakistan.
Kissinger told Nixon that the carrier task force, which was transiting the Straits of Malacca, should arrive at a point near the center of the base
of the Bay of Bengal on 15 December in the evening. “Rumors about this move are already widespread in the area where they are being combined
with stories that the United States is considering military assistance to Pakistan,” he added.
On 16 December at 9:30 a.m., Kissinger called Nixon after East Pakistan had surrendered.
Nixon: “On the India-Pakistan thing, Dacca has surrendered and now the issue is...”
Kissinger: “Now, if in the next 24 hours the Indians don’t agree to a ceasefire in the West we are in for it. Up until now, it could be explained
that the Soviets wanted to wait until Dacca had surrendered.”
Nixon: “Has the proposal been put up in...”
Kissinger: “No, it has been tabled and there will probably be a vote today. And, that will be the test.”
Nixon: “Well, they [the Soviets] will veto it.”
Kissinger: “Well, I don’t know. They aren’t saying anything any more.”
Nixon: “Then under the circumstances, would they just continue the war?”
Kissinger: “There are three possibilities: first, the British proposal carries; second, India-Pakistan ceasefire and third, the Indians continue the
war until they smash the Pakistanis in Kashmir. Now we have had another appeal from the Pakistanis last night. Action is picking up in the West
and they are asking for American planes, but we cannot even consider this. If this isn’t settled by tomorrow night we will know the Russians have
put it to us.”
Nixon: “The one thing I am disappointed about, really teed off at, is that you were unable to get out that Indian cabinet meeting thing. We have
got to get it out.”
Kissinger: “We will do it.”
Nixon: “I know there are a lot of pro-Indian people in the State and who are trying to delay this. But I want it. We ought to be pressing the
Indians every day. Now that Dacca has fallen, we have got to get that ambassador in here and tell him the president is outraged about what he has
done using our television and radio facilities to do it.” Nixon referred to Jha’s interviews with the U.S. media.
Implementing Nixon’s instructions, on 16 December Sisco summoned Jha to the State Department. Nixon had told Sisco to warn the Indians
that since East Pakistan had fallen, continued fighting would “have the most drastic consequences on U.S.-Indian relations.” By the time he met
Jha, Sisco had seen press reports that India had already proposed a ceasefire on the Western front. So, instead of conveying Nixon’s warning,
Sisco requested Jha to confirm the proposed ceasefire.
In the morning of 17 December, Farland saw Yahya to urge him to accept India’s ceasefire offer. The general said he already had indicated his
willingness to do so by accepting the General Assembly resolution ten days earlier. He saw no need to reiterate that position. Upon the
ambassador’s further urging, Yahya agreed to consider formally responding to India’s proposal. Before leaving the president’s house, Farland told
Yahya that if he rejected the offer, America would need to evacuate its nonessential citizens from Pakistan, a hint that Washington anticipated the
conflict to escalate. At 3 p.m., Pakistan’s foreign secretary informed Farland that Yahya would publicly accept the offer, bringing East Pakistan’s
nine-month long crisis to an end, but not exactly the way he had wished.

22 
Why Niazi Surrendered
n 14 December at 5:20 p.m., the U.S. consul general in Dhaka received a call from General AAK Niazi, the commander of Pakistan’s
Eastern sector, to “receive him urgently.” He appeared at the consulate shortly, along with General Rao Farman Ali, the military adviser to
the governor of East Pakistan. He told Spivack that the bombing of Dhaka in the afternoon “had convinced him that the fighting must be
stopped immediately to prevent further bloodshed, even though, he said, his troops were still in good positions and were not in the danger at the
moment.” Farman Ali had in his possession a rough draft proposal he wished the consul general to transmit to New Delhi so that it could be passed
on through Indian channels to the Indian field commander in East Pakistan.
After some discussion, they drew up a proposal in the form of a letter to Spivack, which both Niazi and Farman Ali signed.
The proposal read:
“In order to save future loss of innocent human lives, which would inevitably result from further hostilities in the major cities like Dacca, I request
you to arrange for an immediate ceasefire under the following conditions: (A) Regrouping of Pakistan armed forces in designated areas to be
mutually agreed upon between the commanders of the opposing forces; (B) To guarantee the safety of all military and paramilitary forces; (C)
Safety of all those who had settled in East Pakistan since 1947; (D) No reprisals against those who helped the administration since March 1971.
“In those conditions, the Pakistan armed forces and paramilitary forces would immediately cease all military operations. I would further abide by
any resolutions, which the Security Council of the United Nations may pass for the permanent settlement of the present dispute. I make this
proposal with the full authority vested in me by virtue of my position as the martial law administrator of Zone B [East Pakistan] and Commander,
Eastern Command, exercising final authority over all Pakistan military and paramilitary forces in this area.”
Niazi asked that the U.S. envoy indicate in his transmittal message that the general was prepared to name a representative immediately to
discuss the details of his offer with an Indian counterpart. He hoped that the Indian commander would do the same immediately, so that
negotiations could begin at once.
Niazi and Farman still wished to avoid using the word “surrender.” Niazi stated he had full authority to take the above action. When Spivack
questioned him specifically whether any concurrence was required by Yahya or anyone else in Islamabad, his reply was a definite “no.”
The consul general reported to Washington that Niazi would send his ADC to his office in about two hours when he hoped some sort of
reaction would be available. He was quite anxious that some progress be made before daylight the next day, when he feared bombing in Dhaka
would resume.
Regarding Niazi’s authority to act, the envoy noted that Malik had left the Governor House to seek protection from the International Red Cross,
thus abdicating any governmental function. Farman Ali said Malik had resigned.
Spivack had earlier received a call from Malik that the governor and Farman Ali wanted to submit certain ceasefire proposals. Malik, who had
received a threat that the Indians would hand over all the prisoners to the Mukti Bahini to be “butchered”, felt a ceasefire was absolutely necessary
because the situation had hopelessly worsened. He assured the consul general the proposals would carry their signatures and would have Yahya’s
approval. Shortly afterwards Malik called Spivack to say he would not submit the proposals because Niazi had stated that talks were taking place
between the central government and Farland, the U.S. ambassador in Islamabad. In fact, Yahya had authorized Malik on 9 December to arrange a
ceasefire based on a bleak picture the governor painted, according to the Pakistan war commission report. But the president backed off on 11
December when he received signals that China and the United States would come to his rescue. Based on the false indications, Yahya ordered
Malik not to take any action on his last message, adding that “very important diplomatic and military moves are taking place by our friends.” It was
“essential that we hold on for another thirty-six hours at all costs,” the general advised the governor.
Commenting on Malik’s backtracking, Spivack said in a cable to the State Department on 14 December, “There still appears to be strong
difference of opinion between Niazi and Farman, with the governor oscillating feebly between. Farman, obviously, desires to initiate some kind of
action on the basis of his appreciation of what he considers desperate local situation. Niazi, whether on instructions from Islamabad or in line with
his own romantic view of himself as a dedicated soldier, is opposed. In effect, the question boils down to whether the Pak army in the East is to be
sacrificed, together with uncounted thousands of civilians in East Pakistan in order to retain some bargaining position in the West.”
Yahya Authorizes Ceasefire In East Pakistan
Subsequently, when the State Department received Niazi’s proposal, it immediately told Farland to see Yahya to ascertain what he wanted the
United States to do. Farland replied Yahya had indicated, through Sultan Khan, that Niazi had the full authority to act along the lines reported in
the telegram from Dhaka.
Yahya authorized passing the proposal to New Delhi and to Bhutto in New York, but the State Department was wary of putting itself between
Indian and Pakistani military authorities. Thus it directed the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi not to deliver Niazi’s proposal to the Indian government.
Rather, the U.S. Mission at the United Nations was advised to give the message to Bhutto, with the suggestion that he might want to pass it either
on to the Indian foreign minister in New York or through the U.N. secretary general. Bhutto chose not to give the message to the Indians. After
confirming that Yahya wanted the message delivered, the State Department told the U.S. Mission to deliver the message to the Indian delegation.
In New Delhi, Keating gave Niazi’s proposal to Haksar on 15 December, with a copy to General Sam Manekshaw, the Indian army chief.
Haksar asked the envoy in a voice choked with emotion, “where our overall relations had gone off the track.” He recounted at some length the
discussions with Kissinger and Sisco during Gandhi’s U.S. visit in November and stressed that there could be no question of the integrity of
Gandhi’s remarks to Nixon.

Haksar then turned philosophical All human affairs were transitory and he was not so much concerned about the present, as it would pass, as he
was about the future. He expressed concern about the relations our children would have and what we owed to them.
“Haksar became quite emotional, his eyes watering, and asked what we could do,” Keating cabled the State Department, summarizing his
conversation. He suggested that Gandhi send a letter to Nixon, and Haksar promised to draft one that afternoon.
At 6.p.m., Haksar called in the deputy chief of the U.S. mission and handed him the text of Makenshaw’s message to Niazi. India “was
conveying a response to Niazi through the United States since we had been good enough to pass on the original Niazi proposal,” the embassy
reported to Washington.
Haksar described the reply as a “carefully considered and sincere response,” especially noting that the Indian military had already announced the
cessation of air attacks on Dhaka effective 5 p.m. of 15 December.
In his message, Manekshaw reiterated his guarantees previously given to Rao Farman Ali, promising to ensure “safety of all your military and
paramilitary forces who surrender to me in Bangladesh.” He promised to give “complete protection to foreign nationals, ethnic minorities and
personnel of West Pakistan, no matter who they may be.”
The Indian military chief also pledged to treat the Pakistani forces according to the Geneva Convention. As soon as he received a positive
response from Niazi, he assured, “I shall direct General Aurora, the commander of Indian and Bangladesh forces in the Eastern theater, to refrain
from all air and ground action against your forces. As a token of my good faith, I have ordered that no air action shall take place over Dacca from
1700 hours today.”
Along with the guarantees came Manekshaw’s warning: “I assure you I have no desire to inflict unnecessary casualties on your troops as I abhor
loss of human lives. Should, however, you do not comply with what I have stated, you will leave me with no other alternative but to resume my
offensive with the utmost vigor at 0900 hours Indian standard time on 16 December,” India’s army chief cautioned.
In Washington, Jha delivered Gandhi’s letter to Nixon on 15 December, as Haksar had promised to Keating. Gandhi’s letter echoed the
sentiment her father expressed in his address when India awoke at midnight in 1947 while the rest of the world was fast asleep.
“I am writing at a moment of deep anguish at the unhappy turn which the relations between our two countries have taken,” Gandhi wrote. “I am
setting aside all pride, prejudice and passion and trying, as calmly as I can, to analyze once again the origins of the tragedy which is being enacted.
“There are moments in history when brooding tragedy and its dark shadows can be lightened by recalling great moments of the past. One such
great moment, which has inspired millions of people to die for liberty, was the Declaration of Independence by the United States of America. That
declaration stated that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of man’s inalienable rights to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness, it
was the right of the people to alter or abolish it.
“All unprejudiced persons objectively surveying the grim events in Bangladesh since March 25 have recognized the revolt of 75 million people, a
people who were forced to the conclusion that neither their life, nor their liberty, to say nothing of the possibility of the pursuit of happiness, was
available to them. The world press, radio and television have faithfully recorded the story. The most perceptive of American scholars who are
knowledgeable about the affairs of this subcontinent revealed the anatomy of East Bengal’s frustrations.
“The tragic war, which is continuing, could have been averted if during the nine months prior to Pakistan’s attack on us on 3 December, the
great leaders of the world had paid some attention to the fact of the revolt, tried to see the reality of the situation and searched for a genuine basis
for reconciliation. I wrote letters along these lines. I undertook a tour in quest of peace at a time when it was extremely difficult to leave, in the
hope of presenting to some of the leaders of the world the situation as I saw it. It was heartbreaking to find that while there was sympathy for the
poor refugees, the disease itself was ignored.
“War could also have been avoided if the power, influence and authority of all the states and above all the United States, had got Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman released. Instead, we were told that a civilian administration was being installed. Everyone knows that this civilian administration
was a farce; today the farce has turned into a tragedy.
“Lip service was paid to the need for a political solution, but not a single worthwhile step was taken to bring this about. Instead, the rulers of
West Pakistan went ahead holding farcical elections to seats which had been arbitrarily declared vacant.
“There was not even a whisper that anyone from the outside world, had tried to have contact with Mujibur Rahman. Our earnest plea that
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman should be released, or that, even if he were to be kept under detention, contact with him might be established, was not
considered practical on the ground that the United States could not urge policies which might lead to the overthrow of President Yahya Khan.
While the United States recognized that Mujib was a core factor in the situation and that unquestionably in the long run Pakistan must acquiesce in
the direction of greater autonomy for East Pakistan, arguments were advanced to demonstrate the fragility of the situation and of Yahya Khan’s
difficulty.
“Mr. President, may I ask you in all sincerity: Was the release or even secret negotiations with a single human being, namely, Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, more disastrous than the waging of a war?
“The fact of the matter is that the rulers of West Pakistan got away with the impression that they could do what they liked because no one, not
even the United States, would choose to take a public position that while Pakistan’s integrity was certainly sacrosanct, human rights, liberty were
no less so and that there was a necessary inter-connection between the inviolability of states and the contentment of their people.
“Mr. President, despite the continued defiance by the rulers of Pakistan of the most elementary facts of life, we would still have tried our hardest
to restrain the mounting pressure as we had for nine long months, and war could have been prevented had the rulers of Pakistan not launched a
massive attack on us by bombing our airfields in Amritsar, Pathogen, Srinagar, Avantipur, Utterlai, Jodhpur, Ambala and Agra in the broad day
light on 3 December 1971, at a time when I was away in Calcutta, my colleague, the defense minister, was in Patna and was due to leave further
for Bangalore in the South and another senior colleague of mine, the foreign minister, was in Bombay. The fact that this initiative was taken at this
particular time of our absence from the capital showed perfidious intentions. In the face of this, could we simply sit back trusting that the rulers of
Pakistan or those who were advising them, had peaceful, constructive and reasonable intent?
“We are asked what we want. We seek nothing for ourselves. We do not want any territory of what was East Pakistan and now constitutes
Bangladesh. We do not want any territory of West Pakistan. We do want lasting peace with Pakistan. But will Pakistan give up its ceaseless and
yet pointless agitation of the past 24 years over Kashmir? Are they willing to give up their hate campaign posture of perpetual hostility towards

