misconstrued as giving aid and comfort to anti-government elements or as constituting intervention in the forthcoming election campaign or in any
aspect of the domestic affairs of Pakistan,” McConaughy promised.
His pledge was intended to blunt “systematic efforts of elements unfriendly to the United States to propagate fabricated stories of American
sympathy with opposition parties in Pakistan.”
“I said that our people had not been guilty of any such impropriety, but I knew that allegations to this effect had been manufactured out of the
whole cloth and that unfortunately they seemed to have been given some degree of credence,” the ambassador reported to the State Department.
Ayub replied that he had heard similar reports, especially about East Pakistan – a statement Yahya would mimic two years later. He said the
reports charged the Americans with keeping prejudicial contacts with such opposition leaders as Sheikh Mujib, anti-government student groups
and other dissidents. Ayub said the charges asserted that America financed these elements.
“I told him that it was incredible that such preposterous insinuations could be seriously entertained by anyone who knew anything about
American policy. I said that as he knew the Americans were mostly gregarious people who liked to get acquainted with all manner of people
among whom they lived,” the ambassador wrote to Washington.
Borrowing a phrase Ayub had used earlier in the context of the Pakistanis hobnobbing with communist China, the ambassador said the
“Americans could not be expected to ‘go into purdah’ as far as casual social contacts with non-official Bengalis in East Pakistan were concerned.
But I assured him that I had issued new instructions to all our people to use the greatest circumspection so as to avoid any even half-way
reasonable inference that they were consorting improperly with anti-government elements.”
Ayub had said Pakistan’s representatives could not “go into purdah” so far as contacts with Chinese communists were concerned. He made the
comment in response to America’s complaints that Pakistan was consorting with its communist enemy.
Ayub was very pleased with the ambassador’s assurances as was his successor, Yahya, two years later. However, Ayub picked up a book on
his desk, whose title alone, he said had been giving him surprise and shock: The Invisible Government . It was David Wise and Thomas Ross’
book, which describes how various U.S. government agencies conduct secret operations. He said he hoped that nothing like the operations
narrated in the book were actually going on. Pakistan’s foreign office had distributed copies of the book to most of the government officials.
McConaughy wanted to reassure Ayub: “Of course, we were not assisting and would not assist in [sic] any opposition element in Pakistan.” By
the same token, he asserted, “Although the United States recognized the key importance of Ayub to Pakistan’s stability and welfare, we were, of
course, not in any way intervening in his behalf, either, in the election campaign.” Ayub was facing a formidable challenger – Fatema Jinnah, sister
of Pakistan founder M.A. Jinnah – in his re-election bid in 1965.
Five years later, on 25 March 1969, under mounting political unrest, Ayub Khan was forced by army chief General Yahya Khan to quit the
stage, ending his eleven-year rule which was kept afloat by technocrats, the military, and the business mughals in West Pakistan. Yahya made it
look like Ayub let him take over the government through the backdoor on his own volition, which was nowhere near the truth. Yahya simply
pushed him out, but quietly. He later succinctly described his ascension to the presidency: “The people did not bring me to power. I came myself.”
To calm down street agitation and placate the politicians clamoring for civil rights and economic justice, the new military ruler vowed to return
Pakistan to an elected administration. Yahya’s real motive was threefold: to keep a strong central government intact, to prevent East Pakistan’s
entry into West Pakistan’s power structure, and to stop the Bengalis from getting the national political power proportionate to their share of the
nation’s population. The military, however, recognised that East Pakistan’s neglect caused the current crisis and vowed to address the issue their
way.
The new military regime promised to eliminate many of the causes for complaints against Ayub. But Yahya Khan’s longer-range political
objectives – particularly about East Pakistan – and his probable success in attaining these goals, were obscure.
Under these circumstances, Washington faced a dilemma: how closely to support a government that might or might not win public support and
ran the risk of becoming a repressive force striving to preserve the existing social inequalities. Despite these potential hazards, America chose to
cast its lot with Pakistan’s new military strongman, whom Nixon’s associates described as a “tough” general – “a splendid product of Sandhurst”
with a “good sense of humor” and pukka shahib manner.
“Our conclusion is that we should support Yahya, but should seek to expand the leverage of our assistance to increase chances of a satisfactory
political solution,” the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan advised the State Department in a cable message, setting the policy tone that would eventually
lead America to its worst diplomatic flop in South Asia in years.
Just about two years later, on 22 February 1971, Kissinger sent a memorandum to Nixon to brief him on East Pakistan’s fast brewing turmoil.
“The chances seem to be increasing that we might before long be faced with an internal crisis in Pakistan that could over time have far-reaching
implications for our interests in South Asia,” the memo said. “I have ordered some contingency planning and want to describe the situation as it
now stands.”
The immediate potential for trouble, Kissinger explained, arose from the hard negotiations that were about to begin over writing Pakistan’s new
constitution. The main issue was the power relationship between East and West Pakistan.
The dominant political leaders – Mujib in East Pakistan and Bhutto in West Pakistan – had failed even to begin the process of forming an
informal consensus on the new constitution. Yahya remained committed to turning his military government over to the politicians, but vowed not to
“preside over the splitting of Pakistan”.
The constituent assembly was scheduled to meet on 3 March to draft a constitution within 120 days for Yahya’s approval. Kissinger continued,
in the same memo, that the odds seemed high against the assembly’s success to write a constitution acceptable to the major actors – Mujib, Bhutto
and Yahya.
Kissinger predicted that, Mujib planned to stick with his demand for the East wing’s autonomy, and if he did not get his way, he was very likely
to declare East Pakistan’s independence.
“This may be a negotiating ploy on his part, but strong and growing provincial nationalism limits Rahman’s flexibility and he has considerable
organisational momentum behind his maximum demands,” Kissinger said. “Further evidence of his intentions can be seen in recent approaches he
has made to the United States and other diplomats to play a peacemaking role to avoid an East-West civil war, if he does not get his way and
makes a unilateral declaration of independence.”

He told Nixon that “a realistic assessment would seem to recognize that there is very little material left in the fabric of the unity of Pakistan. This
would argue for adjusting our posture, but against that is the fact that the division of Pakistan would not serve U.S. interests.”
“At a minimum,” Kissinger argued, “it would seem imperative that, in the face of the growing possibility that East and West Pakistan will split,
we draw together our contingency planning on how best to protect U.S. interests.”
Nixon underlined the last sentence containing “consul general” at the end and added a handwritten comment in the margin: “Good.” He also
underlined a part of the sentence that read “more neutral stance toward Rahman, who is basically friendly toward the United States” and wrote in
the margin, “not yet-correct-but not any position which encourages secession,” a phrase that succinctly reflected the policy Nixon would pursue
during the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971.
Bhutto Wants To Be Foreign Minister
On 28 February 1971, at 9 a.m., Farland met Sheikh Mujib at his house in Dhaka for an hour-long conversation. Mujib greeted the ambassador at
his car and escorted him into his house. “It was obvious that he was particularly pleased to see me and welcomed me with great cordiality,” the
envoy reported to the State Department. “At the same time, he seemed somewhat nervous and slightly apprehensive as to what the conversation
might generate.”
Mujib exchanged a few preliminary social comments, which included his reflection that “our meeting comes at a most critical juncture in
Pakistan’s history”. He then “precipitously barged into substantive discussions by asking me, ‘what did I think about the situation?’ ”
Farland pushed the ball into Mujib’s court. “I told him, as an interested observer, I was concerned about the political impasse between East and
West Pakistan.” He then suggested that Mujib, as the Awami League chief, could better interpret the current developments.
Mujib said the political impasse was not due solely to the machinations of Bhutto, but represented a situation that was created by “those very
people who had supported Ayub”. He said Bhutto could not possibly have acted alone since he had less than an organized political party. Without
the help and leadership of certain West Pakistani military officers, Bhutto’s position would be untenable. It was precisely because of this situation
that Bhutto favoured excessive military expenditures, Mujib explained.
When Farland asked whether he thought Bhutto would attend the National Assembly, Mujib said that because the Awami League had “now
boxed him in”, he would attend. However, Bhutto, whom Mujib called a “callous cow”, would subsequently take off for the West wing. At that
moment, “the life struggle of Bangladesh would begin”.
Farland then asked just how far apart were the People’s Party and the Awami League. Mujib said they were so far apart that he anticipated
little or no chance of a consensus. More specifically, the Awami League and he as its chosen leader, could not and would not compromise on the
six-point program, which he had made a part of East Pakistan’s life for some ten years.
Mujib said Bhutto wanted to become foreign minister. He also demanded the right to select Pakistan’s president. Capitalising on West
Pakistan’s fears of East Pakistan’s separatism, Bhutto had asked that Mujib form a coalition with him. Mujib found Bhutto’s foreign policies
abhorrent because of his love for communist China and his intransigent position vis à-vis India. Mujib reflected at length upon his anti-communist
position and the dangers China posed to the region. As for India, Mujib felt it was imperative that Bangladesh re-establish good relations with New
Delhi and reopen the historic trade routes in the area. Summing up, Mujib said the differences between what Bhutto wanted and what the Bengalis
demanded appeared to be insurmountable.
Bhutto was somewhat more extreme in his dislike of India than most other Pakistanis. “The roots of the confrontation between India and
Pakistan go deep into our history and will have to continue until the cause of justice triumphs, no matter how heavy the odds,” Bhutto had declared
in 1969. He had fewer reservations about close relations with China.
Even within the Ayub government, Bhutto was known as an extremist. During a 1964 conversation with Robert Komer, deputy National
Security Adviser to President Lyndon Johnson, Pakistan’s Finance Minister Mohammad Shoaib said, “Bhutto was at one extreme among Pak
policymakers. Ayub deliberately kept him in the middle, and didn’t take all Bhutto’s advice.”
Shoaib also told Phil Talbot, assistant secretary of state, that he had inspired the Regional Cooperation for Development – an alliance formed in
1964 including Pakistan, Iran and Turkey – as an alternative to Bhutto’s pressure for new gestures toward China. Shoaib’s idea was to create a
security arrangement among the region’s non-Communist Muslim states to shore up Pakistan’s security position without requiring it to turn, as
Bhutto preferred, to China for support.
Mujib had no love for communists, and he made it sufficiently clear to the Americans. Indulging in a ten-minute speech, which could have been a
part of his political oratory, Mujib told Farland in 1971 that the communists had killed three of his leaders. He, in turn, had promised the
communists that for every Awami League member killed, he would kill three of theirs; “This we have done,” he said. Mujib told the envoy the
Bengalis were behind him. The small hard-core communists were very much on the run as proven by pro-Chinese Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan
Bhashani’s political disarray.
After noting the time he had spent in prison at the hands of the West Pakistani leadership, Mujib said he had no fear whatsoever of facing the
bullet if the unity could not be maintained. He dramatically pointed out that he was unafraid of being jailed or “hacked to pieces”. He said he would
not deviate from the mandate that had been the will of his people.
“He culminated this monologue by saying that he did not want separation but rather he wanted a form of confederation in which the people of
Bangladesh would get their just and rightful share of foreign aid, and not a mere twenty percent as heretofore. With sixty percent of foreign
exchange coming from my country, how can Islamabad justify the crumbs, which they have thrown at us?” Farland reported Mujib as having
rhetorically asked.
Moving on to the subject of foreign aid, Mujib said Pakistan faced a dangerous financial condition: its foreign exchange reserves were virtually
exhausted. In a sense, Mujib added, this was a blessing in disguise for Bangladesh, as West Pakistan lacked the financial power to subjugate the
Bengalis. He said, however, that West Pakistan was begging Japan for substantial financial support and that if this was received, “then they will
bang us”.
Mujib pointedly asked Farland if the United States and the consortium would support Bangladesh’s rebuilding. The envoy made no firm

commitment; he merely told Mujib that America had been, and continued to be, interested in the subcontinent’s economic well-being.
Mujib then described at length what he considered to be East Pakistan’s chances of becoming a viable area, noting the great gas reserves
available not only for domestic consumption by a petrochemical industry but also for export to India. Under his leadership, he said, Bangladesh
would be self-sufficient in food within two years, the boro crop being one of his primary interests. When Farland pointed to him the almost
unbelievable birth rate in East Pakistan, Mujib said birth control would be one of his main objectives.
Mujib’s mood then turned thoroughly serious. He said he hesitated to do so, but he felt he should point out that America had a reputation for
deserting its friends in the face of disagreeable problems. He said disagreeable problems would expectedly arise in this part of the world, which
again would put the United States to test. Mujib’s comments suggested he somehow got an impression that America might support East Pakistan’s
independence, although he was skeptical whether Washington would ultimately stand by him if push came to shove. Quite possibly he himself had
sought America’s support but was rebuffed, as Kissinger’s 22 February memorandum to Nixon suggested.
“The highly uncertain internal situation in Pakistan has forced us to walk a very narrow tightrope. We are not the controlling factor by any
means, but our influence and support is sought by the major political leaders. We do have some important interests, and our posture at this juncture
is critical to how these interests will be protected in the future,” wrote Kissinger, adding he saw a “growing possibility that East and West Pakistan
will split.”
“The U.S. position has been that we support the unity of Pakistan. This has not been gratuitous. Some Pakistani politicians have charged – for
their own purposes – that the United States is plotting East Pakistani secession, and we have taken the obvious position in denying these charges.
Thus, our consul general in Dacca has urged Rahman to seek a constitutional decision and has scrupulously avoided any implication of U.S.
intervention, if Rahman opts out of a unified Pakistan and a bloodbath ensued.
“However, we could before long be faced with a declaration of East Pakistani independence. Although there is a large negotiating element in
current threats of secession, we may face that situation. That raises the issue of whether or not we should be adopting a more neutral stance
toward Rahman, who is basically friendly toward the United States, as a hedge against the day when we might have to deal with an independent
East Pakistan. A realistic assessment would seem to recognize that there is very little material left in the fabric of the unity of Pakistan. This would
argue for adjusting our posture, but against that is the fact that the division of Pakistan would not serve U.S. interests.”
Responding to Mujib’s comment that the United States had a reputation for deserting its friends, Farland told him that “his opinion was entirely
too pat” and he “would be happy to discuss the American role in support of its friends at another time”. He maintained that “some credence should
be given to the fact that the United States financially assisted Pakistan to the tune of something in excess of four and a half billion dollars”. Mujib’s
retort was that “if the United States would give me one billion dollars, I would make a prosperous Bangladesh a bulwark for democracy.”
“All these comments were but background to the key question which the Sheikh wished to ask, i.e., what is the policy of the United States
toward Pakistan? With the utmost care, I delineated the U.S. policy, precisely in accordance with the policy guidance position set forth in” a State
Department telegram, “and I in no way conveyed a sense of concern” in reference to “Pakistan’s future in such a manner as to suggest the
unalterable U.S. opposition to Bengali aspirations,” Farland reported to the State Department.
Without putting it in the form of a question, Mujib then said it behooved all the friends of Bangladesh to exert maximum influence on “those who
would use the force of arms to keep my people in a colonial status”. He said he had been a student of world affairs long enough to know the
United States and other aid-contributing countries could exert this type of influence, if they desired to do so.
“Since no question was posed, the necessity for an answer was obviated, but it may require an answer sooner than we expect, and hence
should be given some serious thought,” Farland suggested to Washington. “I had anticipated the possibility that the Sheikh would raise the matter
of recognition since he had evidenced interest in this subject as heretofore reported; however, he did not do so.”
On 2 March, Mujib responded to Yahya’s decision to defer the parliament session by announcing a five-day general strike in East Pakistan. “In
this critical hour, it is the sacred duty of each and every Bengali in every walk of life, including government employees, not to cooperate with anti-
people forces and instead to do everything in their power to foil the conspiracy against Bangladesh,” he declared.
As the Bengalis took to the street responding to Mujib’s call, Pakistan’s political situation appeared gloomier. On 3 March, Jeanne W. Davis,
National Security Council staff secretary, prepared a contingency study on Pakistan. She sent copies to Deputy Defense Secretary David
Packard, Under Secretary of State John N. Irwin, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, and Central Intelligence Director
Richard Helms.
The paper, which included a briefing about what led Pakistan to this crisis, said Mujib had asserted he would use his absolute majority in
parliament to enact a constitution based on his party’s autonomist program. But Bhutto had declared he would boycott the session unless Mujib
modified the Awami League’s six-point program. Because of his landslide mandate, Mujib had little flexibility in modifying his program. However,
he preferred a unified federal state of Pakistan with maximum provincial autonomy rather than outright separation.
Bhutto, on the other hand, had tacitly concluded he would let East Pakistan secede – leaving him to govern West Pakistan – rather than accept
a weak federal system as planned by the Awami League.
Because of Yahya’s postponement of the assembly, the crisis had reached a critical juncture. Unless a compromise was found, secession by the
Bengalis or separation of the two wings by mutual consent appeared real, the paper predicted.
U.S. Anticipates Use of Force by Yahya
On 3 March, the State Department sent a cable to the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi, which clearly indicated the United States had anticipated
Yahya would use the military to suppress the Bengalis. The telegram said that as the Pakistani political crisis deepened with the possibility that the
“martial law administration may be prepared to use force to maintain unity,” the attitude of the Indian government took on a growing importance.
India had the capability to interdict air and sea communication between Pakistan’s two wings and “might under certain circumstances intervene
militarily”, if the Bengalis so requested after a crackdown by the West Pakistanis. Because of this possibility, the department sought an analysis
from the embassy about what action India might take that would affect the outcome of Pakistan’s political crisis one way or another. The
department, however, cautioned the embassy not to approach the Indian government for answers to these questions.

On 11 March, the U.S. consul general in Karachi told the State Department it had further information that Yahya could unleash the military force
in East Pakistan. This information came from Dirk Jonganeel, manager, Philips Electric Company Ltd. in Karachi. According to Jonganeel,
Lieutenant General Yakub Khan, martial law administrator of East Pakistan, passed through Karachi with his wife on his way to Islamabad.
Jonganeel said he had learned from a reliable source that “Yakub has been transferred out of East Pakistan because he refused to be party to the
military subjugation of East Pakistan and it is in preparation for this eventuality that Lieutenant General Tikka Khan was assigned to replace him.”
The decision to use force in East Pakistan was made secretly on 11 February 1971 by the top generals, including Hamid Khan, S.G.M.M.
Pirzada, Gul Hassan Khan, Tikka Khan, Ghulam Umer and Akbar Khan at the army headquarters. The deputy chief of Pakistan’s intelligence
agency, S.A. Saud, who attended the secret meeting, opposed the idea and leaked it to a senior Bengali officer of the intelligence department. The
Bengali, in turn, informed Mujib of the army’s decision. Mujib sought help from Governor Vice Admiral S.M. Ahsan and Lieutenant General
Sahibzada Yakub Khan, the military commander in East Pakistan, according to G.W. Choudhury, a Yahya adviser who authored The Last Days
of United Pakistan, published in 1974. Both Ahsan and Yakub Khan opposed the military plan, but they were soon ousted from their positions.
Yahya’s plan to suppress the Bengalis was apparently given the final shape in early March. Iqbal F Quadir, a retired vice admiral with the Pakistan
Navy, got the hint on 8 March from Admiral Muzaffar Hasan, the navy chief. Quadir, who was about to leave for Paris for a stint as Pakistan’s
naval attache, had gone to bid farewell to his chief when the admiral told him that a major general, who was visiting Karachi, had mentioned to him
in passing that the army would be ready for action in East Pakistan by 17 March. Quadir later discovered that the major general was Akbar Khan,
the military intelligence chief.
Long before the situation reached this crescendo, the Americans saw East Pakistan splitting from the West. On 20 February 1969, after Ayub
Khan’s roundtable conference with opposition leaders collapsed, Thomas L. Hughes, director of intelligence at the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research at the State Department, raised such a possibility. Pakistan, he noted, was in a “situation in which political demands are rapidly reaching
a level which can no longer be contained within the political system”.
“In East Pakistan, opposition to Ayub has taken on strong overtones of an anti-West Pakistani sentiment to the point that secession can no
longer be ruled out as a possible consequence of the political convulsion,” he observed. Hughes concluded that Ayub’s “failure to build a solidly
based political system has come home to roost; the country will be fortunate if it emerges from this period of stress as a single entity.”
On 22 February 1971, in a memorandum to Nixon, Kissinger said Mujib was “planning to stick with his demands for the virtual autonomy of
East Pakistan and if he does not get his way – which is very likely – to declare East Pakistan’s independence. This may be a negotiating ploy on his
part, but strong and growing provincial nationalism limits Rahman’s flexibility and he has considerable organizational momentum behind his
maximum demands. Further evidence of his intentions can be seen in recent approaches he has made to U.S. and other diplomats to play a
peacemaking role to avoid an East-West civil war, if he does not get his way and makes a unilateral declaration of independence.”
Again, on 3 March, America prepared an analysis of the origin of the East Pakistan crisis, with a prognosis of where the crisis might lead this
South Asian nation, a staunch Washington ally, in its fight against communism.
The report correctly assessed that the 1970 parliament elections resulted in a nearly complete polarisation of Pakistan’s political forces. In the
East wing, the Awami League, campaigning on full provincial autonomy, won virtually all the seats and secured a small but absolute majority in the
National Assembly. In foreign affairs, the Awami League favoured reconciliation with India. In the West wing, a substantial majority of the seats
went to the leftist Pakistan People’s Party, which advocated a central government with substantial powers and a policy of continuing confrontation
with India over Kashmir. The leaders of the two parties had conferred but had, in effect, agreed only to oppose each other’s constitutional
program.
Yahya, whose power to arbitrate was greatly diminished by Mujib’s landslide election victory, had summoned the National Assembly to
convene in Dhaka on 3 March 1971. However, confronted with the political impasse, on 1 March he had postponed the assembly indefinitely to
give the politicians time to resolve their differences. Mujib intended to use his absolute majority to enact a constitution based on his six-point
program. Bhutto would not attend the session unless Mujib modified his autonomy plan. Several other West Pakistan lawmakers from smaller
parties aligned with Bhutto in boycotting the session.
As outlined in the previous study, this report also found that because of his landslide mandate Mujib had little flexibility in modifying his program,
although he and his party were believed to have preferred remaining in a unified federal state of Pakistan, with maximum provincial autonomy,
rather than secede. Bhutto and his followers, on the other hand, might have tacitly concluded that they would be prepared to let the East Pakistanis
secede – leaving themselves to govern a residual state in West Pakistan – rather than accept a weak federal system based on the Awami League
program.
As a result of Yahya’s assembly postponement, the crisis had reached a critical juncture. Unless a compromise formula could be devised,
secession by the Bengalis or separation of the two wings by mutual consent had become real possibilities.
“Our consistent position has been that U.S. interests are better served by a unified Pakistan than by its separation into two independent states –
West Pakistan with a population of about 61 million and East Pakistan with about 76 million,” the document said. “We have concluded that an
independent East Pakistan would be more vulnerable to internal instability, economic stagnation and external subversion than an East Pakistan
affiliated with West Pakistan. We have also concluded that the East Pakistanis provide a moderating influence over West Pakistani hostility toward
India. Finally, we have recognized that we have had no realistic alternative but to support Pakistan’s unity if we were to maintain satisfactory
relations with the government in Islamabad.”
The Americans concluded that as a practical matter their ability to influence the course of these events was very limited. The special relationship
that they maintained with Pakistan until the late 1960s had ended, with Islamabad essentially pulling itself out of the regional military alliance of
SEATO, and with it the leverage it once had in influencing Pakistan’s political developments.
“All evidence pointed to the fact that Yahya was doing his utmost to effect an accommodation between the two contending forces in his country
to preserve a unified state,” the Americans concluded, and “we see little we could effectively do to help him except to maintain our general posture
of cooperation with his government and to encourage him in his efforts as long as they stand a reasonable chance of success.”
Giving an outline of how things could unfold in the event the two wings separated, they noted that both would want to maintain viable ties with
the United States as an offset to their relations with other major external powers – India, the U.S.S.R. and China. “Both will keenly desire

continuation of U.S. economic assistance and will seek our support on various political issues. Both may also desire military and public safety
assistance from us, at least in training and the sale of equipment. In short, both states will want friendly and cooperative relations with the United
States – a desire which will be in our interest to reciprocate and to support within the capability of our resource and in the light of our interests in
the South Asian region as a whole.”
An independent East Pakistan would undoubtedly face formidable problems, especially in the economic sphere and eventually in the political,
the report correctly predicted. However, these were problems that would inevitably arise whether East Pakistan were independent or merely
autonomous within a federated Pakistan. Politically, it said, the Awami League under Mujib would restore democratic government in the new state
and enjoy wide popular support from the start, judging from the overwhelming size of its mandate in the recent elections. It would move to
establish cooperative relations with India because of external security as well as trade. At the same time, it would cultivate good relations with
many other countries to avoid excessive dependence on any one power and to tap the resources of as many aid donors as possible, the Americans
concluded.
“In the present circumstances, we could perhaps affect the timetable or modalities of East Pakistani secession through our posture toward Mujib
and his followers, or perhaps influence the West Pakistani response to it. However, we could not deter a move for independence if the East
Pakistanis should make the ultimate decision to establish their own country. Nor could we dissuade dominant political forces in West Pakistan,
notably Bhutto and his followers, from pursuing a course of obstruction which would result in driving East Pakistan into secession, if they should
choose to do so,” the policy paper outlined.
Despite the intelligence assessment that East and West Pakistan were falling apart, policymakers in Washington consistently maintained that
America’s interests were better served by a unified Pakistan than by its separation into two independent states – West Pakistan with a population
of about 61 million and East Pakistan with about 76 million. Still, they remained open to the possible re-partition of South Asia and dealing with
another new nation – Bangladesh.
“While we have regarded our interests as better served by a unified Pakistan, we should be able to adjust to the emergence of two separate
states and to maintain satisfactory relations with them without serious damage to our interests,” the study concluded.
The United States had been aware of the Bengali sentiment against West Pakistan at least since 1957, when Major General Iskandar Mirza
ruled Pakistan. When America was deciding whether or not to support Mirza’s presidential rule, the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan told the State
Department that East Pakistan would interpret such an approval as Washington’s support for the “Punjabi tyranny and victimization of their
province.”
The American diplomats favored a policy that would iron out the East-West differences. America’s objective, the embassy concluded, was to
promote an orderly transition from the government by a small bureaucratic clique to an effective parliamentary system run by political parties
supporting foreign and domestic policies in line with U.S. aims.
“Imposition of the president’s rule would lead many to conclude that the representative regime cannot exist in the same system with the
expanded Pakistan military strength,” the report contended.
According to the embassy, the “Awami League remains predominantly secular and middle class and is committed to parliamentary practices. Its
program of provincial autonomy reflects desires of the bulk of population, which did not believe the dictatorship would solve any of Pakistan’s
basic problems.” The mission suggested it should be made known to Mirza.
From the early stage of Pakistan, the Bengalis confronted West Pakistan’s domination, a state of affairs that worried the Americans. U.S.
Ambassador Horace A. Hildreth related one incident to the State Department on 24 September 1956. During a conversation the previous week,
he had confronted Mirza with “coffee-shop gossip” that the H35.S. Suhrawardy, Pakistan’s prime minister, by phone on 16 September to allow
the foreign minister to accept an invitation to a conference in London. When the ambassador asked Mirza about the rumor, he denied putting
pressure on the prime minister.
The following week, “Mirza had obviously forgotten the previous conversation and said bluntly he had put pressure on Suhrawardy,” saying to
the prime minister: “When the Nasser invitation comes, you accept the invitation within half an hour.”
Suhrawardy had blamed the previous governments for pursuing a foreign policy that was never explained to the public. Within a few hours after
being sworn in as prime minister, he told the American ambassador in a private conversation that he “felt that previous governments had been very
inept, negligent and stupid in not explaining the foreign policy to the people and pointing out the reasons and advantages for it and that he intended
to correct this.”
When the ambassador later revealed this to Mirza, the general threw a sarcastic question to Hildreth: “Well, when is he going to commence?”
Mirza then stated he had drafted a letter to the prime minister on foreign policy, which he had not yet sent as he was waiting for the proper
provocation and proper time. When the ambassador said he would be very much interested in seeing his views, Mirza left the room and came
back with a four-page memo and let him read a copy.
“It was a stinging reaffirmation of a very strong pro-West, pro-Free World, anti-Communist foreign policy. It emphasized that the government
of Pakistan in recent months by weaseling is losing stature and friends in both camps,” Hildreth reported to Washington.
Mirza said in the memo that the “government countenanced constant criticism of the United States and the previous government had not
displayed any guts in explaining the foreign policy and so far Suhrawardy was not doing any better.”
Mirza’s action followed the publication of a New York Times article by A.M. Rosenthal on 10 September 1957. Mirza was irritated by the
article because it alleged he opposed making Suhrawardy prime minister for fear that the Bengali leader would not back Mirza for president in any
future elections.
Mirza told the ambassador that “he had told Suhrawardy that he would back him to the hilt, except if he washed out from foreign policy or
meddled with the military and if Suhrawardy double crossed him. In these respects he, Mirza, too could play dirty, and Suhrawardy would have a
revolution on his hands.”
Commenting on Mirza’s statements, Hildreth told the State Department the general “showed every indication that he intended to be in control of
the country, but would back Suhrawardy so long as Suhrawardy did not cross him on foreign policy.”
Mirza also told the envoy that “people long had been accusing him of wanting to be a dictator, but he had already shown time and again that if

he could avoid a military government he would go to great ends to do so.” Mirza then added he hoped the United States would understand if he
had taken any drastic action.
The State Department, which shared the embassy’s concern over Mirza’s planned authoritarian rule, was “reluctant to take any action which
could be construed as interference in internal political affairs [of] Pakistan and thus would prefer at present not to make suggested representations
to Mirza.”
With what would later prove to be disastrous for both South Asia and the United States, America pursued the same hands-off policy during the
initial phase of the 1971 South Asian crisis, lest it face accusation by Yahya of interfering in Pakistan’s internal affairs.
Mujib’s 7 March address in Dhaka relieved the Americans, who had anticipated that the Bengali leader could opt for outright secession from
Pakistan, thus putting America’s long-pursued South policy in disarray. Washington felt that his speech, which was broadcast live in East Pakistan
and attended by an estimated one million Bengalis, was a step back from a call for immediate independence. Instead of announcing an outright
separation, Mujib called for a continuation of the peaceful non-cooperation movement, including the closure of all government offices and
educational institutions. He said he would consider attending the National Assembly scheduled for 25 March if martial law was terminated, the
troops in East Pakistan sent to their barracks and power returned to the elected representatives. His retreat appeared tactical. He made it clear
that something very close to independence – i.e., his people’s emancipation – was his goal and that his movement would not be deflected until that
was achieved.
That Mujib quite openly took issue with Yahya was similarly noteworthy. He accused the general of “submitting to the declaration of a minority”,
a reference to West Pakistan and Bhutto. Mujib asserted that his Awami League was Pakistan’s sole legitimate source of authority, an assertion
the West Pakistanis found hard to swallow.
“Our embassy in Islamabad believes that Rahman’s goal remains unchanged – “emancipation” of East Pakistan from West Pakistani domination.
This could still conceivably mean “full provincial autonomy” within a united Pakistan. But it is just as likely, if not more so, that Rahman has come to
believe firmly that the freedom he seeks is only attainable by outright independence,” Kissinger told Nixon on 13 March 1971.
Mujib’s speech on 7 March suggested he wanted to achieve his goal by gradually asserting power without risking a direct confrontation with the
army that could have possibly followed a unilateral declaration of independence.
The other element in this delicate political equation – Z.A. Bhutto – remained relatively quiet. Since triggering the current crisis in mid-February
by refusing to attend the constituent assembly, Bhutto had worked to further consolidate his support in the West wing and at least to appear more
conciliatory. The differences between Bhutto and Mujib on dividing powers between the center and the provinces could be reconciled or at least
papered over if the constituent assembly met.
Noting that Yahya would shortly visit Dhaka and meet with Mujib, Kissinger outlined three scenarios that could then develop: Yahya could
decide not to take Mujib’s challenge lying down and to retaliate, perhaps to the extent of arresting Mujib and the other leaders, and attempting to
clamp a military lid on East Pakistan. In doing so, Kissinger added, Yahya faced two basic problems: Mujib’s was a Gandhian-type non-violent,
non-cooperation campaign that made it harder to justify repression; and the West Pakistanis lacked the military capacity to put down a full-scale
revolt over a long period.
A static waiting game could develop with neither the army nor the civilians prepared to take a bold initiative to break the deadlock, and each
hoping the other would break first. This was where Mujib would probably prefer to continue the status quo for a while longer so that he could
gradually take de facto control of East Pakistan without forcing a showdown, he surmised.
Finally, Yahya could make more tactical political moves to let Mujib or Bhutto probe for accommodation and buy more time without giving up
anything. This had been his operational strategy so far but it might be that just about all of the possibilities in this sphere had been played out.
“In short, the Pakistan crisis was far from over and could suddenly flare up again,” Kissinger cautioned.

2 
Pakistan in Trouble:
Mujib’s Secret Message to America
y mid-March 1971, America had concluded that the Bengalis were marching on a road towards an independent country. Pakistan’s political
crisis had moved beyond holding the parliamentary session and framing a constitution.
“The election results themselves doomed this possibility by, first of all, affording the Awami League the unexpected majority by which to
ram through a constitution of its making, and secondly, by cutting Bhutto out of any role other than the chief minister of Punjab or the leader of the
opposition in the National Assembly,” the U.S. consul general in Dhaka, Archer Blood, wrote to the State Department in March.
What was needed to keep at least a vestige of Pakistan’s unity was a solution that “would give something to Bhutto, something to Mujib and
something to Yahya and the army”.
One such solution, according to a suggestion from the United States was to form a confederation, allowing Bhutto to become prime minister of
West Pakistan and making Mujib prime minister of Bangladesh. Yahya could become president of the confederation and the military would receive
its sustenance from both the wings and be stationed in both parts.
But this solution would have created a big problem in foreign affairs, given Mujib and Bhutto held diametrically opposite views on relations to
India – Mujib favored keeping warm ties, but Bhutto was steadfast on waging a fight for Kashmir. Another weakness of the confederation plan
was in the eyes of Yahya, who considered it as a half-step towards eventual full independence for East Pakistan.
Still, Blood saw no other feasible alternative than some form of a confederation – as outlined in Mujib’s six-point plan, which proposed a federal
government with maximum powers given to provinces, especially in economic matters.
“The possibility of Mujib compromising significantly on the six points to permit the National Assembly to agree on a constitution seems out of the
question,” the consul general argued. “It would be political suicide for Mujib. His people would not tolerate it. We have passed that point in time.
The ominous prospect of a military crackdown is much more than a possibility, but it would only delay and ensure independence of Bangladesh.”
On 7 March, Mujib held a mass rally in Dhaka, asking the Bengalis to be ready to fight for independence. Simultaneously, he effectively took
control of East Pakistan and ordered the civil servants to follow his instructions. Yahya’s grip barely extended beyond the military garrisons
dominated by the West Pakistani commanders.
Despite the open rift with West Pakistan, Mujib apparently kept the possibility of remaining within one Pakistan under a loose federation as
outlined in his six-point plan. Or so, at least, the Americans thought. From Dhaka, U.S. Consul General Archer Blood sent a message to
Washington on 10 March 1971 to this effect, quoting a purportedly secret message from Mujib, brought to him by some Alamgir Rahman who
was identified in a State Department telegram only as an Awami League leader.
“Alamgir Rahman came to see me this morning with what he said was a message from Mujib,” Blood wrote. “According to Alamgir, Mujib had
wanted Yahya to come to Dacca for talks, and I was greatly relieved at the news that Yahya was, in fact, coming. Mujib wanted very much to
work out with Yahya some political settlement that would avoid bloodshed, satisfy Bengali aspirations, and preserve some vestige of link with
Pakistan. Alamgir opined that it’s now too late to talk in terms of the six-point constitution, but perhaps some solution can be found along the lines
of a confederation, with separate constitutions for East and West Pakistan, and one army and one foreign ministry.”
Mujib Seeks U.S. Help
Mujib’s question, said Alamgir, was this: Did the United States want to see a military confrontation with the prospect of eventual communist
domination of Bengal, or would it prefer a political solution to the current crisis? In essence, Mujib sought America’s help to bring about a solution
to the crisis.
“I told Alamgir that Mujib’s question, put that way, was easy to answer. We naturally hoped for a peaceful political solution in lieu of bloodshed:
We were gratified to learn that Mujib is also thinking in these terms, and we interpret Yahya’s willingness to come to Dacca as evidence he, too, is
desirous of achieving a peaceful solution. We hope both sides would approach talks in the spirit of a compromise.
“Alamgir then said Mujib wanted to know if the United States would be willing to indicate to Yahya our hopes for a political solution to the
current crisis. I said I did not know if this thought had been conveyed to Yahya in Islamabad, but I would undertake to suggest to the charge
[d’affaires in Islamabad] that, if an appropriate occasion presented itself before Yahya’s departure, he might note to Yahya our hopes for a
political solution to the problems facing Pakistan.”
Blood ended his dispatch with a comment. “Recognize, of course, that the expression of hope for a ‘political solution’ as distinct from a
‘peaceful’ solution carries the implication that we would not be happy about a military repression as the martial law authority’s solution to the crisis.
Nonetheless, given the urgency of the situation, I would hope we could be somewhat more positive in this regard.”
Despite their reluctance to support an independent East Pakistan, the Americans had begun seriously thinking that soon they might have to deal
with a new nation in South Asia; this was long before the civil war that engulfed Pakistan in 1971. Based on this assumption, they had started
examining what they would face if East Pakistan separated from West Pakistan. Washington believed that an independent East Pakistan would
face formidable economic and political problems. Sheikh Mujib would restore democracy in the new state, and enjoy wide popular support from
the start. The new nation would establish cooperative relations with India for external security and trade. It would cultivate good relations with
other countries to avoid excessive dependence on any one power and to tap the resources of as many aid donors as possible.
The Awami League, which emerged from the elections as more of a nationalist mass movement than just a tight political organisation, however,

would be hard-pressed to fulfill its program and satisfy people’s aspirations. It would face defections from its own ranks and mounting opposition
from radical leftist elements outside. The long-term outlook suggested increasing radicalisation and political instability in East Pakistan.
Economically, an independent East Pakistan could maintain its existing low growth rate for some years after separation, assuming improved
mobilisation of local resources. It would enjoy exclusive benefit of the foreign exchange earnings from jute, which had been thus far shared with
West Pakistan. It would also benefit from trade with India and an infusion of huge foreign aid. Its economy was bound to suffer in the long term,
however, because of the population burden. The Americans wondered how the new state could, in the long run, meet its basic needs, let alone
improve its economy, even with sizable external aid.
In contrast to the situation in East Pakistan, the Americans maintained a new state in West Pakistan would most likely be organized around a
left-trending populist type of government dominated by Bhutto. The military would remain an important element in the political equation. An
authoritarian regime headed by Bhutto and backed by the armed forces was conceivable. Given the military’s influence and the more favorable
economic outlook, the chances for stability appeared somewhat better in West Pakistan than in East Pakistan, according to calculations made by
the Americans.
Externally, a new West Pakistan would continue a hostile policy towards India, which could spell trouble for its security and economic progress
as it would entail excessive defense expenditures. The state might move closer to China, while trying to maintain viable relations with both the
United States and the Soviet Union.
Compared with East Pakistan, an independent West’s economic prospects were much better. The new state should be able to maintain its
forward movement for some years to come with continuing foreign aid. But it, too, faced a potentially serious population problem, which could
badly retard its economic progress.
Both the nations would seek aid from the United States. But before America would even receive requests for economic aid, Washington would
face serious diplomatic issues, if events in Pakistan ultimately started rearranging South Asian political realities. The Awami League leaders had
already sounded out the American officials on the posture Washington would take towards an independent East Pakistan. Even if the separation
was uncertain, they could approach America for support against possible West Pakistani resistance. At the same time, the West Pakistani leaders,
including Yahya Khan, could probe the U.S. position regarding Pakistan’s unity.
To deal with these contending forces, the Americans outlined three alternative options:
First, Washington could maintain its existing official position, telling Pakistan: “Our policy has been and continues to be to support independence,
unity and integrity of Pakistan. However, this is your country and how you organize and deal with its problems is your business.”
Second, America could tell the Bengalis that it favored Pakistan’s unity, but “we recognize that there is a rising sense of nationalism in East
Pakistan and that we would be prepared to adjust our policies to the evolving situation.”
And third, “we could, while maintaining our present public position, privately urge President Yahya to make every effort to reach an
accommodation with Mujibur Rahman, which would enable a single Pakistan to continue, even though its federal powers were limited to defense
and foreign affairs, and even though Bhutto’s party refused to cooperate in the process of government.”
Unless and until separation was certain, the United States decided, “any shift in our position would be against our continuing interest in seeing
Pakistan remain unified. Any softening on our part would contribute to the process of disintegration.”
The Americans were concerned that their encouragement of East Pakistan’s separatism would quickly get back to West Pakistan and deepen
suspicions among some West Pakistanis that Washington wanted to split their country. “It would, thereby, prejudice our relations with the present
West Pakistanis as well as our future relations with a possible independent state in West Pakistan,” they concluded.
“We, therefore, prefer at this stage to continue to maintain a balanced posture between West and East Pakistanis. It serves to reassure those
with whom we have to continue to deal in West Pakistan, while leaving the impression with the East Pakistanis that we are not inflexible, although
we would prefer [as Mujib presently seems to] a mutually agreeable constitutional system within a unified state.”
Washington felt that Yahya was doing his best to bring Mujib and Bhutto closer, according to some analysts at the State Department. “He does
not need any urging from us in this matter and we can realistically offer little or nothing that will materially affect the situation. Moreover, an effort
by us to urge compromise could be resented as unwarranted interference in Pakistan’s internal affairs”.
Yahya knew very well when he postponed the parliamentary session that his move could provoke a backlash in East Pakistan. He figured the
alternative to the postponement would be even worse. His two main options were to postpone the session and risk an immediate confrontation
with East Pakistan, or to hold the session and risk an immediate fight with his army.
Because he would eventually have to reject an autonomy constitution, Yahya figured he would inevitably provoke a confrontation with the East
Pakistanis in a few months. So, he could not compromise with Mujib or move closer to Bhutto without jeopardising his own power base and
risking his ouster by hardline military elements. In short, Yahya decided to risk a confrontation with East Pakistan in the slight hope that if he
pushed all the parties to the brink, a compromise might evolve from their coming to grips with the consequences of dividing Pakistan. Given the
sentiment within West Pakistan’s political-military establishment, he saw no other realistic choice.
The looming Bengali-Punjabi fight assumed a greater significance for the Americans as it shook Washington’s core policy in the subcontinent.
The United States had held since India woke up at midnight that a stable South Asia free from outside influence served America’s interests better.
So the CIA argued that a constitutional government along the line advocated by the Awami League would hurt America’s best interest. A divided
Pakistan would leave West Pakistan under the control of an anti-West demagogue, Bhutto, popularly known in Washington as the “Yankee-
baiting foreign minister” of Pakistan and “a drunkard”.
On the other hand, a confederation reserving foreign policy and defense to the central government would check Bhutto’s strongly pro-Chinese
and anti-Indian policies; it was expected that he would not control the Pakistani military as he had an excellent chance of doing if the country split.
So went the logic for American support for a united Pakistan.
Still, the Americans feared that the point at which East Pakistan’s separation became inevitable could rapidly be reached and “we should be
prepared to adjust our posture quickly to take account of this eventuality. Much will hinge on East Pakistani reactions to Yahya’s decision to
postpone the convening of the assembly.”
The Americans concluded that if separation became imminent, but before it was announced, the United States should let the East Pakistanis

know privately that “we would recognize the new state and be prepared to conduct normal relations with its government.” To support Pakistan’s
unity at this stage, they argued, would unnecessarily alienate the “Bengali leaders with whom we would want to be on good terms in the future”.
However, if East Pakistan’s leaders “should request U.S. intercession or intervention to forestall an anticipated West Pakistan military action,
we should decline on the grounds that we do not consider a West Pakistani military intervention likely,” if Washington assumed that to be the case
at the time. “We should firmly reject any suggestion of a U.S. military involvement. If East Pakistan publicly declares its independence and requests
our recognition, we should grant it,” the CIA further advocated.
How then should America react if East Pakistan declared independence and West Pakistan took military action?
“We think it was very unlikely that West Pakistan would intervene militarily to attempt to preserve the unity of Pakistan by force,” the analysis
inaccurately predicted. “Given the anticipated vehemence of the Bengali response, the limited strength of West Pakistani forces now in the East
[one army division and a few aircraft], and the difficulties of reinforcement from the West, the risks of military intervention would appear to be
excessively high. Moreover, there would probably be a general lack of public and political interest in West Pakistan in preventing a Bengali
secession. Rather than undertake military action, most of them would prefer to let East Pakistan go its way.”
West Pakistan would refrain from military action also because such a step could bring the Indians to the aid of the Bengalis.
“We believe India considers that a unified Pakistan is in its interest. But if separation appears imminent, India would prefer an independent state
in the East to a united Pakistan dominated by the West,” Washington concluded. Moreover, the United States believed that India would not send
troops into East Pakistan to avoid the risk of escalation in the West.
“Despite the unlikelihood of military intervention, we, nonetheless, should plan for it on a contingency basis on the theory that an irrational action
is always possible,” the intelligence study said. “If a West Pakistani intervention becomes imminent or actually occurs, we would have an interest in
doing what we could to avoid bloodshed and restore peace, and to prevent the conflict from escalating beyond a purely East-West Pakistan clash.
We should be willing to risk irritating the West Pakistanis in the face of such a rash act on their part, and the threat of stopping aid should give us
considerable leverage.”
As the foreign policy experts began chalking out America’s future course of action towards Pakistan, Washington opted to remain neutral and
uninvolved, at least for the moment. America made it clear, though, that it favored Pakistan’s unity and that it wanted the Pakistanis to decide their
country’s future. Some Americans still saw merit in pressing Yahya to align himself with Bhutto’s foes and compromise with Mujib, who was
considered pro-American. But Washington held off making the suggestion to Yahya, fearing an army backlash. The State Department also
opposed getting involved, but kept the option open for the future.
To the Americans, Pakistan’s major political figures represented a cocktail of ideologies and characters: Yahya, Mujib and Bhutto possessed
different ideological outlooks. Yahya, whose power base was the military and the economic elite who opposed compromise with Bhutto to avoid
an “equitable distribution of wealth,” was fairly conservative. Bhutto, a leftist and populist, did not want to accommodate East Pakistan because he
wanted to control a strong central government.
Yahya and Bhutto, however, had one thing in common; both opposed Mujib. Moreover both were committed to ensuring that neither gained a
dominant position in any future Pakistani government. Mujib, concerned mainly with East Pakistan, remained steadfast on autonomy. He favored
normal relations with India, putting himself in further conflict with Yahya and Bhutto, who both held a fairly hardline position towards India.
The open political process provided a ray of hope for a possible understanding amongst Mujib, Bhutto and Yahya, despite their conflicting
ideologies and political interests. But the scope for a compromise dimmed, with Yahya’s announcement to postpone the parliamentary session. The
United States concluded that Mujib had almost decided to opt out of Pakistan. In fact, the Awami League leader indicated this when he talked
with Farland on 28 February 1971, asking the ambassador about U.S. aid to an independent East Pakistan. Farland appeared amenable to
supporting Mujib.
Mujib had called for Pakistan’s withdrawal from the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO) and Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO),
both non-communist military blocs. But, a CIA analysis concluded, “despite his neutralist statements and his leftist tendencies in domestic
programs, he was still basically pro-Western.”
Still, America remained unimpressed with Mujib’s foreign policy credentials, which Washington felt were virtually non-existent. A CIA study –
Pakistan, India, and Communist China: A Change in Relations? – released on 19 January 1971, concluded that “Mujib has devoted himself
to winning greater autonomy for East Pakistan and has never developed a comprehensive foreign policy.”
However, there were signs which way he would swing; Mujib did not view India in the same light as Pakistan’s previous rulers had. With the
army representing West Pakistan’s interests and with too few troops in the East Pakistan army to protect East Bengal, the Bengalis concluded that
it would better serve their interests if negotiations were held with India rather than engaging them in confrontation.
As the crisis unfolded in 1971, Washington faced a tough question: If East Pakistan seceded, how active should the United States be in trying to
avoid bloodshed? National Security staff members, Saunders and Hoskinson, hinted in a memo what they expected to come up and what they
wanted to do: “We are, after all, witnessing the possible birth of a new nation of over 70 million people in an unstable area of Asia and, while not
the controlling factor, we could have something to do with how this comes about – peacefully or by bloody civil war.”
To answer this question, Kissinger sent a memorandum on 16 February to state and defense secretaries and the CIA director, for a contingency
study to outline the possible range of U.S. reactions to East Pakistan’s move towards secession. The study inaccurately dismissed Yahya’s
possible military intervention in East Pakistan.
Ominous signs of a looming crisis in East Pakistan were, however, apparent to some other American intelligence agencies long before the army
crackdown in March. On 8 December, Ray S. Cline, director of Intelligence and Research at the State Department, sent a brief to Secretary of
State William Rogers, telling him what the future held in store for Pakistan in light of Sheikh Mujib’s election victory.
The Awami League’s sweep in East Pakistan and the People’s Party’s surprising lead in West Pakistan would make it difficult to strike a deal
between the two wings, said the report prepared before the complete election results were announced in Pakistan. It observed:
“While an accommodation is still possible, it has become more problematical. With an absolute majority, the Awami League may be tempted to
press too hard for more autonomy than the West Pakistanis are prepared to accept. Even if Sheikh Mujib recognizes the dangers inherent in such a
course, efforts on his part to restrain his followers may risk his position – and the majority.”

Bhutto’s emergence as a prominent figure in the West also complicated the Pakistan situation. His radical appeals were an anathema to the
establishment, and thus raised fresh doubts in the Yahya regime’s minds as to the popular government’s value.
Bhutto had not openly criticized Awami League’s autonomy demands, but he preferred a strong center. He was unlikely to join forces with
Mujib on an issue that could in any way diminish his newly achieved position in West Pakistan. Bhutto’s opposition to anything more than token
provincial autonomy would leave the Awami League dependent on the few scattered West Pakistani centrists as it sought true autonomy.
The key to a resolution of the autonomy issue was Yahya Khan. He was assumed to have accepted the need to work with Mujib, but this
decision was doubtless predicated on the belief that the West Pakistani ruling elite would be well-represented by centrists who could work with
and control the Awami League leader and thus protect West Pakistani interests. Bhutto had destroyed this belief.
Since the constituent assembly must write a constitution in 120 days, a task made more difficult by the assembly’s composition, and since Yahya
must approve any proposed constitution, it appeared less certain that martial law would see its end nor a civilian government would be formed.
But, the report predicted, if a constitution embodying what the Awami League deemed to be adequate autonomy could not be framed or was
rejected, the Bengali reaction could well be secession.
On 4 March, Saunders and Hoskinson prepared yet another review, showing a deteriorating situation in East Pakistan. This memo followed
Mujib’s decision not to attend the roundtable conference that Yahya had called after postponing the parliamentary session.
Mujib Confuses America
Mujib’s action confused the Americans, who felt that the Bengali leader had possibly slammed the door on the East-West compromise by dumping
Yahya’s planned conference. However, they were not entirely sure what Mujib actually wanted at that point; they were merely taking hints from his
press statements. Mujib had made off-the-record statements to several foreign journalists that he could announce a sort of independence for East
Pakistan in his 7 March public rally. He, however, went on to say that the East and West wings should write their own constitutions and then
discuss how to link the two wings.
The Americans took this statement as a sign that Mujib kept “the door open to some sort of confederal relationship”. So, they advocated
against “jumping too soon to the recognition of the East Pakistani independence,” if Mujib opted out of Pakistan.
As Mujib stepped up the political pressure, Yahya put his military machine into action. Washington received reports of troop movement from
Wast Pakistan to East, with indications that the military wanted to strike against the East Pakistan leaders. An earlier review by Washington had
ruled out an attack, but that assessment had become seemingly less and less true. The CIA’s latest report predicted a violent reaction from the
Bengalis if Islamabad launched a crackdown.
The State Department worried it might soon have to grapple with another question if Yahya unleashed military force on the Bengalis: how to
deal with the Bengalis working at the Pakistan Embassy in Washington. They had already approached the department about their relationship with
the United States, should East Pakistan declare independence. They feared expulsion from the embassy, and the deputy chief of the mission, an
East Pakistani, would become de facto charge d” affaires of a new Bangladesh Embassy. After Mujib fell short of announcing outright
independence on 7 March, both the Bengalis and the department got a breathing room.
On 15 March, Joseph Sisco, assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, sent a memorandum to Rogers after Mujib
declared that his party, which had won 288 of 300 seats of the provincial legislature, took control of East Pakistan’s administration. The memo’s
headline, “Mujib Takes Over East Pakistan; Yahya Flies to Dacca,” succinctly captured the prevailing situation in East Pakistan.
Mujib’s announcement contained thirty-five directives to take over the administration. His move was carefully planned. By taking this step,
Mujib had directly confronted Yahya, but avoided an unqualified declaration of independence.
Under the circumstances, Yahya apparently had only two options, and either one would further weaken Pakistan’s already fragile unity. If he
acquiesced in Mujib’s step, he would have forfeited his martial law powers, at least in the East, and would be hard-pressed to retain them in the
West. If the president or the military generals decided “to resist Mujib’s action by force, East Pakistan would be engulfed in a struggle between the
military and the Bengali nationalists, the outcome of which can only be eventual independence of Bengal and the breaking of all ties with West
Pakistan – unless, as seems unlikely in the long run, the army can successfully contain a rebellion,” Sisco predicted.
Yahya found himself between the proverbial rock and a hard place not only in East Pakistan but also in West Pakistan. He faced problems in
West Pakistan, with Bhutto demanding that power be given to the majority parties in each wing. Bhutto’s speech in Karachi calling for power
transfer, in fact, might have triggered Mujib’s action. Bhutto had decided that his chances of getting power in West Pakistan were best enhanced
by a total split of Pakistan, or even nearly so. However, Bhutto had less opportunity to act than Mujib because the army was strong in the West
and could probably contain a rebellion. The events cast further doubt on the continued unity in Pakistan. Yahya’s response would be the most
important determining factor.
Although in the December 1970 elections, the Bengalis opted for autonomy, their opinions had since hardened as a result of the crackdown in
March. The best that West Pakistan could have expected was a restoration of conditions that existed under Ayub.
Under such a system, routine and low-level administrative duties would go to Bengalis loyal to Islamabad. The West Pakistanis would have the
ultimate control, and the army would remain the final arbiter of power.
The two areas would remain as a single economic unit. The central government would seek to cope with East Bengal’s formidable economic
problems. But a huge majority of the population would remain strongly disaffected and launch sporadic uprisings. Pakistan’s talk about enlisting
loyalist Bengalis in large numbers appeared nothing more than wishful thinking.
The political complexion and outlook of an independent Bangladesh were extremely difficult to forecast. If it came into being rather soon, and if
Mujib and the principal Awami League leaders were still alive and permitted to return, they would quickly take over. Mujib’s political and
economic philosophies were essentially moderate ones; he wished to develop good relations with India and adopt a generally balanced and
neutralist international posture. In domestic affairs, he advocated a mild type of socialism, emphasising an improvement in the living standards of the
Bengalis and a concerted attack on the many economic problems.
On the other hand, if the fighting prolonged, the prospects of a takeover by a radical leadership could rise. “We know almost nothing about such

