may make about the restoration of normalcy, he has not yet done anything to effectively impede the reign of terror and brutality of the Pakistan
army, the root cause of the refugee exodus. I believe the United States, whether we like it or not, bears very heavy responsibility for the continuing
deterioration of the situation. Unless forceful and effective action is promptly undertaken to stem the refugee flow, the government of India would
be forced into an act of desperation.”
Scolding Washington for its hands-off posture vis-à-vis East Pakistan, Stone also said, “We are the key factor in all of Yahya’s calculations for
the immediate future. Despite his apparent lack of realism in recognizing the facts of life in East Pakistan, it is difficult for me to believe he does not
perceive that the mainstay for the survival of his government is the continued flow of support and resources from the [U.S. government.] To hold
this card in our hand without playing it seems to me to be indefensible in the present situation.”
He recommended that Washington use all the leverage available to pressure Pakistan into halting without further delay the repression in the East
wing. “Under present conditions, for us to call on India to show restraint amounts to putting the shoe on the wrong foot.”
Displeased with this bitter comment, Nixon summoned the ambassador from India for consultation. On 16 June, Keating briefed the president
ahead of the Indian foreign minister’s visit to Washington. Keating told Nixon that a political settlement was unlikely unless Yahya was ready to
deal with the Awami League.
“The old Pakistan is through,” the ambassador flatly told the president.
But Nixon remained transfixed on his policy not to disturb Yahya before his secret China mission was over. He wanted good relations with
India, but not at Pakistan’s expense. “It would not be in our interest” to contribute to the collapse of Pakistan, Nixon said. But he agreed that
Pakistan might collapse within the following months.
After Keating left the Oval Office, Nixon and Kissinger continued their discussion. Kissinger advised his boss to tell India’s foreign minister that
Washington would give aid to India, but not from Pakistan’s budget.
“It would be considered such an insult to Yahya that the whole deal would be off,” Kissinger cautioned, referring to Pakistan’s role in America’s
efforts to develop contacts with China.
“It just may be that the poor son of a bitch can’t survive,” Nixon commented, referring to Yahya.
On 16 June, Swaran Singh met with Nixon as part of his worldwide tour. Washington was Singh’s final stop on a ten-day tour of major world
capitals, including Moscow, London, Paris, Bonn, and Ottawa, undertaken to reinforce the seriousness with which India viewed the situation in
East Pakistan.
During his meeting with Nixon, Singh told the president that Pakistan “was reaching the point of no return”. Nixon asked Singh to outline an
outcome that would be in India’s best interest. He asked if India envisioned an independent country in East Pakistan. Singh replied: “We have no
fixed position on that.”
When Singh met Rogers the same day, he said India believed that “there is some prospect that if the government of Pakistan selects proper
course, unity of Pakistan can be maintained.” India “did not advocate any particular political solution which might be autonomy under six points,
federation, confederation or independence. This [is] up to Pakistan to decide upon, but India does wish to end the conflict, which both weakens
Pakistan and causes a refugee burden for India.”
When Sisco asked how Bangladesh leaders’ insistence upon independence was the only solution related to India’s approach, Singh replied,
“India had carefully avoided committing itself to any particular solution. It has not recognized Bangladesh nor decided that Bangladesh must be a
separate entity, but one cannot expect East Bengalis to abandon the idea of independence until they see a real possibility of an acceptable
alternative.”
Welcoming this view, Rogers stated, “We can urge Yahya to try to work out a political solution, but we cannot urge him to accept separatism.
We can only advocate solution which has some prospect for success and point out to Yahya difficulties which he would face if he did not seek an
accommodation.”
On 21 June, David Schneider, country director for India at the State Department, sent a letter to Galen Stone, the U.S. chargé in New Delhi,
assessing the impact of Singh’s visit to Washington. Overall, he felt, Singh had made a positive impression. State Department officials were
surprised by Singh’s moderate approach to the East Pakistan crisis. “What particularly impressed the secretary, Joe Sisco and others was that,
according to Swaran Singh, the government of India had not hit on any one exclusive solution for solving the East Pakistan problem. It admitted of
the possibility of a political accommodation within a united Pakistan. We welcomed this here because it meant that the United States and India
could operate within the same basic strategy.”
Yahya, however, saw India’s concerns about the refugees as a mere ploy to impose a political solution upon Islamabad. He made this point
clear in a letter to Nixon on 18 June where he said, “It is most unfortunate that this humanitarian question should be cynically turned into political
propaganda by India, and that the Indian government should use the problem of the displaced persons as an instrument of pressure on Pakistan to
impose a political government of Indian choice in East Pakistan. No government could yield to such blackmail.”
Yahya saw India’s demand as an indication that war was coming. He told Nixon: “As I have repeatedly stressed, war would solve nothing and
we do not want a conflict with India. It remains our earnest hope that India will not resort to a conflict. The danger is that through constant
repetition of threats, the Indian leaders may succeed in creating an atmosphere and mood in their country which could inevitably lead to a conflict.”
He complained that the Indian army had indulged in numerous aggressive activities from across the border in previous days. He said reports
confirmed an increasing concentration of Indian forces. Neutral observers saw camps in India to train saboteurs to infiltrate East Pakistan. He
asked Nixon to use his “influence with India to persuade her to desist from actions” that could lead to a breach of peace.
India “Did Not Know How Not To Go To War”
In July, Kissinger came to South Asia to gain first-hand knowledge of the situation. On 6 July, he met with Prime Minister Indira Gandhi’s personal
secretary, P.N. Haksar. Haksar was furious over America’s military aid to Pakistan. Kissinger sought to quiet down Haksar, telling him that
Washington would try to work silently over the next few months to encourage a settlement of the refugee problem.
Haksar conceded that the United States could not respond to public furor, but hinted that India had decided nothing short of military action

would bring this crisis to an end. “India did not want to go to war, but it did not know how not to go to war,” he said.
Kissinger later recalled telling Haksar that the Indians were just making lots of noise over the military aid to Pakistan to set up for war. After
conversations with Haksar and Kaul, Kissinger concluded that India was “playing power politics with cold calculations”.
One day after his discussion with Haksar and Kaul, Kissinger met with Gandhi, who was accompanied by Haksar and another aide. Keating
and Saunders joined Kissinger. Meeting privately with Kissinger for fifteen minutes, Gandhi told him she did not wish to use force and was “willing
to accept any suggestions” from the United States.
On his part, Kissinger hinted about America’s secret overtures to China, assuring Gandhi they were not directed against India but rather part of
Washington’s global policy. Kissinger later wrote that he had dropped the hint about China to avoid “future charges that, on an issue of vital
concern to them, we had not at least confided our general intent”.
When the other participants joined the discussion, Kissinger asked whether the settlement in East Pakistan must include Mujib. Gandhi said the
deal must be between East and West Pakistan; after all, it was not an Indo-Pak problem and India would not have been involved except for the
refugees.
Kissinger stressed the importance of avoiding “extreme measures” for another few months to give the present pressures a chance to work on
Pakistan. Gandhi gave the assurance that India did not want to take extreme measures. What India would do would be a question of how the
situation developed and what it could do. It was true that the shipment of a few arms to Pakistan did not make much practical difference, but in
psychological terms, the United States had made the situation more difficult.
Pakistan, according to Gandhi, had felt all these years that it would get support from the United States no matter what it did. This had
encouraged an “adventurous policy,” she said, adding that India was “not remotely desirous of territory”. It was irritating, she stressed, to have the
Pakistanis base the whole survival of their country on hostility to India. “If they really had the good of Islam at heart, they would think of the sixty
million Muslims in India also.”
When Kissinger met with India’s external affairs minister on 7 July, Singh appeared more resigned to the prospect of a conflict with Pakistan.
Singh told Kissinger that Yahya’s comments on Mujib in his 28 June address were unhelpful. He feared that a settlement along the lines of a
confederal relationship appeared to have been nipped in the bud by Yahya’s statement. It appeared now that the constitution would not be drafted
by the elected lawmakers. It was also unclear what role political parties or Mujib could play.
India To Accept Deal Minus Mujib
During his trip to New Delhi, Kissinger also met with Jagjivan Ram, India’s defense minister. At Kissinger’s request, Ram assessed the Chinese
military threat to India. Kissinger observed that China might intervene on Pakistan’s behalf, should India and Pakistan go to war. Kissinger assured
Ram that the United States would take a grave view of any Chinese move against India, a declaration that was in contrast to a warning earlier
made by the national security adviser to Jha in Washington.
Kissinger had told India’s ambassador to Washington before his trip to New Delhi, that if war broke out between India and Pakistan, and China
got involved on Pakistan’s side, “We would be unable to help you against China.”
When Kissinger arrived in Pakistan, he met with Sultan Khan, the foreign secretary, M.M. Ahmad, economic adviser to Yahya, and Agha
Hilaly, Pakistan’s ambassador to Washington. Saunders joined Kissinger. Kissinger told the Pakistanis, “I do not consider it impossible that the
Indians could take military action.”
Sultan Khan realized the problem needed to be defused quickly because it could pressure India into making a rash action.
Kissinger suggested that it would help if Pakistan could make a comprehensive proposal rather than merely dribble out bits and pieces of its
action, as well as internationalize its response to the refugee problem by inviting international observers. Kissinger felt it was important to defuse the
issue of the refugees so that it could be separated from that of the political structure of East Pakistan; linking the two would only prolong the
current situation, which could lead to war and that would be a catastrophe.
Pakistan’s foreign secretary asked what Kissinger felt would be the Indian rationale for war. Kissinger replied that the seven million refugees
were an intolerable burden on an already overburdened Indian economy, particularly in eastern India. India saw an enormous danger of communal
riots. The Indians just feel they must “do something”. India felt that it would win any military confrontation, Kissinger told the Pakistanis.
Sultan Khan told Kissinger about the efforts being undertaken to arrange a meeting between Yahya and Gandhi. Iran’s Shah had offered to
provide a neutral ground for an Indo-Pak meeting, but Gandhi had rejected it. Similarly, Nikolai Podgorny, Soviet president, and Aleksei Kosygin,
Soviet prime minister, had wanted to arrange a meeting in June 1970. India did not reply until October, when it said a summit meeting was
inappropriate then. New Delhi suggested the discussion begin at the secretary level.
“The lady is unpredictable. She is maneuvering for a fight,” Hilaly commented on Indian Prime Minister Gandhi.
On 22 July, Rogers told Hilaly he had warned Swaran Singh against letting increasing incidents on the Pakistan-India border get out of hand.
This indicated to Hilaly that the United States was maintaining its pressure on India. Kissinger told Hilaly the next day that when he had met Jha in
San Clemente, he had also made it clear that the United States would view “with extreme disfavor”, any Indian move to begin war.
Hilaly asked, “So Jha came to the West Coast. Did he ask about China’s intentions?”
Kissinger, speaking slowly and avoiding a precise response, said Jha had just wanted to get a general fill-in. He said he had told Jha that
America vehemently opposed any moves that could lead to war. He had told him that a complete political solution would take longer than working
out a plan for the refugees, and thus the Indians should not make the refugee return a condition for forging a political settlement.

13 
Pakistan Crisis:
Superpower Game
he United States made its first foray into South Asia during World War II when British power in India was dwindling. Washington worried
that the region could fall into the hands of Japan, potentially hurting its own war efforts. Since the departure of Britain from India – and from
the world scene as a major power – the main factor guiding the then newly emerging superpower’s policy towards the subcontinent was its
perception of the region’s relevance to its global geopolitical and strategic goals. America’s South Asia policy was shaped not so much by the
region’s interests, but by U.S. interests versus Soviet Union and China. The United States mainly sought to prevent the absorption of the area into
the communist orbit. Its early thrust was against advancing communism in general; eventually, the emphasis would shift to countering Soviet
expansionism. Guided by its strategic interests, the United States tended to view regional conflicts largely from a global perspective.
A report on the then emerging situation of India, Pakistan and Iran in the State Department Bulletin on 3 April 1950, summed up the serious
thinking in Washington about South Asia. It said, “The schism that led to the breakup of the old India was very deep . . . The development of a
Pakistan-India entente cordiale appears remote. Moreover, the vigor and methods which have characterized India’s execution of its policy of
consolidating the princely states and its inflexible attitude with regard to Kashmir may indicate national traits which in time, if not controlled, could
make India Japan’s successor in Asiatic imperialism. In such a circumstance a strong Muslim block under the leadership of Pakistan and friendly to
the U.S. might afford a desirable balance of power in Asia.”
America sought to prevent Asia’s domination by a single power that could pose a threat to it. Towards that end, it offered to help South Asian
countries develop economically and as relatively open societies. As part of America’s game plan, its policymakers made it clear that if the free
world was to be protected from communism – whether it be Russian or Chinese – Pakistan must be an integral part of the Western strategic
arsenal. The United States concluded that it had a vital interest in ensuring Pakistan’s independence and its continuing alignment with the free world
in collective security against communism. It was, therefore, necessary to help Pakistan to maintain a military force capable of meeting such threat,
and to maintain levels of economic activity and standards of living capable of supporting America’s interests in South Asia.
Olaf Caroe, a former governor of the Northwest Frontier Province of Pakistan and foreign secretary of the British-Indian government, advised
the Americans in his book, Wells of Power , that Western defense of the Middle East should be based on Pakistan, just as British defense of the
Middle East had been based upon control of the subcontinent. America also realized that it would be easier to defend the Middle East with
Pakistan as ally.
Thus Pakistan was the only country in South Asia and within the Muslim world that participated in all of the US-led military alliances in the
1950s. Overall, Pakistan’s purpose in joining those alliances was not to contain communism but to strengthen its own defense and bargaining
position vis-à-vis India, its arch adversary.
For the US, the military alliances with Pakistan became a strategic necessity and America got branded in India “as a friend of Pakistan and
opposed to India.” This perception allowed the Indians to believe that America’s patronisation of Pakistan meant denial of proper status to New
Delhi, thus pushing it towards the Soviet Union.
Subsequently, India’s willingness to expand relations with the communist countries enhanced their international stature and made other Asian
countries more receptive to Soviet overtures. India’s policy paid off during the 1971 war because the Indo-Soviet treaty successfully neutralized
the United States and China. America and China gave verbal support to Pakistan, but both were helpless to defend Pakistan’s territorial integrity
as State Department officials and American public opinion opposed Pakistan. Although the Nixon administration tilted to Pakistan, it was simply to
avoid war in the region. The Americans had accepted the inevitability of the creation of Bangladesh, but Nixon wanted to stop West Pakistan’s
anticipated breakup. To this end, America told the Soviets that it would take tougher action if they didn’t restrain India.
On 9 July 1971, Alexander Haig, the deputy national security adviser, sent a memo to Nixon on the Indian foreign minister’s visit to Moscow,
saying Kosygin had agreed to arm the Bengali guerrillas. Singh had sought Russia’s military protection against China’s threatening gestures.
Kosygin responded favourably, although he requested a formal request from Gandhi.
Haig explained to Nixon that the Indians were still being haunted by the 1962 humiliation, notwithstanding their brave talk about being able to
defend against China and fighting on two other fronts against Pakistan. This could be why Singh regarded his Moscow visit as “a major political
development”. Gandhi, too, was pleased with Moscow’s response, but Haig suspected the Russians would not aid India because “it would be a
major break in the Soviet policy,” which committed Moscow to supporting communist regimes.
China Hints Action If India Attacks East Pakistan
On 10 July 1971, Kissinger and Chou En-lai discussed in Beijing that how China would react in the East Pakistan situation. Chou implied that
China would intervene if India undermined Pakistan’s control over East Pakistan. He said, “In our opinion, if India continues on its present course
in disregard of the world opinion, it will continue to go on recklessly. We, however, support the stand of Pakistan. This is known to the world. If
[the Indians] are bent on provoking such a situation, then we cannot sit idly by.”
Kissinger told Chou that while Washington maintained “friendly relations” with India, in this case, the Nixon administration sided with Yahya.
He, however, was restrained in his comment on how the U.S. would respond should India attack East Pakistan. Kissinger said, “We strongly
oppose any military action to solve the problems of East Pakistan. And, if India takes military action in East Pakistan, we would strongly and
publicly disapprove of it.”
On 16 July Nixon summoned his top advisers to the Western White House for a session that lasted more than an hour. Among the ten

participants were Kissinger, Rogers, Helms, and Moorer. Opening his discussion on South Asia, Nixon vented his anger against the Indians,
describing them as “a slippery, treacherous people.” He felt that the Indians would like nothing better than to use the East Pakistan tragedy to
destroy Pakistan. If the Indians believed that they could get away with it, he fumed, they would like to undercut the Pakistani government.
After finishing his verbal salvos against the Indians, Nixon asked what restraints could be applied to them. “We could not allow – over the next
three-four months until “we take this journey” to Peking – a war in South Asia, if we can possibly avoid it,” he told his aides.
Turning his attention to the situation on the ground, Nixon asked whether Pakistan would fight if it were attacked. Helms replied, “Yes.”
But the Pakistanis would not attack India, Moorer interjected.
Helms stressed that the pressures were building in India to go to war.
Nixon realized things were spiraling downward. The situation “smells bad,” he said, adding that the Indians were not to be trusted.
Kissinger jumped in, saying, “The Indians seemed bent on war. Everything they have done is an excuse for war. Whatever their objective might
ostensibly be, they appear to be thinking of using the war as a way of destroying Pakistan.”
Kissinger believed that if East Pakistan were attacked, Yahya would start an all-out war and that he would lose it.
What would China do? Nixon queried.
Kissinger incorrectly predicted that the Chinese would come in, a comment perhaps he based on Chou En-lai’s promise in Beijing. He said the
Indians were “insufferably arrogant.” He quoted India’s army chief, General Sam Mannekshaw, as saying India would take on East Pakistan, West
Pakistan and China – all at once.
Kissinger said the way the Indians were hooking the refugee solution to an overall political solution suggested that they were using the refugees
for political purposes. But Yahya lacked the imagination to solve the situation in East Pakistan in time. Over a longer period, 70,000 West
Pakistanis could not hold down East Pakistan, Kissinger observed.
Kissinger had urged Yahya to develop a generous settlement on the refugee issue to deny India an excuse for intervention. He worried that an
outbreak of war involving Pakistan, India and China, would send all U.S. efforts to build ties with China, down the drain.
Rogers said the tragedy was that Pakistan, as currently constituted, could not survive.
On 23 July Kissinger held a Senior Review Group meeting to discuss South Asia. Helms and Moorer were among the nineteen participants
from the State Department, the CIA, the Joint Chiefs, the Pentagon and the National Security Council.
Kissinger began by reiterating Nixon’s determination to delay the war for at least three to four months. “The Indians should be under no illusion
that if they go to war there will be unshirted hell to pay. We want to avoid war and we will do the right things to prevent it,” he vowed.
Sisco felt that the ball was in America’s court. “The way we handle the Indians can either deter them or move them toward war. If we assume
that the only way to move the Indians is with a stick, I don’t think we understand the Indian psychology. We need a combination of carrot and
stick and some concentration on the proper way to use our leverage. Psychology and mood are important in terms of making the Indians believe
that we are doing what we can to be helpful.”
Kissinger appeared determined to execute Nixon’s plan. He said, “We are quite prepared to do that, but the Indians must not be under any
misapprehension. We will do everything we can to ease the refugee problem as long as India understands the consequences of any rash action on
their part.”
Irwin observed that the Indians remained suspicious of the United States – a trait that had marked Indo-U.S. relations since at least the 1940s,
when Britain ruled India. “They think we are pro-Pakistan. They will understand the pressure if they believe we seriously want to help. But such
pressure won’t work unless we continue to push the Pakistanis so that the flow of refugees slows or stops, with some possibility of the return of the
refugees to East Pakistan or the achievement of some political accommodation.”
Kissinger then said he had no doubts this was a profoundly emotional issue to the Indians. “My impression is that the Indians have a tendency to
build to a hysteria from which they won’t know how to escape. They could bring about a major confrontation, and I am not confident that China
would not come in the circumstances.”
Irwin reminded the group of Jha’s comment that America economically helped India but never politically. “They’re really schizophrenic. They
appreciate what we have done for them, but are distrustful of us. Of course, they have never been with us politically.”
Sisco interjected, saying many Americans had a wrong impression about India. “When many Americans think of India they think of Krishna
Menon, and that’s not an inaccurate image.” Menon, Nehru’s left-leaning defense minister who often showered America with bristling attacks,
tilted India’s military establishment towards the Soviet Union.
As for the Pakistanis, Kissinger had few kind words for them, because the generals in Islamabad failed to grasp what they really faced. But he
made an accurate prediction on when India would attack Pakistan and how New Delhi would finish the war. “On the Pakistani side, it is my
impression that Yahya and his group would never win any prizes for high IQs or for the subtlety of their political comprehension. They are loyal,
blunt soldiers, but I think they have a real intellectual problem in understanding why East Pakistan should not be part of West Pakistan. You will
never get the acceptance of the Awami League from the present structure. If India attacks, it will be in the next six months. The Pakistanis will not
put the Awami League back in power in the next six months. It seems inevitable that any political process will end with some degree of autonomy
for East Bengal. Can we get a program that separates the refugee issue while still leaving a vista for political accommodation? The Pakistanis don’t
have the political imagination to do this themselves.”
Helms seconded that Yahya simply had no political solution.
Sisco said, “If the Indians come to the conclusion that there is no hope of any accommodation, this continued frustration could lead to what we
would consider an irrational Indian action.”
Kissinger said India had the right to insist on any particular political formula as a precondition for the return of the refugees.
Irwin said, “I know the prime minister told you they would not insist on any formula, but Jha is insisting on the reinstitution of the Awami
League.”
Kissinger replied,”We could press Yahya on that, but not on accepting the Awami League. If we press him on the Awami League and he
refused, that could be the basis for an Indian attack.”

Sisco said, “We will have to nudge Yahya toward the Awami League. We will also have to do what we can to see that he does not try Mujib. I
will weigh in with Hilaly on that.”
Sisco’s comments referred to a report the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad had sent to Washington on 22 July, saying Pakistan was preparing for an
in-camera trial of Mujib.
When Irwin wanted to know if there were any Awami Leaguers left in East Pakistan whom Yahya could deal with, Kissinger replied that Yahya
claimed he could get up to sixty of the 167 Awami Leaguers.
Van Hollen said the “estimate is high.”
Kissinger concluded, “I am no expert, but I think the situation could be building toward war. India is torn between wanting the refugees to go
back and wanting to use them as a pretext for a move against Pakistan. Pakistan is most flexible about wanting the refugees back but is least
flexible about the possibility of restoring the Awami League.”
Maurice J. Williams, deputy administrator of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), added, “I think that’s too sharp
a dichotomy. In the first place, I don’t think Yahya can be talked out of his attitude toward Mujib. And, the refugees can’t be talked into going
back unless there is some political accommodation.”
Sisco replied: “It is the result of Pakistan’s use of force in the early days. Also of the continuation of the guerrilla action and of the general
dislocation in East Pakistan. We can’t tell Yahya to put his army back in their barracks when India has training camps on the border, is engaged in
border crossings and is actively supporting the liberation movement.”
Irwin interjected, suggesting that Washington talk with Jha and the Russians.
Kissinger wanted to be sure what the United States should discuss before making an overture to the Soviet Union.
Irwin promised “to get together a scenario on exactly what we would say to the Indians, the Pakistanis and the Russians.” He said the U.S.
would tell Pakistan that “we want to reduce the flow of refugees to a trickle.”
To that end, added Sisco, Washington would tell Pakistan to expedite the transfer of power to the civilian government in East Pakistan.
Williams, however, remained skeptical about the outcome of such a proposal. He said, “As long as the Pakistani army is both fighting and
running the country they won’t be able to do much. It is absolutely necessary to get the army out of the civil administration. They don’t give a damn
and they aren’t very good at it. That means speed up the process at least to get a quasi-Bengali political apparatus in East Pakistan.”
As the Americans started formulating their strategies, Farland came to Washington on 30 July for consultation. During a meeting, also attended
by Saunders, Kissinger said he was certain that the State Department wanted to link any movement on the refugee and relief fronts to a full political
accommodation in East Pakistan. He asked Farland to check his judgment that it was better to talk to Yahya “with love rather than with brutality.”
Farland could not agree more and stressed, “That is the only way.” Washington could say anything to Yahya as long as it was related to a
refugee settlement, but not to a “political accommodation.”
Kissinger said there would some day be an independent Bangladesh. However, the problem now was to defuse the refugee situation so that
India could not use it as a plausible excuse to start a war.
Farland, however, foresaw the possibility of an imminent war.
Kissinger, for his part, felt that America had to press the Indians harder against war. He asked what Saunders thought, who said, “We had just
about run out of steam with the Indians for the moment and had to press for some accomplishment on the Pakistani side before we could go back
at the Indians.”
Kissinger shrugged off Saunders” last statement. He thought the big mistake the Pakistanis made was to dribble out all of the things they were
doing on the refugee front. They should have saved them all up for several weeks and then announced a big program. Such a move could have
been pointed out by them as a significant effort to solve the refugee problem.
He said it was “absolutely essential that we get a comprehensive refugee program. If Yahya could propose a coherent program then we would
have something to take to the Indians as a basis for squeezing them not to go to war. The Indians could then be asked to let the refugees go back
or to keep quiet about them. In any case, if the Pakistanis had what looked like a plausible refugee program, then the Indians would have less of an
excuse to go to war.”
When Farland resumed his conversation with Nixon and Kissinger the next day, he issued a dire cautionary forecast. If a war were to break out,
Farland said, China would get involved and the entire subcontinent would be a “hell fight.”
Nixon asked, “What do you think our position should be?”
“I think we are doing what we should,” the ambassador replied to the president. He painted a dark picture for the subcontinent, pointing out that
the Hindus and the Muslims – who had fought against each other for centuries – were likely to continue doing the same.
Nixon interjected, saying, “Miserable damn place.”
Kissinger said the Indians” involvement in the crisis was based on their assumption that “if they can undermine East Pakistan, then in West
Pakistan so many forces will be unloosen that the whole Pakistan issue will disappear.”
Nixon asked Farland, “You are convinced that Yahya will fight?” The ambassador replied, “Oh, he will.”
Nixon then remarked, “He will commit suicide.”
Kissinger agreed that Yahya would fight, “just as Lincoln would have fought.”
Farland added, “The possibility of a defeat is a minor consideration as opposed to their sense of national unity.”
Nixon then inquired about the “terrible stories” being circulated by the Indians about the horrors endured by the refugees at the hands of the
Pakistani army.
Farland said only what his boss wanted to hear: the Indians were “past masters at propaganda.”
Nixon was concerned that a “bloodbath” would develop in East Pakistan. “We warned the Indians very strongly,” he said. “If they start anything
– and believe me it would be a hell of a pleasure as far as I am concerned – if [sic] we just cut off every damn bit of aid we give them, at least
whatever it is worth.”

Nixon said his problems in dealing with the situation in East Pakistan were magnified by the State Department bureaucracy. “We are having a
hell of a time keeping the State Department bureaucracies hitched on this thing.” He labeled the State Department’s South Asia specialists as pro-
Indian.
By August, Washington had drawn the conclusion that both India and Pakistan were marching on the road to war. On 6 August Rogers told the
U.S. Embassy in New Delhi, “I am increasingly concerned at public and intelligence indications that both Indian and Pakistani governments are
beginning to feel war may be inevitable and are tending to act on that assumption.” To buttress his contention, Rogers noted in the cable that
Pakistani and Indian air forces had been put on alert.
Another sign of war preparations came from India when New Delhi told the West Bengal government that after 15 August it might not rely on
the Indian army troops for internal security. Other signs included Bangladesh guerrillas” apparent plan to mount a major offensive in September and
increased cross-border shelling by both the Indians and the Pakistanis, which was shifting from sabotage to direct attacks on the West Pakistani
forces. On top of all this was India’s rejection of the U.N. proposal to have a presence on its side of the border. India’s efforts to exclude foreign
relief workers from refugee areas also suggested a greater Indian sensitivity about activities in those locations.
In the light of these ominous signs, Rogers instructed the embassy to seek a meeting with either India’s external affairs minister or foreign
secretary, “to express our continued concern at dangers of the situation.” He told the mission to specifically ask India “to take no action which
would exacerbate the situation and to use its influence with the Bengali guerrilla forces to prevent the creation of a situation in which guerrilla
activities could lead to hostilities.”
Rogers was not the only one who felt that India and Pakistan were headed towards war. On 3 August Secretary General U Thant warned the
U.N. Security Council that a major conflict could break out in South Asia.
Despite the grim assessment by his advisers, though, Nixon still saw no need to change his policy. He believed that India had planned to attack
Pakistan long before the current crisis erupted. On 27 July, he had a conversation with Kissinger, who assured him that he “will make it clear with
the Indians that there isn’t going to be a war.”
China Containment Drives Moscow’s South Asia Policy
Similar to America’s strategic goal, the Soviet Union’s most important purpose to have South Asia in its fold was to ensure that the subcontinent
would not be used by any power against any country. From its global strategic point of view, Russia saw Pakistan as an area of enormous value to
gain greater control over world affairs and to strengthen its power to fight the West and China. Soviet policies in South Asia were determined on
the basis of global power politics. Its interest in South Asia was linked with its traditional czarist urge to gain access to the warm water ports for
global domination.
According to Nixon’s account in his book The Real War, Soviet President Leonid Brezhnev told Somalian President Said Barre went: “Our
aim is to gain control of the two great treasure houses on which the West depends, the energy treasure of the Persian Gulf and the mineral treasure
house of Central and Southern Africa.”
Moscow perceived America and China as potential threats to its interests in South Asia and the Indian Ocean area. The Soviet Union
considered the competition for influence in the area as a zero-sum game: to reduce Chinese and U.S. influence, its own influence must expand. For
this purpose, the Soviet Union urged India to take diplomatic and economic decisions to help curb U.S. influence in South and Southwest Asia.
Russia perceived that it was vital for its strategic interests to maintain a hold over South Asia, the Persian Gulf, as well as Afghanistan, Iran and
Turkey. Thus it hooked up with India as a reliable partner. India, for its part, considered Moscow as a neutralizer against China, a nation that
Russia was seeking to restrain.
In 1969, Brezhnev first propounded his Asian Collective Security doctrine, calling for the renunciation of the use of force in relations between
states, respect for sovereignty and the inviolability of borders, noninterference in internal affairs and the broad development of economic and other
cooperation on the basis of full equality and mutual advantage. Since then the Soviet Union had been trying assiduously to woo the South Asian
nations to its sphere. This move was dictated by the Soviet preoccupation with the “containment of China.” Since the late 1960s the Soviet Union
had perceived China as a political and military threat to its security, and a primary obstacle to the spread of its influence in Asia.
With détente flourishing in the West, the U.S.S.R. was keen to engineer a strategic cordon around China to accomplish its grand design.
Pakistan, which has had friendly links with China, was crucial to such a scheme of things. The Soviet Union bent its efforts, consequently, to try to
wean away Pakistan using the classic carrot-and-stick approach.
East Pakistan’s brewing crisis presented an embarrassing situation for the Soviets, in that they were being driven toward an open pro-India and
anti-Pakistan stance on the question. And yet, despite its close and growing friendship with India, the Soviet Union continued to resist the pressure
for quite a while to publicly side with New Delhi. The Soviet Union eventually did play a crucial role in the birth of Bangladesh, especially by using
its veto power at the United Nations, although Moscow initially opposed breaking Pakistan.
G.W. Chowdhury, a former Pakistani cabinet member and adviser to Yahya, noted in Brezhnev’s collective security plan for Asia, that the
Soviets avoided discussion of an independent Bengali state for a long time, talking instead of a political settlement acceptable to the whole of
Pakistan. During his visit to Algeria in the summer of 1971, Soviet Premier Aleksei Kosygin referred to Pakistan’s “territorial integrity.” In fact,
Moscow announced its preference for a peaceful political solution after the East Pakistan crisis had erupted.
On 3 April, President Nikolai Podgorny advised Yahya to strike a deal with the Bengalis: “We have been and remain convinced that the
complex problems that have arisen in Pakistan of late can and must be solved politically without the use of force.”
But the Soviet policy changed sharply in a matter of three months, as India moved closer towards a military solution. On 2 July, Kosygin
pledged support for the guerrillas operating in East Bengal, and, upon receipt of a formal request from India, the Soviets promised a guarantee of
military protection to enable India to resist pressure from China. Based on the latest developments in East Pakistan, Soviet policymakers had
assumed a divided Pakistan was no longer politically viable and an independent East Bengal was inevitable.
Under the changed circumstances, the Soviets were willing to concede West Pakistan to China and to focus on backing India and the Bengali
independence movement. The Soviets, however, continued to publicly profess their even-handed policy for the subcontinent.

Brezhnev explained the Soviet policy in a letter to Nixon on 8 December 1971. He said the Soviet Union was “profoundly concerned about the
situation in the Hindostan peninsula, the more so that the dangerous events are taking place in the immediate proximity to the borders of the Soviet
Union.” From the very outset, Moscow favored “a peaceful solution and did everything necessary in this respect, trying in every way to convince
both sides of this.” Moscow told Yahya Khan “the only way to proceed is the way of political settlement, and that a political settlement requires
political means.” It was clear all along that the refugees would not return home without a political settlement in East Pakistan, so Moscow advised
“Yahya Khan to speedily take that path”.
“Our approach in this matter has not been and is not one-sided. We persistently expressed to both Pakistan and India our view about the
necessity of the speediest political solution of the problem. We sought to exert influence on the Pakistani leadership not because we were
interested, for some special considerations of ours, in supporting the other side. We acted in that way because we saw the events in East Pakistan
as the main cause of what was happening. And our viewpoint has not changed. Unfortunately, President Yahya Khan and his government did not
take our advice. We are still puzzled as to the reason why the Pakistani leadership did not want to follow the way of political settlement – the way
of negotiations,” the Soviet leader told the American president.
Nixon’s China Plan Lands India Firmly In Soviet Orbit
What the Soviet Union failed to win through diplomatic courtship with India for years, it got as a byproduct of America’s secret efforts to consort
with China. After Kissinger informed Gandhi about Nixon’s China plan during his visit to India in an attempt to allay New Delhi’s possible
misunderstanding, she rushed to sign a military pact with Moscow.
On 9 August, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Indian External Affairs Minister Swaran Singh signed the 20-year Friendship
Treaty, giving India a strong weapon to face any potential military confrontation, especially if China got involved in East Pakistan.
The pact provided that in the event of an attack there would be immediate mutual consultations. By then the treaty had been discussed for nearly
two years, after India dragged its feet for fear of sabotaging its own credibility in the Non-Aligned Movement.
Analysing its implications, Irwin told Nixon that each side undertook to refrain from giving assistance to any third-party taking part in armed
conflict with the other party, assuring India of the prospect of Soviet help in the event of a war. The decision to depart from its traditional posture
of non-alliance reflected India’s perceptions of changing international power realities, notably the détente in Sino-American relations. In addition,
recent U.S. policies towards Pakistan had reinforced the Indian view that it could not count on U.S. support in the event of hostilities.
From the Soviet point of view, the rising level of tension in South Asia and the prospect that India might extend diplomatic recognition to
Bangladesh, thereby precipitating hostilities, seemed to have prompted Moscow to offer the treaty. By signing the pact, the Soviets dissuaded the
Indians from rushing into recognising Bangladesh. For Moscow, the gains from the treaty were formal Indian assurances that it would not enter any
hostile alliance system, permit foreign bases nor allow the use of India for purposes militarily harmful to the Soviet Union.
The Soviet assurance of support had also diminished pressures on the Indian government and restored a degree of self-confidence and restraint.
The treaty in itself provided no basis for the resolution of the fundamental issues at stake in East Pakistan. But by implicitly giving a deterrent
against a Pakistani or Chinese attack, it encouraged the Indians to step up their covert activities in East Pakistan with less fear that these steps
would escalate into war.
While the treaty represented no substantial change in Indo-Soviet relations, it reinforced the increasing closeness of views between the Indians
and the Soviets. It reflected a Soviet recognition of the preeminence of its interests in India and India’s recognition of the geopolitical necessity of
close ties with Moscow. The pact did not, however, imply any change in India’s desire for close relations with the United States.
The hint that New Delhi still wanted close ties with Washington came from Gandhi’s overture to America. Two days before India signed the
treaty, Gandhi’s office told America she would be pleased to accept an invitation for an official visit to Washington in November. Gandhi was
reluctant to visit America when it was first proposed a few months earlier.
On the day India and the Soviet Union signed the agreement, Jha sought a meeting with Kissinger in Washington. When they met, Kissinger told
the Indian envoy that the treaty was a matter of secondary concern to the United States, “though it was hard to reconcile with the nonalignment
policy of India.”
“What did concern us, however, was the possibility that India might draw the conclusion from it of an unlimited freedom of action vis-à-vis
Pakistan,” Kissinger said. He cautioned he could not be more categorical in pointing out that a fresh Indo-Pak war would set back Indo-American
relations for half a decade.
If New Delhi ended up because of this treaty as a diplomatic appendage to Moscow, America’s interest in India would diminish. America
wanted a strong independent India, Kissinger said. Jha assured him that India would not be anybody’s diplomatic satellite.
Kissinger called Jha’s attention to Article 9 of the treaty and said that if read literally, this meant that India would have to support the Soviet
Union diplomatically in a new crisis over Berlin. Jha said that such was not the treaty’s intention. India simply wanted an ally to counter Pakistan’s
repeated claims that China would be on its side in the event of a new war.
Kissinger said that anything that exacerbated conditions in the subcontinent was against U.S. policy. He hoped the ambassador “understood that
we were deadly serious about it”. He also said it seemed a pity for the United States and India, which had no conflicting interests, to quarrel over a
problem whose solution was preordained by history.
Jha asked Kissinger what he meant by the last statement.
Kissinger replied: “It seemed to him that over a historical period, East Bengal would be gaining autonomy even without Indian intervention. We,
in turn, had no interest in the subcontinent except to see a strong and developing India and an independent Pakistan. Indeed, there was a difference
in our approach to India and in our approach to Pakistan. India was a potential world power; Pakistan would always be a regional power. For all
these reasons, the problem would sort itself out if we separated the issue of relief from that of refugees and the issue of refugees from that of
political accommodation.”
Jha said he had no difficulty separating relief from refugees, but he saw no way of separating refugees from political accommodation. The
ambassador then handed Kissinger a letter from Gandhi to Nixon, which was couched in very conciliatory terms. Jha said it would provide an

excellent opportunity for Nixon to state his basic policy towards India and to start a useful dialogue. He also told Kissinger that Gandhi had
accepted the invitation to come to Washington.
Kissinger told Jha it was essential that the India-Pakistan problem not be solved by war. “We would be generous in refugee relief, but India
should not believe that it could use this crisis to overthrow the settlement of 1946,” the U.S. national security adviser emphasised, referring to the
Partition of British India.
On August 11, Kissinger convened a meeting of the Senior Review Group in the White House. Before he started the meeting, Nixon wanted to
talk to some of the panel members, including Kissinger, Irwin, Moorer, Cushman, Williams, Sisco and Saunders.
Nixon spoke about the gathering storm over South Asia and how he wanted this issue to be handled by his administration.
“We must look at this situation above all in terms of U.S. interests. The interests of the United States would be ‘very much jeopardized’ by any
development that could break into an open conflict. ‘We will have to do anything – anything – to avoid war.’ We will do ‘anything – all we can –
to restrain’ those who want to be involved in a war.”
Elaborating, the president said, “India’s interest, some Indians think, would be served by war. Some Pakistanis would be willing to have a war.
‘The USSR – I don’t know what they want.’ The interests of the United States would not be served by a war. The new China relationship would
be imperiled, probably beyond repair, and we would have a ‘very sticky problem’ with the USSR.”
Nixon then vented his frustration with U.S. diplomats and gave his take on India’s plans, noting that he had been visiting India since 1953, when
he was vice president under President Dwight Eisenhower. “Now let me be very blunt,” he said. “Every ambassador who goes to India falls in love
with India.”
“Some have the same experience in Pakistan – though not as many because the Pakistanis were a different breed. The Pakistanis are straight
forward – and sometimes extremely stupid. The Indians are more devious, sometimes so smart that we fall for their line.”
He stressed that the United States “must not – cannot – allow” India to use the refugees as a pretext for breaking up Pakistan. He was
“convinced” that India wanted to break up Pakistan. That was what he might want to do if he were in New Delhi, Nixon added. He feared that if
the Indians did “romp around in East Pakistan” or sent guerrillas, the Pakistanis might well go to war even though they felt that such a move could
be suicidal.
Nixon said the United States would “go all out to help the refugees and to help people in East Pakistan” and stop “a war because war would
help no one. We will not publicly exacerbate the political situation. We will deal with the political problem in private. It is not our job to determine
the political future of Pakistan. The Pakistanis have to work out their own future. We will not measure our relationship with the government in terms
of what it has done in East Pakistan. By that criterion, we would cut off relations with every communist government in the world because of the
slaughter that has taken place in the communist countries.”
When Nixon asked if anyone had questions, Sisco ventured the Indo-U.S. treaty would have serious repercussions. “The Indians may feel
constrained from conventional military moves across the border, but they may feel encouraged to support guerrilla crossings. Relief alone won’t do
the job. President Yahya may not be able to go far enough. But if there is not some progress on the question of political accommodation, the
guerrilla warfare would continue, Pakistani military reprisals would continue and the refugees would be unlikely to return to their homes. More
importantly, Yahya may feel he has to attack the guerrilla camps in India.”
On 14 August, just five days after India and Russia signed the friendship treaty, Kissinger met with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador in
Washington, amidst charges that the pact encouraged India to take military action to resolve the crisis. They talked over lunch in the Map Room of
the White House. Kissinger summarized the conversation in a 24-August memorandum to Nixon.
Dobrynin told Kissinger that the Soviet Union was doing its best to restrain India as it wanted peace in the subcontinent. He remarked it was
irony that the Russians were lined up with what looked like the pillar of democracy while the United States was lined up with the communist
Chinese.
Kissinger took exception to the Soviet ambassador’s observation. As far as the subcontinent was concerned, he said, the United States was not
lined up with anybody. “We, above all, wanted to prevent the outbreak of a war, and we hoped that they did not inadvertently give the Indians
enough backing so that they felt it was safe to engage in war.”
Dobrynin said Moscow’s interest was stability and, in fact, the Soviet Union had invited Pakistan’s foreign secretary to come to Russia to see
the country’s pursuit of a balanced policy.
Kissinger felt what Moscow had done thus far was inadequate. He said Moscow should not encourage Indian pressures for an immediate
political solution in East Pakistan, as that would only make the problem impossible to resolve. He suggested it would be best if the refugee and
relief problems were first addressed and the political accommodation, later.
Dobrynin said the Soviet Union basically agreed with such a formula. He asked Kissinger whether it was correct that the United States would
look at a Chinese attack on India as a matter of extreme gravity and might even give them some support. India had advised the Soviet Union that
Washington would come to New Delhi’s aid in the event of an attack by China. He said India had been puzzled by Kissinger’s comment to this
effect, but had then put it all together after the U.S. national security adviser’s trip to Beijing.
Kissinger said he never commented about his meetings in other countries, but that the U.S. certainly was not aligned with any country against
India.
On 26 August, Hoskinson sent a memo to Kissinger, summarising the Soviet ambassador’s answers to some questions Rogers had posed
regarding the Soviet position on South Asia. Analysing the reports, Hoskinson concluded that if Kosygin did come through on the guarantees
against China, India would feel much more inclined to attack East Pakistan.
Dobrynin said Moscow had no interest in a conflict in the area. The Soviet policy had been directed towards reducing the danger of a conflict.
The Indo-Soviet treaty was to calm the Indians by assuring them that they had friends when they suspected the Pakistanis of planning hostilities.
The treaty seemed, in fact, to have had the intended effect.
Dobrynin said the guerrilla action in East Pakistan was “practically over” and the real problem was coping with seven million refugees. He
volunteered that the Soviets were not encouraging the separatist movement in East Pakistan. The Soviets had informed the Indians that they would
not support demands for a separatist state.

As for the Soviet involvement with the Bengali guerrillas, Dobrynin said, “We do not like to be involved in such things.” Dobrynin’s assurance
later proved to be something other than what Moscow actually had in mind.
While Moscow and Washington discussed global politics, New Delhi became concerned about America’s stance on South Asia. On 7
September, Saunders asked Kissinger how to respond to a query from India’s External Affairs minister about how the United States would react if
China attacked India. Singh was told by Kissinger in New Delhi that India “could be reassured concerning continued U.S. support against China.”
But upon his return from New Delhi, Kissinger told Jha “that if China intervened as the result of an Indo-Pakistan confrontation, the U.S.
reaction could not be assured.” Singh was surprised at the apparent change and told Keating, “We would definitely like to know where it now
stands.”
Saunders opposed a formal reply to Singh. He suggested instructing Keating to reply that there was no ground for confusion. America had often
expressed its interest in India’s independence and its consequent concern over an unprovoked Chinese attack. But if India started a war, obviously
the situation would be different.
On 29 September 1971, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko met with Nixon in the Oval Office. He assured that the Soviet Union did not
want this crisis to develop into a full-blown war, which could have serious consequences on the Nixon-Brezhnev summit scheduled for the
following year. He told the American president that Gandhi had assured the Soviet government she would do nothing to precipitate a clash with
Pakistan.
Gromyko’s assurance, however, proved to be an attempt by Moscow to let India achieve its goal without provoking Nixon, which could have
adversely affected the planned superpower summit the following year. Just a few months before the India-Pakistan war broke out, the Soviet
Union decided to side with New Delhi, especially after the signing of the Indo-Soviet pact. As a result, when America raised the South Asian issue
with Gromyko to urge Moscow to restrain India, the Soviet foreign minister retorted that the country that should be restrained first of all was
Pakistan, at least according to the conclusion which the Soviet government had come to on the basis of its observations.
Nixon, however, took Gromyko’s assurance at its face value, and simply observed that Moscow and Washington would need to keep in close
touch with each other on the South Asian situation.
Nixon had reason to accept Russia’s statement as genuine. The U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union, Jacob Beam, told the State Department
that the Russians had kept doors open for cordial ties with Pakistan even after signing the peace treaty with New Delhi. His source of information
was Pakistan’s ambassador to the Soviet Union. Beam met with Pakistan’s envoy Jamsheed Marker before Pakistan’s Foreign Secretary Sultan
Khan’s scheduled visit to Moscow.
Marker told the U.S. ambassador that he did not believe the Soviets had deliberately killed the “spirit of Tashkent. But the support of India
offered greater rewards in enhancing the expansion of Soviet influence and circumscribing the Chinese,” Beam reported in a telegram in September
1971. “Actually, the day-to-day Soviet-Pakistani relations continued normal and the Soviets were still interested in aiding development projects.”
Another sign of Moscow’s willingness to keep Pakistan in good humor came from the fact that the Russians had made all arrangements for its
foreign secretary’s visit, including his stay at Sovietskaya Hotel as an official visitor. “The Soviets have been most cooperative in making
arrangements, including appointments with Gromyko,” Marker told the U.S. ambassador.
In early November, Nixon requested Kosygin to urge India to agree to talks with Pakistan for mutual withdrawal of forces. Kosygin’s reply to
Nixon’s letter was delivered to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow on 3 December. It was transmitted to the State Department from Moscow the same
day. Kosygin said the withdrawal was “scarcely feasible.” He stressed the importance of a political solution and put the onus for such a solution on
Pakistan.
As the full-scale war broke out in South Asia, Nixon sent yet another letter to Brezhnev on 6 December, expressing his “profound concern
about the deepening gravity of the situation in the Indian subcontinent.”
“Whatever one’s view of the causes of the present conflict, the objective fact now is that Indian military forces are being used in an effort to
impose political demands and to dismember the sovereign state of Pakistan. It is also a fact that your government has aligned itself with this Indian
policy,” the U.S. president complained to the Soviet leader.
He warned Brezhnev that Soviet support for India ran “counter to the recent encouraging trend in international relations to which the mutual
endeavors of our two governments have been making such a major contribution,” a reference to the US-Soviet understanding on the Middle East.
Nixon urged Brezhnev to restrain New Delhi from dismembering Pakistan. “I must state frankly that it would be illusory to think that if India can
somehow achieve its objectives by military action the issue will be closed. An ‘accomplished fact’ brought about in this way would long complicate
the international situation and undermine the confidence that we and you have worked so hard to establish. It could not help but have an adverse
effect on a whole range of other issues.”
Brezhnev replied: “The Soviet leaders, already for a prolonged time and not once, have drawn the attention of the president to a dangerous
situation developing in the Hindostan peninsula as a result of the actions of the Pakistani government against the population of East Pakistan. While
applying efforts to prevent an armed conflict between Pakistan and India, we at the same time were firmly convinced – and so frankly stated to the
president – that of crucial importance in this matter would be a political settlement in East Pakistan on the basis of respect for the will of its
population as clearly expressed in the December 1970 elections. Although the American side did not object in principle to the approach above,
we, it must be said frankly, did not receive the impression that the United States acted actively enough and precisely in the same direction that we
were acting, i.e. towards removing the main source of tension in relations between Pakistan and India.”
“In view of all the circumstances,” the Soviet leader continued, “which led to the present conflict, to demand a ceasefire without demanding, as
an organic connection with that question, that the people of East Pakistan in the name of its elected representatives be given an opportunity to
decide its destiny for themselves – would be both unrealistic and unjust with respect to that people, and would not eliminate the causes which led
to the conflict.”
Kissinger called Nixon shortly after receiving the Soviet message. He said the message proposed a Security Council resolution, calling for a
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities, but made no provision for the withdrawal of troops. Kissinger viewed the references in the message to East
Pakistan rather than Bangladesh as a positive sign. He characterized the proposed resolution as unacceptable but “at least a move.”
Nixon said, “Just tell them, sorry; no withdrawal, no deal.”

On 8 December, Brezhnev wrote to Nixon again, offering what Kissinger described were conciliatory proposals to resolve the crisis, but he still
found them unacceptable. Blaming Yahya for his failure to end the conflict politically, the Soviet leader said, “The thing to do now is to stop the
war already underway. This requires a ceasefire. But the question arises – what is the best way to achieve it? It seems to us that, proceeding from
the situation which developed from the very start, effective can be such a ceasefire, which would be connected with a simultaneous decision for a
political settlement, based on the recognition of the will of the East Pakistani population.”
He proposed to solve “together and simultaneously both questions – of ceasefire and of immediate resumption of negotiations between”
Pakistan and the Bengalis. “Those negotiations should, naturally, be started from the stage at which they were discontinued. We feel that this
proposal provides a way out for all, including Pakistan. On the other hand, all would lose – and Pakistan maybe even more than others – on the
way of continuing the war and rejecting a political settlement.”
Kissinger briefed Nixon on Brezhnev’s letter less than two hours after he had received it: “They’re proposing a ceasefire and a political
negotiation between Islamabad and the Awami League.” These he characterized as “old proposals” and added, “It is a very conciliatory letter,
which is in itself unacceptable.”
He proposed a response, thus: “If this negotiation is within the framework of the united Pakistan, with maximum autonomy for the east, we are
willing to discuss it with them. That will separate them to some extent from the Indians. And, secondly, it will get us a ceasefire in the west, which
we’ve got to have if the West Pakistanis aren’t to be smashed.”
Moscow Pushes India To Capture Dhaka Fast
On 12 December, Soviet First Deputy Foreign Minister V.V. Kuznetsov arrived in Delhi heading a five-man team. Meanwhile, former Indian
ambassador to Moscow, D.P. Dhar, who negotiated the Indo-Soviet treaty, flew to Russia. Both moves occurred under the consultation provision
of the friendship treaty.
Kissinger told Nixon that the Soviet delegation pressed for a decisive Indian action to quickly end the war in East Pakistan. Quoting an unnamed
source, Kissinger said the Soviets were disappointed by the pace of the Indian offensive in the East, but the other two suggested that in general
Moscow was satisfied. Kuznetsov advised the Indians to “liberate Bangladesh in the shortest possible time.” He encouraged the Indians to confine
their objectives to East Pakistan and not to try to take any part of West Pakistan, including Azad Kashmir, as the Indians had earlier decided.
Moscow was concerned that a great power confrontation over South Asia could ensue and that the longer the war lasted, the greater was the risk.
Quoting a high-level Indian government official, who was a CIA agent and whose identity still remains classified as of this writing, the CIA said
Kuznetsov arrived in India to discuss the Bangladesh recognition by the Soviet Union. India had asked Moscow to recognize Bangladesh and sign
a defense treaty with Dhaka. But Kuznetsov said Russia would not recognize the new country until India liberated Dhaka, according to a CIA
dispatch to Washington from New Delhi on 15 December. If the Soviet Union was to retain whatever small influence it still had in Pakistan, it could
not recognize Bangladesh until these conditions were met, the Soviet minister reasoned.
The Soviet Union, according to a secret CIA agent, was impatient with the Indian armed forces for their inability to liberate Bangladesh within
the ten-day time frame mentioned before the outbreak of hostilities. Kuznetsov told the Indians the Soviet position in the Security Council of
opposing a ceasefire became more untenable the longer the war went on in the East. Kuznetsov said the Soviet Union would continue to use its
veto power to stall any efforts to bring about a ceasefire. He, however, stressed the importance of a quick and decisive Indian action in liberating
Bangladesh in the shortest possible time.
Kuznetsov delayed his scheduled return to Moscow because he was awaiting special instructions from Brezhnev about India’s request to the
Soviet Union to sign a defense agreement with Bangladesh. Brezhnev was not in Moscow when Kuznetsov sent him the request for guidance.
Kuznetsov also discussed the threat of Chinese intervention. Both the Indian officials and Kuznetsov agreed the Chinese could attack through
Sikkim. China would seek to overwhelm the Indian defensive position in the Siliguri area and then withdraw back across the border, as it did in
1962, to embarrass India.
The Soviet ambassador to India, Nikolai M Pegov, said he saw no need for India to attack West Pakistan because Pakistan’s military machine
had already been crushed. However, if India ignored the Soviet advice and took Pakistan-held Kashmir, it should be done in the shortest possible
time. Moscow “would not interfere.” Pegov discounted possible U.S. or Chinese intervention. He asserted that the Soviet fleet, already docked in
the Indian Ocean, would prevent the U.S. Seventh Fleet from intervening. If the Chinese moved into Ladakh, “the Soviets would open a
diversionary action in Sinkiang.”
As the major powers debated their plans behind the scenes, America’s deployment of the naval task force in the Bay of Bengal put Keating on
a tough spot. In a cable to the State Department on 15 December, the ambassador vented his anger: “Up until last few days, I have felt able to
defend the U.S. policy on the basis of our overriding concern to bring a halt to hostilities. I am now troubled by the fact that a number of my
diplomatic colleagues view the deployment of the carrier task force as a military escalation by the United States.”
Especially, Canadian High Commissioner James George felt that the move encouraged Yahya to continue his military effort. He said Yahya’s
disavowal of the initial ceasefire message, sent by Major General Rao Farman Ali from Dhaka, and the subsequent message from East Pakistan
Governor A.M. Malik was directly related to the carrier task force deployment.
The high commissioner viewed the task force deployment as a direct superpower involvement. It was bound to make both the Soviets and the
Chinese nervous and likely to serve as a screen for their increased participation in the conflict. George told Keating he wold send a strong message
along these lines to his prime minister, recommending that Pierre Trudeau, in turn, contact Nixon.
After the war ended, Gandhi denied, the Soviet Union ever promised her that it would intervene against the Seventh Fleet or China. “There is
fantastic nonsense being talked about in the United States about our having received promises from the Soviet Union,” she told newsmen on 22
December. “I assure you that these matters were not talked over with the Soviets.”
As to the economic consequences of the war, a penalty Nixon had promised to impose on India if it started a war, Gandhi said, “We’ll have
some hardship but we are used to it and can bear it.”
Nixon’s policy to apply economic pressure on Gandhi resembled the tactics followed with success by previous U.S. administrations, especially

