On the morning of 12 April, Nixon met in the Oval Office with Kissinger and H. R. Haldeman, the White House chief of staff, to discuss the
developments in Pakistan. Both Nixon and Kissinger worried the United States could become involved in Pakistan’s civil war.
Kissinger said that if America supported the insurgents, “we get West Pakistan turned against us, and ... the Bengalis are going to go left
anyway.”
Nixon agreed: “If we get in the middle of that thing it would be a hell of a mistake.” In an oblique reference to India, he said: “The people who
bitch about Vietnam, bitch about it because we intervened in what they say is a civil war. Now some of those same bastards ... want us to
intervene here – both civil wars.”
Kissinger said India wanted the U.S. involvement “because they are scared to death of their own Bengalis. Deep down, the Indians don’t really
want an independent East Pakistan because within ten years of that the West Bengalis are going to start bringing pressure on them for autonomy.”
As things turned out, Kissinger could not have made a more fatal miscalculation.

8 
Did India Plan to Break Pakistan?
n 15 March, ten days before Pakistan unleashed the power of its army to restore control over East Pakistan – and when the Yahya-Mujib
talks still held promise – L.K. Jha, India’s ambassador to Washington, told Kissinger that his government preferred Pakistan’s unity.
The U.S. Embassy in New Delhi sent a telegram to Washington on 27 March with a similar message, describing India’s reaction to
Pakistan’s repression in East Bengal. It was based on the American ambassador’s discussion with the Indian officials. India’s Foreign Secretary
T.N. Kaul had called Keating to the foreign office to discuss the situation.
Kaul started by giving the U.S. diplomat a copy of External Affairs Minister Swaran Singh’s statement in Lok Sabha earlier in the day. Singh
had accused Pakistan’s army of suppressing the Bengalis. Kaul said Singh faced criticism from members of all parties who described his statement
as “too cold.” Singh had to intervene and state that there was no doubt that India’s sympathy was with the people of East Pakistan.
India was deeply concerned at the developments. It felt that Yahya’s talks in March with Mujib to reach a settlement had been nothing more
than a facade to allow time for the transport of additional troops to East Pakistan. Kaul said India was concerned about its own borders, because
New Delhi saw a threat to its security and expected an influx of refugees. Kaul hoped there would not be any outside intervention by any country,
an indirect reference to China. Perhaps, even at this late hour, it might still not be too late for Washington to express to Pakistan “our hope that a
political solution can be reached”.
With this note, he requested that the United States exchange with India any information it might get on the situation, and told the envoy there had
been rumors of a possible Chinese intervention, a statement possibly intended to win America’s sympathy. The communist nation, he continued,
would certainly feel that it was in its interest to support West Pakistan. Some evidence suggested that Beijing had authorized Pakistan overflights
over Kashmir, Tibet and Burma, to East Pakistan.
China Opposes Pro-India Mujib
Kaul said that the Chinese had at least an understanding with Yahya, but they did not like Mujib because he was considered to be pro-Western
and pro-Indian. Mujib had the upper hand over extremist elements in East Pakistan headed by Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani. However,
Kaul said, with Mujib in custody, the Chinese might try to fish in troubled waters, with the help of hardcore Naxalites in East Pakistan.
New Delhi faced considerable public pressure to intervene as the news of the repression in East Pakistan spread in India. On 29 March 1971,
India’s parliament passed a resolution, pledging support for the Bengalis in their struggle for the transfer of power to their legally elected
representatives. Lok Sabha expressed confidence that “the historic upsurge of 75 million people of East Bengal will triumph.”
While the resolution supported the “struggle for the transfer of power”, but not armed resistance nor self-rule, it signaled a change in India’s
policy towards Pakistan. Previously, India respected Pakistan’s integrity to protect its own unity, which had been threatened by regional factions
and demands for autonomy.
India’s support to the Bengali rebels initially consisted of assisting voluntary efforts and of encouraging the escaped Awami League leaders to
form a provisional government. India, however, withheld the formal recognition of this government-in-exile. These cautious actions resulted in
military advice that India would be unprepared for military action until the monsoon season ended in September.
India’s initial reluctance to break Pakistan also had something to do with its fear that an independent East Bengal could pose a serious threat to
West Bengal, where a strong-armed communist insurrection was wreaking havoc. India was concerned China would side with Pakistan if a conflict
broke out. India also feared that Beijing, which claims part of eastern India as its land, could switch sides from West Pakistan and support a united
Bengal movement. A successful outcome of such a campaign with China’s support would mean India would find itself surrounded by hostile
neighbours on all sides. On top of all this, India feared separatist movements along its eastern frontiers could find encouragement if the Bengalis
won independence.
India’s fear of China’s influence in Bangladesh persisted even after the war. Soon after the Mujib government fell in 1975 and Beijing extended
recognition to the Moshtaque administration, Indira Gandhi’s private secretary, P.N. Dhar, expressed concern to Adolph Dubs, deputy assistant
secretary of state, in New Delhi, on 21 October. Dhar could foresee “a potential problem in which the Chinese would establish an influential
position with a leftist regime in Bangladesh and threaten the stability in West Bengal and the tribal areas of northeastern India.” No doubt Dhar’s
statement was somewhat intended to curry favor with Washington, which sought allies in its fight against communism.
To preempt the possible Chinese hold on Bengal, New Delhi adopted a cautious posture towards the Bengali resistance. India initially decided
its prudent course was to force Pakistan to restore normalcy in the East Pakistan to stop the influx of refugees and the return of those who had
already crossed over into India.
As time went by and millions of refugees poured into India, New Delhi realized it faced a more serious issue than it had initially thought. India’s
leaders discovered that most of the traumatized refugees were Hindus, who had been systematically targeted for elimination after the military began
the campaign in Dhaka. The Hindus – estimated by the State Department to be around 80 percent of the ten million displaced people – would not
return to East Pakistan unless the Awami League came to power, the party the Hindus overwhelmingly supported for its secular politics. This
resulted in New Delhi’s reassessment of its initial stance and making a demand that Yahya reach a political accommodation with the Awami
League.
Within months after the Bangladesh government-in-exile was formed, India saw two trends emerging within the Bangladesh movement: the
Awami League leadership had factions and the Bengali guerrillas had begun going left – some worrisome factors for India’s leaders to grapple
with.

Secret China Plan Makes Gandhi Nervous
On top of all this, India got nervous after it learned from Kissinger about Nixon’s secret overture to Beijing. Gandhi countered America’s move by
hurriedly signing a pact with Moscow – a strategic milestone that made India confident of a favorable outcome in a future war against Pakistan.
With India’s diplomatic offensive over East Pakistan gaining traction internationally, New Delhi got down to rethinking its strategic move, ultimately
deciding to end the East Pakistan crisis through military intervention.
On 9 April 1971, following a Senior Review Group meeting on Sri Lanka and Pakistan, the panel moved into an executive session at the
request of the CIA member. CIA’s Deputy Director Cushman began by summarizing a request from a undisclosed party that had been circulated
in a short memo before the meeting. Some analysts speculated the undisclosed party was India, which asked the intelligence agency to supply
unmarked small arms to what it called “freedom fighters” in East Pakistan.
Cushman remarked that the CIA had a secure channel through which it could deliver such weapons but that his personal opinion was that this
operation would not remain secret much beyond that. He noted that his boss did not favor the project.
In response to Kissinger’s query, Irwin said he was “reluctant” to provide arms. Joint Chiefs Chairman Admiral Moorer felt that it would be
“very wrong” to be working on both sides of the East Pakistani issue at once. Cushman also felt that an affirmative response would pre-judge the
larger policy issue that the Senior Review Group had been discussing.
Kissinger summarized by saying that he felt that Nixon would never approve this project. Sisco said that he felt the Indians were “testing us.” It
was one thing, he noted, for the United States to close its eyes to the reports of clandestine Indian support for the East Pakistani resistance
movement, but quite another thing for America to collude with the Indians in this supply.
Kissinger stated his assumption that the United States could not, in any case, deliver enough equipment to make a difference to the outcome in
East Pakistan. Moreover, he assumed that the Indians would have sufficient stock to supply any small arms that might be needed.
Blee said that the Indians lacked a large enough quantity of unmarked, unattributable weapons to supply what the East Pakistanis needed, in the
quantities they needed, so there would be a need if someone wanted this done. On the other hand, he did not see how Indian supply could make a
difference in the outcome of the contest between the leftists and the moderates to gain control over the East Pakistani nationalist movement. He felt
that it was a foregone conclusion that the leftists would win out. That was a very serious judgment, Kissinger said, which should be taken into
account in the U.S. policy considerations. “If we feel that, under present circumstances, the radicals are likely to take over, that could affect our
judgment about the necessity of bringing the civil war to an end.”
He continued that if the United States had been presented with a choice on 25 March, it would certainly have urged Yahya not to take military
action. But he recalled that everyone had been taken by surprise when the negotiations broke down and Yahya turned to military action.
Sisco noted that the United States and Yahya both had a large stake in the preservation of moderate leadership in East Pakistan. He noted that
he had said privately to Hilaly that Pakistan had some interest in allowing those whom it had jailed to play a role in establishing a moderate
leadership in East Pakistan.
Sisco said the CIA, much earlier than the State Department, had indicated the likelihood of Yahya’s taking recourse to military action. The State
Department had been much more inclined to see a negotiated settlement and, therefore, had worried less about this issue before 25 March.
Blee noted that the main opposition to Mujibur Rahman was the leftists. The moderate leadership was now mostly either in jail or dead.
Sisco described Hilaly’s present line about how Yahya was planning to concede the “six points” to East Pakistani leadership.
Kissinger wondered why Yahya would have tried a military solution if he had expected to end up conceding anyway.
Blee surmised that the army had misjudged its ability to quickly subdue East Pakistan.
The discussion then turned to what the Indians wanted, and Kissinger pointed out that in earlier sessions the panel had assumed that the Indians
wanted a unified Pakistan.
Blee replied that he felt what the Indians had really wanted was a very loose confederal relationship between East and West Pakistan.
Irwin noted that the Indians had proposed rescheduling the Indo-U.S. bilateral talks – from January, because of the election, to 24-25 May. He
noted the problem of going to New Delhi without stopping in Islamabad. Saunders noted the difficulty of going to New Delhi if the East Pakistani
insurgency were continuing and the West Pakistanis were holding India responsible for fueling it.
Kissinger showed great reservation, noting that Nixon “had a special feeling about Pakistan”. He said he felt this problem would have to be
checked with the president.
The assumption underlying the discussion after Kissinger asked individuals’ views on the Indian request to provide arms to the guerillas was that
there was no question of approving it.
The Central Intelligence Agency produced an analysis of South Asia on 12 April, examining “the present and prospective state of the Pakistani
civil war, the role of India and other powers.” It gave an outlook for Pakistan’s two parts – “if the Bengali uprising should be put down and if it
should succeed.”
The study said that when Pakistan launched the crackdown on 26 March, the military leaders probably expected to destroy the Awami League
and regain effective control of East Bengal in days, if not hours. They clearly miscalculated.
While precise figures were unavailable, large numbers of the 13,000-man East Pakistan Rifles remained intact, as did the several Bengali units of
the Pakistani army. Despite serious logistic and leadership problems, these armed cadres continued fighting the Pakistani forces.
“The prospects are poor that the 30,000-odd West Pakistani troops can substantially improve their position, much less reassert control over 75
million rebellious Bengalis,” the CIA observed. “This is likely to be the case even if the expeditionary forces are augmented. For most of East
Pakistan’s residents, the time has come for a separate Bengali nation.”
Whether the Pakistan army would face widespread non-cooperation or continued active resistance would depend partly on how much help
India gave the Bengalis. East Bengal’s vast land frontiers with India would make it impossible to prevent the movement of arms and guerrillas
across these extensive borders.
Significant evidence – including observation of weapons being trucked into East Bengal from the Indian border – showed that some arms

shipments had already taken place. India’s support for the Bengalis would depend on its domestic popular pressures – which were quite strong.
India’s role in this conflict would also depend on an assessment of its own national interests.
India’s parliament – Lok Sabha – and the press had already given the Bengalis strong support. India’s national interests in East Bengal were
enormous. Pakistan’s disintegration would permanently remove a border threat. West Pakistan had long been India’s principal enemy. A
successful Bengali insurgency would weaken West Pakistan. East Pakistan, basically uninterested in the Kashmir dispute, posed no military threat
to New Delhi. On the contrary, the Bengali leaders, particularly Mujib, wanted cordial relations with India.
“Hence, we estimate that India will continue and increase its arms aid to the Bengalis and this will enable them to develop at a minimum the kind
of insurgency capability, which the army cannot entirely suppress. In so doing, India is accepting the risk that some of its arms may fall into
extremist hands. In time, the Bengalis may prove more than a match for the army except where the latter is concentrated in a few strong points,”
the intelligence analysis said.
India Sees Danger In Long War
India had another reason to help the Bengalis bring the crisis to a quick end. New Delhi was concerned that a protracted crisis could help the
extremists assume the leadership and eventually take over the new country. Such a radical regime in East Bengal could pose severe problems for
India, especially in West Bengal in the light of its own on-going Maoist insurgency. So, India not only sought to liberate Bangladesh, but also to
ensure that a friendly government ruled East Bengal.
Initially, India preferred helping the Bengalis by clandestine means, such as covert arms support and the provision of sanctuaries. If the rebellion
dragged on or if India saw a significant chance of a radical leadership emerging, it was ready to give more direct support, risking armed clashes
with the Pakistani forces. The Americans did not rule out an open military intervention by India, which had sufficient forces to defeat the Pakistani
forces in East Bengal without drawing down heavily on its troops on its other frontiers, especially along China.
India, of course, ran the risk in supporting the Bengali rebellion, even by covert means. It could provoke Islamabad to attack western India.
However, in the 1965 war, the Indian military had already showed itself more than a match for the Pakistanis. In 1971, the Indians had become
much better equipped than in 1965, and faced forces weakened by the transfer of Pakistani units to East Bengal.
In analysing the outlook for the crisis, the Americans concluded that the Bengalis had reached the point of no return. Even if the West Pakistanis
succeeded in reasserting military control over the Bengalis, which seemed highly unlikely, they would almost certainly find it impossible to build a
new political system based on anything approaching a consensus in the two wings.
India began supporting the Bangladesh guerrillas by April end. General Sam Manekshaw, India’s army chief, ordered the Eastern Command on
1 May to train a force “for waging guerrilla warfare in East Bengal,” according to the official History of the Bangladesh War, 1971 , a study of
some 5000 files of Indian government documents and interviews with sixty-six key participants in the conflict.
Operations conducted subsequently by the Mukti Bahini and the Indian commandos led by Major General Surjit Singh Uban proved
spectacularly successful. In response, Pakistan intensified infantry and artillery attacks on Indian forward positions. India’s initial success boosted
its confidence. On 18 May, Gandhi issued a warning to Pakistan, saying that “if a war is forced on us, we are fully prepared to fight.” By June,
India had initiated several limited incursions into East Pakistan.
As the East Pakistan crisis dragged on to the month of May, India began to show a hardening of attitude. On 3 May, a U.S. envoy met with
Swaran Singh in New Delhi. Galen Stone, U.S. chargé d’ affaires in India, told the Indian foreign minister he had received first-hand reports that
New Delhi was training the Bangladesh freedom fighters on Indian soil.
“I told him that I, of course, recognized the sensitivity of this matter. On a personal basis, I asked him to give me the justification for Indian
activities in support of the Bangladesh forces,” the U.S. Embassy reported to Washington in a telegram on 4 May 1971.
Singh termed the information as “absolutely incorrect”.
Foreign Secretary T.N. Kaul, who was present at the meeting, referred Stone to the reports of Frank Moraes in the Indian Express newspaper
as well as to those of British and American journalists regarding the training of the guerrillas. Kaul said the refugees were in no state to fight – they
were hungry, sick and at times almost naked. He said India had prevented the organising of volunteers to fight in East Pakistan.
Singh was more blunt in his comments to the U.S. diplomat. He said he felt very uncomfortable that without carefully assessing what had actually
transpired in East Pakistan, some people who were close to Islamabad attempted to allege that India’s actions were politically motivated against
Pakistan.
“I totally refute these allegations,” India’s foreign minister said. The United States should be the last to put India on the defensive in a situation
like this, he said, expressing disappointment at the type of international recognition India was getting for all the restraint it had shown.
Kaul also accused Washington of “politicizing our relief”. He, however, assured that India would not provoke a war with Pakistan.
On 25 May, a CIA report maintained that “while India probably does not seek a war with Pakistan, it may come to believe that its national
interest requires a preemptive strike against Pakistan.” One day later, Secretary of State William Rogers told Nixon that East Pakistan was on a
path that could eventually lead to a war between India and Pakistan.
Until then, the Americans were unsure if India would finally go to war to create an independent Bangladesh. The U.S. ambassador to India told
Kissinger on 3 June in Washington that the Indians were concerned about the deep ties between East Bengal and West Bengal, where a
formidable guerrilla insurgency posed a serious threat to stability. Kissinger agreed with Keating. He said India’s other concern was that “with the
passage of time, the radicals would take over the resistance movement and would eventually cause more trouble for India.”
Capturing Dhaka Not In Initial War Plan
On 16 August, India’s military commanders unveiled the Operation Instruction 53 – an unequivocal offensive mandate for Indian troops, according
to the official History of the Bangladesh War, 1971 . “Destroy the bulk of the Pakistani forces in the Eastern Theater,” the Operation Instruction
said, “and occupy the major portion of East Bengal, including the entry ports of Chittagong and Chalna-Khulna.”

Capturing Dhaka was not mentioned in the initial instructions. But according to the History , the revised plans explicitly “envisaged that 4 Corps
would cross the Meghna between Daudkandi and Bhairab Bazar and advance to Dhaka. 101 Communications Zone Area, with 95 Mtn Bde Gp
[Mountain Brigade Group] would advance to Dhaka from the North.” Both these forces, India’s commanders believed, would receive help from
Bangladesh freedom fighter Kader “Tiger” Siddiqi’s irregular forces.
It was not until 30 November, just three days before the formal outbreak of the general war, that the Indian commanders issued revised orders
of “the liberation of the whole of Bangladesh as the military task of the Eastern Command.”
By June, India had become distrustful of U.N. actions to repatriate the refugees, an indication that New Delhi was no longer convinced of a
successful peaceful settlement in East Pakistan. When Pakistan shifted ground to accommodate U.N. actions, India rejected the proposal for
posting U.N. observers on its border. India was concerned that East Pakistan would return to the pre-crisis situation with little or no gain towards
the Bengalis’ self-determination.
Domestically, the Indian government found itself in an increasingly favorable position by June. Public opinion in India’s turbulent eastern
provinces favored severing Pakistan’s link with East Bengal as an opportunity to weaken a dangerous enemy. India, therefore, insisted that
Pakistan must come to a political solution of the crisis founded on self-determination for East Bengal before social and economic aid was extended.
But the U.N. approach was to put social and economic recovery in place before a political solution was attempted. America clearly supported the
U.N. approach to return South Asia’s power balance to the pre-crisis condition, but India showed no interest.
After a lull in June, more refugees poured into India. Yahya continued to press the United Nations to force India to withdraw its support to the
Bangladesh rebels and to decrease the border tension to induce more refugees to return home. He threatened that if India tried to seize a base in
East Pakistan for rebel operations, he would start an all-out war. He followed up this threat by a Pakistani military build-up along the West
Pakistan border with India.
Some Pakistani military officials, including Major General Akbar Khan, the military intelligence chief, saw the possibility of a general war as early
as 6 May. He pointed to India’s military build-up along the border to buttress his assessment. By then, India had placed its air forces on war alert
in six airfields near East Pakistan.
By June, India’s position had markedly hardened. Gandhi commented on 16 June that the possibility of a political settlement in East Pakistan
was becoming remote everyday. She vowed that New Delhi would oppose a settlement that would mean Bangladesh’s death. India, she declared,
was “prepared to make all the sacrifices” and “go through hell” to look after the six million refugees.
Gandhi, however, had told a different story when she met privately with Kissinger for fifteen minutes on 7 July 1971, in New Delhi. Kissinger
later told Saunders, a National Security Staff member who recorded the discussion’s minutes, that “she does not wish to use force and that she is
willing to accept any suggestions that the United States may have.”
Kissinger, who was to go next to Pakistan as part of his trip, told Gandhi that America had no ideas about how to solve the issue, but promised
to form a judgment in Islamabad on how Yahya planned to proceed. He had read Yahya’s 28 June speech, but did not know whether Yahya had
any long-range ideas.
“We certainly would use what influence we have to encourage a solution,” he vowed to Gandhi. “The whole point of our policy has been to
retain influence in order to help create a situation which would enable the refugees to return. If this does not produce results, we will have to re-
examine our policy.” He said he could not promise how any re-examination of policy would evolve.
Kissinger went on to say that all the U.S. specialists in March predicted West Pakistan would not use force in East Pakistan. He told the prime
minister that Washington would take a new look at the problem. However, he added, America’s ability to move events even with strong advice
was extremely limited.
Gandhi told Kissinger that “India is not wedded to any particular political solution in East Pakistan.” She was, however, afraid of mounting
Chinese influence in East Pakistan, where China had set up training camps for the Mizo insurgents to keep India bogged down in domestic
instability.
Neither the Americans nor the Pakistanis initially expected India to intervene militarily in East Pakistan, according to a U.S. Defence Intelligence
Agency report prepared by Army Major John Hunt after Yahya cracked down on Dhaka. “The Indian officials have indicated that they would not
be drawn into a Pakistani civil war, even if the East should ask for help. Their intentions might be overruled if the fervor of the Bengali nationalism
spills across the border,” Hunt said.
India’s sworn enemy, Bhutto, also did not see India hell-bent upon splitting Pakistan, although he accused New Delhi of taking advantage of the
situation created by the military turmoil in East Pakistan. “A tragic civil war, which rent asunder the people of the two parts of Pakistan, was seized
by India as an opportunity for armed intervention,” Bhutto wrote in Foreign Affairs magazine in April 1973.
Mujib’s Release Could Have Avoided War
Gandhi told Nixon after the Pakistani soldiers surrendered in Dhaka that the “war could have been averted if the great powers had realized that the
people of Bangladesh were being denied their ‘life and liberty, not to mention about their pursuit of happiness’ and had searched for a genuine
reconciliation.” It could have been avoided “if the power, influence and authority of all the states and above all the United States had gotten Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman released.”
According to a British assessment, India did not seek territorial gains either in the East or West, although both Prime Minister Edward Heath
and Foreign Secretary Alec Douglas-Home were not fully persuaded that India would not take advantage of the situation to try to force some
territorial adjustments.
However, Sir Denis Greenhill, British permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office from 1969 to 1973, told a meeting in London attended
by the U.S. ambassador, the British prime minister and the foreign secretary that before hostilities began, India had indicated to him that if war
indeed came, New Delhi would make the most of the situation to settle the Pakistan problem once and for all. All three – Heath, Greenhill and
Douglas-Home – however, said that the British government had sought and received assurances from the Indian government that it did not seek
territorial gains.

Gandhi’s war preparations took urgency after Kissinger told her about Nixon’s secret communications with China. During a private meeting
with the Indian prime minister in July, Kissinger disclosed to Gandhi the Nixon administration’s intention to normalize relations with China. He said
there could be significant developments in the months ahead and assured her that “these were not directed at India and that they derived from our
global policy.” They, rather, derived from Nixon’s feeling – which India seemed to have shared in the past – that a more normal world order and
structure for maintaining world peace required that China be drawn into the international community of nations.
Kissinger’s soothing words did not really put Gandhi at ease; rather they caused her significant anxiety. She told Health during a visit to London
in 1971 that Nixon’s friendly overtures to the Chinese – and their closeness to Pakistan – had pushed India into signing the Indo-Soviet treaty,
according to a secret transcript of Heath-Gandhi talks released by the British Public Records Office in 2003.
India, she said, faced a triple whammy with the new development, because the United States was establishing links with Beijing, which was
already tied to Pakistan, a long-time foe of India. She felt that the United States was aligning itself with China, which fought a war with India less
than a decade ago and still claimed part of its territory. India’s pact with the Soviet Union ensured that the United States would not intervene in
East Pakistan. It also helped deter China from opening a second conflict on India’s northern border during the 1971 South Asian war.
Turning to East Pakistan, Kissinger told Gandhi that the use of force could lead to a serious war. On the other hand, there was a political
situation that must permit the refugees to return to their homes.
Gandhi noted that she had written to Nixon about the urgency of resolving the refugee problem. While the flow seemed to be slowing down, it
was difficult to be accurate about the actual numbers because many were in private homes fearing that if they registered, the Indian government
would send them back to Pakistan. She put the number at 6.8 million “registered” refugees. She said that a good part of the feeling in India was
emotional, created by the refugees – food shortages, rising prices and depressed wages.
When Kissinger asked whether the settlement in East Pakistan must include Mujib, Gandhi avoided a direct answer. Instead she said, “The
settlement must be between East Pakistan and West Pakistan. This is not an Indo-Pakistani problem. India would not have been involved except
for the refugees.”
During Kissinger’s meeting with Jagjivan Ram, India’s defense minister discussed the Chinese military threat to India. Ram said he saw no
change in the military balance between India and China. The Chinese had their concentrations of troops at some points and India’s preparedness
continued the same as it had been. The Chinese had been training roughly 1200 Mizos in East Bengal for commando work on the Northeast
Frontier. Generally, however, the Chinese threat continued to be the same. They had not increased their forces in light of the East Pakistan crisis,
although they had gradually improved their communications, their bunkers and their airports. About 100,000 Chinese troops were stationed on
India’s northern border.
Kissinger asked whether the Chinese could fight without reinforcement there or they were preparing some sort of an attack.
K.B. Lall, India’s defense secretary who was also at the meeting, responded: India would know ahead of time of such an attack because the
Chinese would have to build up their supplies there. Kissinger asked what had happened in 1962, and Lall replied that India was unprepared and
that its information was bad.
When Kissinger asked how many months it would take the Chinese to build up their supplies to the necessary level, Lall said two to three
months.
Kissinger commented that the United States made studies in Europe to try to determine the kind of build-up required by the communist forces
before they could launch an attack. Ram said India had made similar studies, too. Ram added that a surprise attack by China would be difficult,
even from Tibet. Nevertheless, Lall interjected, there is a great deal of talk and natural apprehension about what the Chinese might or might not do.
He asked Kissinger whether he thought the Chinese would do anything without some provocation, and Kissinger replied that it seemed unlikely. It
was possible, however, that the Chinese would intervene if there were to be a war with Pakistan.
Lall asked what would be the justification for such an attack. India was not going to go to war with Pakistan.
Keating, who accompanied Kissinger, explained that the Chinese had said they would support Pakistan in a war.
Kissinger added the United States “would take a grave view of any Chinese move against India”, a promise Kissinger would later reverse during
a conversation in Washington with Jha, the Indian ambassador. The Chinese, Kissinger added, had been cautious in their military moves, although
they had been tough in their talk.
When Kissinger asked what the Indian problem was on the west, Ram said there was constant tension on the western border. Any accretion of
military hardware created difficulties for India. Bangladesh should be seen in the wider perspective of peace and stability. The United States had to
judge whether Pakistan could retain Bangladesh, Ram advised.
“Will it be in the U.S. interest for Pakistan to stay together?” he asked.
Kissinger replied that America was considering that question. “What can the United States do?” he asked.
A lot, Ram replied, noting how Pakistan had been sustained by the United States. He asked whether the secretary agreed, and Kissinger
replied, “partially”.
Ram said: “Look at your support for building the army of Pakistan.” The refugee problem was bad enough as an immediate problem. If the
people think they were going to stay in India, then it would be a problem of great social concern. But even ignoring that, a solution of the
Bangladesh problem had to be found. Pakistan ought to have another election. “I would not mind that.” He said he knew the Bangladesh leaders
from Partition days. He knew what was going on in Bangladesh. If Pakistan did not get massive outside aid, it could not survive, he said, in an
indirect lash at U.S. policy.
Kissinger defended America’s policy, saying it was to try to avoid a confrontation with Pakistan and to have some influence on developments.
The Indians were less than satisfied with the explanation. What was not clear to the Pakistanis, Lall said, was that the U.S. policy was directed
at encouraging a change in the situation.
Kissinger made it abundantly clear where the United States stood. America was “not in favor of secession. We are in favor of a political
solution. We don’t want to mislead India. What we want is a situation that will permit the refugees to return.” The United States had no fixed view
on what a solution should be.
Ram said he understood the situation in East Bengal. The Punjabis did not regard the Bengalis as of the same stock. The Punjabi rulers had not

put faith in the Bengalis. “Mujibur Rahman never wanted secession. He was a moderating influence,” Ram stressed.
He said India’s problem was the nearly seven million refugees on its soil.
Kissinger asked how Ram felt a solution could come about.
Ram replied that America could tell Yahya that he would have to find a solution that catered to the Bengalis’ will.
Kissinger said U.S. actions were not directed towards finding the balance between India and Pakistan. Of India, America’s interest was to keep
it strong and stable; with Pakistan, it desired to preserve its influence on it.
“Our hope is to use that influence to encourage a settlement that will permit the refugees to return. If this policy is not successful, then we shall
re-examine it,” Kissinger said.
When Kissinger asked how many Pakistani forces there were in East Pakistan. Ram said there were about 70,000; Lall added that there were
more than four divisions.
Kissinger asked how long they could fight in a major military confrontation.
“Not very long,” Lall replied.
Ram added that for the Pakistani military forces, the logistics problem was real. “It would be difficult for them to continue fighting over a
prolonged period.”
Kissinger concluded that the U.S. interest was to help bring about a solution to permit the refugees to return. America had no intention of
creating a balance of power situation between India and Pakistan.
Ram said he was glad that this was the understanding. “If India is weakened, it would affect the stability of the entire world.” Kissinger simply
replied, “That is our profound conviction.”
The only balance of power the United States was concerned with was of the global kind – and the problem of preventing an outside power from
dominating South Asia. The local balance within South Asia was not an American concern. “The difficult problem we now have between us as
nations is to maintain that long-term perspective,” the secretary said.
By 12 July when Ram told parliament that a new nation of Bangladesh would be established replacing East Pakistan, New Delhi had started
seeing the conflict as a clear opportunity to weaken its major rival in South Asia. Pakistan had humiliated India in the war over Kashmir in 1965.
India then had to divide its forces between East and West, while keeping considerable forces on its northern border with China. This time, New
Delhi was determined not to be defeated again by Pakistan.
India figured that breaking East Pakistan from West Pakistan would greatly simplify its defense problem. India, therefore, decided to support the
Bangladesh movement, while preparing its own armed forces for war with Pakistan, should intervention become necessary. Throughout the period,
East Pakistan’s independence was pursued consistently and skillfully.
Another ingredient favoring India was the overwhelming public support for its policy. The burden of ten million refugees in India’s most populous
and impoverished region was costly and caused social unrest. Furthermore, most Indians saw Pakistan as a threat, which would, in any case, lead
to war eventually.
India started feeling more confident about clinching a military victory against Pakistan after it signed the treaty with the Soviet Union. Until the
end of July, the Soviet Union had maintained a balanced approach to India and Pakistan in an effort to increase its overall influence on the
subcontinent. However, after the United States and China moved towards closer bilateral relations and both supported Pakistan, Moscow and
New Delhi cemented their ties with the Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation signed on 9 August.
The treaty had little effect on India in military terms, but it gave the much-needed support for India’s position at the U.N. Security Council. The
Soviet Union opposed every proposal for any kind of intervention that could allow Pakistan to get a political settlement unacceptable to India, i.e.,
denial of self-determination for the people of East Pakistan.
For the Soviet Union, the treaty showed to the world its increasing influence in South Asia. It was in part a Soviet response to the Sino-U.S.
rapprochement – a policy aimed at encircling China and strengthening Moscow’s position on the Chinese flanks .
For India, it gave what it needed most: an ally with a veto power in the Security Council and the might to counter a Chinese threat. When the
pact was signed, it relieved internal pressures on Gandhi. Subsequent events suggested that this treaty virtually guaranteed Soviet support in
whatever action India took against Pakistan; in fact, Soviet support for Indian military action was reported by sources after Gandhi’s visit to
Moscow in late September. One report also indicated that the Soviets promised a diversionary action in Sinkiang if China threatened to intervene
against India.
By skillfully managing its diplomatic affairs, India won enough time to prepare for military intervention while preventing wider international
intervention that was potentially damaging to its aims. China considered Pakistan – in particular West Pakistan – vital to restricting Soviet influence
on the subcontinent. Should both India and Pakistan be drawn into the Soviet sphere, China’s borders would be threatened on all sides. With India
having to deal with its rivalry with Pakistan, its threat to China would be much reduced.
For similar reasons, the Soviet Union was initially trying to steer an even course in the India-Pakistan dispute. However, when rebuffed by
Yahya in July 1971, Moscow quickly saw the chance to increase its influence with India. Moreover, when India discovered America’s secret
overtures to China, it quickly cemented its ties with Russia and thus further strengthened its military might vis-a-vis Pakistan, an edge that boosted
Gandhi’s confidence that the chances of China’s possible movement against India had been diminished. Armed with the Soviet pact and enormous
international support, India embarked upon harnessing its unexpected opportunity against Pakistan.
Yet the Indian foreign ministry officials were less committed to resorting to war to solve the crisis than their counterparts in the rest of the Gandhi
government. Leonid Shebarshin, an intelligence officer at the Soviet embassy in New Delhi, was among those who noticed this trend. “The Centre
– unlike many in the Foreign Ministry – concluded that war was inevitable,” Shebarshin commented in a secret KGB report, which was published
in 2005 as part of The Mitrokhin Archive , a collection of Russian intelligence documents.
The KGB agents, despite their widest possible contacts in India, appeared unaware of New Delhi’s precise war plans until the very last
moment. Shebarshin, a ranking KGB operative in New Delhi in 1971, realized that the war had begun through an expected signal – when the lights
went out in the middle of a diplomatic reception at the Soviet Embassy on 2 December. Leaving the embassy hurriedly, he met a senior Indian
military commander, a KGB source whom he found to be in an optimistic mood. The general knew precisely when and how the war would end –

on 16 December, with the Pakistani army’s capitulation in East Pakistan “because they had no one from whom to expect help”, according to The
Mitrokhin Archive.
India’s involvement in the Bangladesh war was perhaps more fortuitous rather than preplanned. New Delhi’s war policy evolved gradually,
shaped by events at home and abroad. Until 25 March the Indians believed their interests were better served by a united Pakistan in which the
Bengalis would be the dominant force. When the Pakistani military launched a crackdown in East Pakistan, India’s estimate of its own best
interests shifted in favor of an independent Bangladesh under a moderate leadership.
India opted to take advantage of the opportunity after it had solidified its position, militarily with its treaty with the Soviet Union, and
diplomatically with its spectacularly successful campaign that generated a groundswell of global support for the Bengalis’ plight. India initially
showed reluctance to create Bangladesh by force, despite widespread support for it in parliament. Gandhi’s decision to support the guerrillas was
based on her calculation that if New Delhi did not support them, the insurgents would turn to China, causing peril to India’s interests. Gandhi chose
to march on the warpath, convinced that negotiations would not work even if Mujib and Yahya were able to work out a deal, because she
believed that the insurgents were no longer loyal to the Bengali leader.
Gandhi also suspected that Yahya was not really interested in negotiations that would install Mujib in power. Her views were solidified by
Yahya’s attempt to hold a farcical election to fill the parliament seats that he had declared vacant and the formation of a civilian government with
discredited right-wing Bengali politician Nurul Amin at its head and Bhutto as deputy.
Ultimately, India saw the 1971 conflict as an opportunity to weaken its main enemy in South Asia. After all, Pakistan had humiliated India in
1965. New Delhi was determined not to be defeated by Pakistan this time around. A weak Pakistan would greatly simplify its defense problem.
India, therefore, covertly supported the Bangladesh movement while putting its military on a war footing, should the need arise. Indian public
opinion gave overwhelming support to New Delhi’s policy. They had been feeling the effects of the crushing refugee burden, which had caused
social unrest, especially in West Bengal. On top of all this, most Indians saw Pakistan as a threat that could eventually lead to another war. Why
not eliminate that danger when the opportunity knocked on the door?
By the second week of December, the United States had concluded that the birth of Bangladesh was inevitable. William I. Cargo, director of
the Planning and Coordination Staff, sent a memo to Rogers on 11 December, blaming Yahya for the setback.

“It is not a new truth to note that the massive use of military force by Pakistanis against the people of East Pakistan, begun on March 25, was a
colossal blunder and miscalculation,” he wrote. “The disastrous effect of this initial blunder was compounded by the unwillingness or inability of the
Yahya government to move rapidly to political reconciliation with the East Pakistan leaders.”
The drastic weakening in Pakistan’s real power position vis-à-vis India gave New Delhi an opportunity unequaled in the confrontation of these
two countries. Given the deep-seated suspicion, fear and hostility between India and Pakistan, it might have been inevitable that India would
conclude that military operations against Pakistan were a welcome means of exploiting the shift in the Indo-Pakistan power balance. Thus, India’s
resorting to war in East Pakistan was almost certainly dictated by Indian concerns that Pakistan might, by eleventh-hour political accommodation,
escape the worst consequences of its initial blunder, Cargo concluded.

9 
Did Yahya Want to Hang Mujib?
n 13 May 1971, Gandhi sent a letter to U.S. President Nixon, which was delivered on 19 May by India’s ambassador to Washington,
L.K. Jha. Gandhi requested that the United States “impress upon the rulers of Pakistan that they owe a duty towards their own citizens
whom they have treated so callously and forced to seek refuge in a foreign country.”
Gandhi wanted America to persuade Pakistan’s military rulers to recognize that the solution they had chosen for East Pakistan was unwise. In
her letter, Gandhi voiced concern over Mujib’s arrest. “India, including all the political parties, is deeply concerned with the personal safety of
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman,” she wrote. “If you consider sending any message to the president of Pakistan, we would appreciate your taking up this
matter with him.” Gandhi ended her letter with a personal note, wishing “the very best” for Nixon’s daughter, Tricia, and her fiancé, Edward Cox,
who had just been engaged.
Gandhi sent a message to Nixon again, on 11 August, saying India was “greatly perturbed by the reported statement of President Yahya Khan
that he is going to start a secret military trial of Mujibur Rahman without affording him any foreign legal assistance.
“We apprehend that this so-called trial will be used only as a publicity to execute Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. This will aggravate the situation in
East Bengal and will create a serious situation in India because of the strong feelings of our people and all political parties. Hence our grave anxiety.
We appeal to you to exercise your influence with President Yahya Khan to take a realistic view in the larger interest of the peace and stability of
this region.” Simultaneously, Gandhi issued an appeal to twenty-three other heads of states to use their influence to save Mujib’s life.
Gandhi’s plea to Nixon fell on deaf ears. Washington decided against responding to Gandhi’s letter in writing lest India exploited it to its
diplomatic advantage.
“Because of the possibility that the Indians might attempt to exploit any written reply to Mrs. Gandhi’s August 11 message on the trial of
Mujibur Rahman, we have decided that it would be preferable for the ambassador to make an oral response on behalf of the president to Foreign
Secretary Kaul,” Johnson explained in a telegram to the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi.
He instructed the ambassador to tell the Indians that Rogers had conveyed America’s concern to Pakistan about Mujib’s summary treatment.
“We intend to continue to indicate our concern on appropriate future occasions, not only for humanitarian reasons, but also because we recognize
the importance which the trial and the possible execution of Mujib would have in the broader context of search for peace and stability in South
Asia.”
Yahya had told Hobart Luppi, the U.S. consul general in Karachi, in May that Mujib “had committed a capital crime and would be tried in a
duly constitutional court, and he would be given a fair and impartial trial.”
Luppi told Yahya that Mujib had already been prejudged, based on Yahya’s last address to the nation. He suggested that Pakistan might well
weigh world opinion vis-à-vis the severity of the sentence, since Mujib enjoyed a great deal of international sympathy. Yahya’s reply was
noncommittal, but not necessarily negative. Yahya indicated he would think about it, according to a telegram Luppi sent to the State Department
on 22 May 1971.
The American intelligence and diplomatic sources held that Yahya personally opposed executing Mujib. His senior military advisers and high
court justices warned against hanging the Bengali leader. They feared Mujib’s execution would seriously damage Pakistan’s image abroad.
America’s pressure influenced Yahya’s decision, too. Yahya also worried that if he executed Mujib, New Delhi would attack Pakistan. Irwin, the
under secretary of state, told Nixon’s foreign policy team in July that three things would prompt India to attack Pakistan: Some military incident; a
famine, which would result in a wave of new refugees; or Mujib’s execution.
On 22 July Syed Nazrul Islam, then acting Bangladesh president, sent a plea to Nixon to save Mujib’s life.
Following Irwin’s prediction and appeals from Gandhi and Nazrul Islam, Joseph Sisco, the assistant secretary of state, asked Nixon during a
White House meeting on 11 August if it would be all right to ask Yahya not to execute Mujib.
Nixon’s reply was couched in his typical convoluted language: “In view of the fact that we have not cut off aid and have a good personal
relationship with Yahya, it is possible that unless he is ‘totally trapped’ he might be responsive. Yahya considers Ambassador Farland his friend.
Any suggestions that we might have – such as ‘not shooting Mujib’ – Farland might point out to him.” Keeping with his stated policy not to do
anything that could embarrass Yahya, Nixon decided to ask Farland instead to privately raise the issue with the general.
Meanwhile, Rogers phoned Hilaly to express the widespread concern felt in the United States over Mujib’s trial. Rogers made the call after
Yahya had announced that Mujib’s secret trial had begun on 6 August. Hilaly promised to pass on the secretary’s message to Islamabad. But
Rogers was less than satisfied with Hilaly’s response, and told the U.S. ambassador in Pakistan to meet with the general.
On 19 August, Farland met with Yahya, along with Maurice Williams, the USAID deputy administrator. After Williams had left the meeting,
Farland met Yahya alone to find out what the general had on his mind about Mujib. Farland sent a telegram to Rogers the next day that he had met
alone with Yahya, based on his assumption that the president would speak more freely with him in private.
“I told Yahya that most, if not all, nations of the world were watching with intense interest and anxiety how the in-camera trial of Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman was proceeding, and most, if not all, were seized with concern as to its outcome. I concluded by stating that I, as a friend, felt strongly
obligated to suggest that Sheikh Mujibur Rahman not be executed. Such an action, I said, would be in my belief contrary to the best interests of his
government as well as to his own best personal interests,” Farland wrote.
Yahya told Farland that his concerns were unfounded. He said he had gotten the most qualified Pakistani attorney, A.K. Brohi, to defend
Mujib. He also said the military tribunal had been advised the trial must be conducted with the greatest care, without bias or prejudgment. Yahya
further stated that because the charge carried a possible death sentence, it was his plan that if such be verdict, a request for mercy would be made
in the Sheikh’s behalf, and he would accept the petition.

Yahya observed that when this request for mercy reached him he intended to “sit on it for a few months” without making a decision until power
was turned over to a civilian government. Once the mercy petition became the problem of a civilian government, there was little or no possibility
that he would be executed.
“I finished my comments with the remark that, ‘from what you have told me it is obvious that you have given considerable thought to a solution
of this problem.’ Yahya replied, ‘I have, and you can stop worrying because I am not going to execute the man even though he is a traitor,’ ”
Farland reported to the State Department.
Yahya Promises Not To Hang Mujib
Farland admitted it was one of his daunting tasks. Farland raised the question of Mujib’s trial with Yahya at almost every meeting since May. On
28 September he wrote to the State Department that Mujib’s trial and sentencing offered “an example of both use and limitations of our leverage”
with Pakistan.
“And, the final story has not yet been written. I have raised the question of Mujib with Yahya at almost every meeting since May, and it is also
one of the few issues in which we have also exerted public pressure on the government of Pakistan. The results have been as much as could have
been hoped for realistically. Mujib has been brought to trial on charges that could lead to the death penalty. On the other hand, the trial is not being
conducted in a summary manner: Mujib has been allowed an outstanding defense lawyer: And, we have received personal assurances that he will
not be executed.”
Among the prominent Americans concerned about Mujib’s execution was Senator Ted Kennedy. On 8 September Kissinger told a Washington
Special Action Group meeting that the Democrat senator had come to see him earlier in the day and told him Mujib was perhaps dead. Kissinger
asked the group if that was true.
Referring to Yahya’s assurance to Farland, Sisco said Mujib would not be hanged, and CIA chief Helms said he had no information to support
the rumor.
Kennedy had asked why there was no picture of Mujib published to still the rumors. “So we are reasonably sure he is alive?”
No one had a definite answer to Kissinger’s question, but Williams, deputy USAID administrator, voiced his agreement with Sisco: “It is
inconceivable to me that they would announce a trial and arrange for a well-known defense attorney if he were dead.”
Sisco added: “It’s even more inconceivable for the president of the country to tell our ambassador to relax – that Mujib would not be killed.”
Kissinger remarked: “I can’t imagine that he is dead.”
Yahya told the U.S. chargé in Pakistan, Sober, on 11 October that Mujib’s trial was still going on. If he were convicted, the court would
sentence him to punishment, which would conceivably be death. The matter would then come before Yahya, who had the presidential power to
modify the court’s judgment. He did not intend to permit any death sentence to be carried out. The new civilian government, which would
presumably have an East Pakistani majority, would deal with Mujib’s future.
The envoy then asked whether Yahya could shortly reveal anything of his thinking along the above lines to a larger audience. Mujib’s role
seemed to be a crucial issue, for example, to begin any direct talks between Pakistan and the Bengalis, Sober pointed out. Yahya responded that
there were limits on his freedom of action. He pointed to the West Pakistan public opinion damning Mujib and opined that not a single West
Pakistani political leader would welcome freeing Mujib and negotiating with him. Even the East Pakistani political chiefs with whom he had been
talking in recent months, including elder leader Nurul Amin, had raised the specter of a return to the pre-March situation, which they said would
result in terrible violence among the East Pakistanis.
As for himself, Yahya went on, if he now indicated that Mujib should be pardoned, people would ask why there had to be so much sorrow and
trouble and would raise the question why Yahya should remain in office. Personally he did not hanker for power, but he had a duty to deal with
critical problems, which his country faced. Yahya said he was not a ruthless person but a normal human being. He had no personal rancor against
Mujib, but he could not disregard the facts provided by recent history.
This conversation occurred with no indication of the slightest annoyance on Yahya’s part that he was being pressed on what was perhaps the
most highly sensitive issue facing him in the bar of world opinion. On the contrary, he responded calmly in stating pressures weighing on him and his
rationale for the current stance. He appeared to wish leaving an impression that he was a man with rather little choice but to do what he was doing,
the envoy observed.
Van Hollen disclosed to a panel headed by Kissinger in October that Farland had recently proposed to Yahya to make a deal with Mujib and
that it was “interesting that Yahya did not take the usual negative attitude,” an indication the Pakistanis were planning to deal with the Bengali
leader.
Van Hollen spoke based on a telegram sent by Farland that Yahya had told him Mujib’s trial had ended and that he was awaiting the tribunal’s
report. When Farland asked if Yahya had considered using Mujib as a “trump card” to restore peace in East Pakistan, the general responded he
had given thought to the matter but could not formulate a solution acceptable to West Pakistan. With thousands of the Mukti Bahini being
introduced into East Pakistan at the onset of the dry season, the Americans felt that Yahya might feel more beleaguered and become more
interested in seeking a settlement.
On 15 October, Helms told Nixon’s foreign affairs aides that according to a reliable source, Mujib had been sentenced to life imprisonment.
Yahya could either uphold the sentence, commute it, or let the matter lie. His decision would indicate how conciliatory he intended to be towards
East Pakistan, the CIA director remarked.
Even if Yahya initially thought of hanging Mujib, he changed his mind when he saw the signs of a military defeat by India and he had felt the
Bengali leader could probably be the ultimate savior in extricating himself from the mess he had created. On top of this, the military ruler came
under intense pressure from the Americans not to execute the Bengali leader. He promised to comply.
Whether Yahya really wanted to kill Mujib, would remain fodder for controversy. Some might argue, based on his statements to the American
diplomats, that Yahya indeed wanted to execute Mujib, but changed his mind under international pressure.
Mujib himself feared the military wanted to kill him, a sentiment he confided in the former Punjab Chief Minister, Ghulam Mustafa Khar. Very

