release. The Indians were only likely to press the Bangladesh leadership towards talks if they believed the Americans would use their influence with
Yahya.
On 8 October, the Indian envoy in Washington asked if Kissinger could ask Pakistan to release Mujib and let him enter the Bengali political life
– it was necessary to keep the moderate control over the Bangladesh movement. He said the so-called foreign minister in Kolkata was being
attacked by the Maoists, and the Awami League leaders were reluctant to let him talk with Yahya lest he be discredited further, and left the field
wide open to the extremists. Kissinger responded that “it was important to understand what was possible and warned against unilateral action.” He
did not elaborate.
The next day, the State Department told the American mission in Kolkata to respond to Moshtaque’s requests. “While much of the substance of
what Moshtaque had to say, particularly with reference to expectations of what the United States could or should do in the present crisis, was
fatuous or naïve. We, nevertheless, believe it is worthwhile to give him a response, with the intent of developing some momentum in moving the
Bangladesh representatives toward talks.”
Washington’s instruction to its Kolkata post was clear: “You should tell him that the U.S. government has no desire to place itself between the
government of Pakistan and the Bangladesh representatives or to enter into merits of the positions of either side.” It added, “The U.S. government,
therefore, has no substantive comment to make on the points raised by Moshtaque. We would urge, rather, that the Bangladesh representatives
seek the earliest opportunity to present their views directly to the government of Pakistan representatives in an effort to explore the possibility of a
negotiated settlement.”
Washington also suggested that the consulate general tell the Bangladesh leaders that the American diplomats had “already discussed the
possibility of such a meeting with President Yahya and he had indicated his interest. The U.S. government is willing to assist in passing messages
back and forth that might lead to a meeting, but we are not interested in playing the transmission belt for ‘demands’ or ‘positions’ of one side or the
other.”
Regarding Moshtaque’s “desires”, Washington said: “You should suggest to him that the Bangladesh representatives present these directly to the
government of Pakistan in talks and not to us. Only by engaging in talks can the two sides hope to find ways toward an early end of violence,
killings and other hardships that now afflict the people of East Pakistan. The alternative what we see is escalation violence, and possibly war, with
further tragic consequences for the entire subcontinent. In our view, those who refuse to participate in unconditional talks may have to assume the
responsibility for the continued loss of life and for the loss of ‘opportunity’ to achieve a constructive outcome.”
Despite their reluctance to get involved directly, the Americans wanted to keep their “options open for contacts with other elements of the
Bangladesh leadership, although this will continue to be controlled from Washington. Hence, while we assume that Moshtaque may remain the
principal channel for future communications, we do not wish to give him the impression that he will necessarily be the only channel. For example,
we obviously might be in touch with the Bangladesh delegation in New York, which presumably was sent to this country for the purpose of
contacting foreign officials, including the United States. Therefore, you may inform Moshtaque at your discretion that we intend to maintain some
contact with the other Bangladesh representatives, if an occasion arises.”
On 12 October, in Moshtaque’s absence from Kolkata, the political officer met with Hossain Ali and gave him the substance of the instructions
contained in the telegram. Ali promised to report the response to Nazrul Islam. If Islam deemed it necessary, Ali said he would make arrangement
to send a copy to Moshtaque, who was believed to be in Tripura at that time, visiting guerrilla training camps.
Ali, however, questioned the usefulness of a dialogue with Pakistan in light of Yahya’s 12 October broadcast to the nation, which contained no
glimmer of hope for a change in the general’s atti tude. The officer clarified that it would be difficult for Yahya not to take the hard line pub licly. Ali
readily agreed that the speech obviously was meant for public con sumption in West Pakistan.
The officer urged that the Bangladesh government seriously consider U.S. suggestions to save the lives of thousands who would perish in a
potential war. He argued the worst the Bengalis could expect in a dialogue was Pakistan’s refusal to talk. That would be no worse than the present
Bangladesh position.
The officer had contacted Ali to make an appointment with Moshtaque. Ali told him Moshtaque was out of Kolkata and not expected to return
until 28 October. Bearing in mind the scheduled 23 October Awami League meeting, the officer decided to meet Ali instead.
Ali asked whether the United States had passed to Yahya the Bangladesh “desires,” which were given to the officer earlier by Moshtaque. The
officer said he had not; Yahya had been informed of US-Bangla contacts, but not of the substance of the talks.
Ali said Nazrul Islam might wish to seek clarification and asked if the officer was willing to meet with the acting president. The officer replied in
the affirmative. Ali then said he had no idea what the leadership’s reaction would be, but that the “total independence” and freedom of Sheikh
Mujib were its only concerns.
In Pakistan, U.S. chargé Sober told Yahya on 11 October that he had nothing new or positive to report on U.S. contacts with the Bengali
leaders. Yahya reiterated his continuing interest and asked to be kept informed. The American diplomat told Yahya that it would be difficult to
arrange direct contacts with the Bangladesh leaders “unless one took into account the apparent continuous attraction of Mujib for the mass of East
Pakistan population”. Yahya said he would not deny that Mujib was still an important symbol. He thought, however, that Mujib’s strength even at
the time of the 1970 elections might have been overestimated. Actually, a fairly large proportion of the East Pakistan electorate had not voted in
December, and a significant proportion of those who voted for Mujib were of the “minority population”, namely, the Hindus. Many of those who
did not vote had been intimidated.
By October, New Delhi had become fully aware of the contacts secretly made between U.S. and Bangladesh. On 2 October, India’s external
affairs minister visited New York to attend the U.N. General Assembly. When Sisco met with Singh, he urged the Indian leader to influence the
Bangladesh officials to start talks with Yahya. Singh replied that India lacked influence with Bangladesh, which had independent financial sources
and was critical of India for its failure to accord it official recognition. He quickly added that this did not mean India opposed the dialogue.
When Sisco suggested that India initiate dialogue without insisting upon Mujib’s participation to see what could be accomplished, Singh said the
United States had contacts with the Bengalis and it had a greater influence on them, and thus it should try to bring about the dialogue on its own.
Sisco said Washington would do what it could with Pakistan to get talks started.
On 22 October, the State Department told Nixon that Farland should tell Yahya to include the Bengalis in Kolkata when the general talked with
East Pakistan’s elected members. But the problem was that the Bangladesh representatives had refused to talk with Yahya, insisting that nothing

could be negotiated except for independence and only Mujib could speak for Bangladesh. Given Mujib’s importance, the department said Farland
should again ask Yahya if Mujib could play a part in a settlement.
On 27 October, Herbert Spivack, the U.S. consul general in Dhaka, weighed in on a proposal from Nazrul Islam for indirect negotiations
between Mujib and Yahya. Nazrul Islam had suggested that he and other members of his leadership team were sufficiently acceptable to Mujib
and Yahya to act as a credible bridge between them. Spivack saw no point in pursuing the proposal unless Yahya was open, in principle at least,
to negotiating with Mujib.
On 28 October, the consulate general in Kolkata pointed out other obstacles facing a negotiated deal. Several factors limited the Bangladesh
leadership’s flexibility, including an increased Mukti Bahini activity in East Pakistan, growing Indo-Pak tension, and the leftist pressure within the
Bangladesh movement. The range of maneuver open to the Bengalis was further cut by news stories published in London revealing the consulate’s
role in promoting contact between the two sides. The conclusion drawn was that the effort had reached a “dead end” and thus it was time for
Yahya to take the initiative and respond to the Bengalis” insistence that he make the first move to directly contact them.
Based on these assumptions, on 30 October, Irwin told the U.S. ambassador in Islamabad to tell Yahya that a long-term resolution could only
be found through a political solution.
“With respect to Mujib himself, we understand sensitivities and only note that, right or wrong, he seems to have become the major symbol. So,
at a minimum, it would seem necessary to the success of any political process to avoid any step, such as publishing the full transcript of Mujib’s
trial, which would inflame the Bengali opinion and might, as Yahya had already noted, produce an explosive reaction in West Pakistan.”
“Whether Yahya can use Mujib as a ‘trump card,’ as he put it, at some point, we must leave entirely to his judgment. Short of that, we assume
Yahya is fully aware of possibilities, such as a simple statement from defense attorney A.K. Brohi the that trial was fair, or use of any appeals
procedure available, which would both soften the international criticism and provide further time to see whether some way is open for a negotiated
settlement.”
Irwin told Farland to suggest to Yahya not to exclude the Awami League leaders in Kolkata from politics under the new constitution and extend
the amnesty to all the Awami League politicians.
“If these thoughts create major problems, what about indicating that under the new constitution there would be a possibility of fresh elections
within two years so that those now frozen out of the process [by charges against them or by own choice] would see an opportunity for their own
eventual reintegration into the political life of East Pakistan? If you find Yahya in a receptive mood on any of these ‘thoughts,’ you should use the
opportunity to probe more deeply Yahya’s ideas on the mechanics of getting a dialogue with Bangladesh started, reminding him that we have urged
the Indians and the Soviets to get behind the idea of an open-ended political dialogue.”
Although America started pushing extra hard to hammer out a deal, by October it had become abundantly clear worldwide that all the efforts to
keep Pakistan united would only be futile. Sydney H. Schanberg, an American journalist, summed up the situation in an article for the Foreign
Affairs magazine: “Every army reprisal against the civilian population produces new Bengali freedom fighters. The Bengalis – now sullen, bitter,
hating – seem ready for a long fight for full independence. Talk of anything less, such as the old goal of East Pakistani autonomy within Pakistan, is
considered heresy.”
With the world opinion overwhelmingly in its favor, India made up its mind against allowing direct talks. India’s foreign minister again raised the
issue of America’s secret contact with Moshtaque during a talk with the U.S. ambassador in New Delhi in October. Singh told Keating that India
knew well that the U.S. officials were in close touch with the Bengalis trying to promote a settlement. America should focus on a genuine
reconciliation, for it would be a great mistake to seek to promote a deal with the break-away Awami League element. “Situation is quite
straightforward. Yahya simply cannot ignore Mujib and Awami League leaders; they are the true East Pakistan leadership. If Pakistan is looking
for an excuse to start trouble, India will defend itself.”
Keating said he had never met with Bangladesh representatives. Some of his junior officers, though, had informally met them in Kolkata and
New Delhi, in order to “listen to their stories.” He then told Singh he had been accused by the pro-Communist Patriot newspaper of attempting to
disrupt the Mukti Bahini and the Awami League and cause internal friction. He said the United States lacked the power to do that and assured
Singh that Washington had done nothing like it.
Singh said India knew of the effort to bring about a Yahya-Awami League dialogue. The Indian government did not need to read the Patriot for
its view, he added.
Keating replied that the effort to promote such a dialogue seemed plausible but did not imply exploitation.
Singh said America attempted to bypass Mujib, an allegation that Keating sought to refute. Singh said that “the American Embassy in Islamabad
under instructions from Washington had just finished urging President Yahya to establish dialogue with the elected representatives of East Pakistan,
which I took to mean Mujib.” Keating added the United States would be delighted if Yahya talked with Mujib.
On 17 November 1971, Dobrynin asked Kissinger about India’s reaction to U.S. suggestions for talks, and if a Bangladesh representative had
been designated. Kissinger replied, “Gandhi had appeared rather negative toward the prospects of such discussions. However, we had stressed
the vital importance of starting discussions looking toward a political settlement. Although a representative had not been designated by Bangladesh,
we believed that President Yahya would be interested in such a procedure and that Mrs. Gandhi should support it.”
On 21 November, Qaiyum again met with the political officer after a month-long hiatus. He pleaded for the U.S. government to press Yahya on
Mujib’s release, saying unless he was freed, the communists would take over the Bangladesh leadership. He said that even if Mujib were kept
confined in West Pakistan after his release, the situation would cool down, helping a negotiated solution. Only Mujib had the power to give Yahya
a face-saving exit. He suggested Yahya hand over power to another general, as Ayub did, and go abroad. Yahya “has no right to destroy both
parts of Pakistan.” Qaiyum warned that time was running out. The Mukti Bahini was increasingly successful with India’s help, and the Bangladesh
leaders expected a military victory in East Pakistan within the next two months.
On 27 November, Qaiyum told the officer the Bangaldesh cabinet had gone to Delhi at Gandhi’s request. He had recommended that the cabinet
members not “sign anything” in New Delhi unless they first brought it back to Kolkata for general Awami League discussion.
Qaiyum also told the American that D.P. Dhar, Gandhi’s foreign policy aide, in his latest visit to Kolkata had questioned Moshtaque about his
talks with the United States, calling the foreign minister a “traitor.” Moshtaque denied everything, but Dhar said he knew all about the negotiations

because the State Department had told everything to the Indian Embassy in Washington. Qaiyum said he told the Indians the Bangladesh
government had not sold its soul to India and that as an independent government, it could talk with any other government it wished, the political
officer reported.
Qaiyum claimed he heard about the Dhar-Moshtaque exchange and pro tested about it to Syed Nazrul Islam, D.P. Dhar and Ashok Ray of the
External Affairs Ministry. He said that he – rather than Moshtaque – had been the one who talked with the U.S. government representatives. If
India did not like what he had done, it was just too bad, he said, as he and his group in the Awami League did not intend to be dictated to by
India. He had threatened to walk out on the Bangladesh government along with some forty-three supporters and go to Pakistan rather than “sell
out” to India.
America’s failure to bring about a negotiated settlement was later raised by Moshtaque during a conversation with the U.S. ambassador in
Dhaka after he became Bangladesh president following Mujib’s overthrow in 1975. Making an appeal for American support for his government,
Moshtaque told Ambassador Davis Boster on 20 August 1975, that Washington “must not lose the opportunity today which we had lost in 1971,”
according to a telegram sent by the U.S. Embassy in Dhaka to the State Department.
The Awami League’s fear of a leftist takeover of the guerrilla movement, its desire to be free from India’s dictatorial grip, and its resolve to save
Mujib – coupled with its fear of massive destruction and loss of lives if a war broke out – prompted the Bangladesh leaders towards seeking
negotiations with Yahya. Moshtaque might have been movitated by his rivalry with Tajuddin, who enjoyed little support among most of his senior
colleagues in the Awami League. The Bengalis feared an all-out war would reduce East Pakistan to ruins, plunging them into an almost
insurmountable task of rebuilding the free country from ashes. They were frightened out of their minds by other thoughts as well, such as the effect
of a prolonged guerrilla war as witnessed in Vietnam, or India potentially annexing a part of East Pakistan to resettle the refugees along the
borders. Moreover, they worried that if India succeeded in slicing East Pakistan and West Pakistan would hold a big chunk of Kashmir, they might
be caught in a diplomatic wrangling between Islamabad and New Delhi in which their interests would become a lesser priority. In the end,
America’s dilly-dallying in arranging a meeting, as well as Yahya’s reluctance to talk with the Bengali leaders in Kolkata and Mujib, along with
India’s ultimate resistance to any direct talks, thwarted the idea that Washington did not originate but fervently pursued.

11 
U.S. Fiasco in East Pakistan:
Right Diagnosis, Wrong Medicine
n 13 April 1971, Kissinger forwarded a memo from the secretary of state to Nixon, suggesting that the time had come “to reexamine our
basic stance toward Pakistan”. In the memo, Rogers stressed “the need to keep our options open in case East Pakistan becomes
independent and to examine our relative priorities between India and Pakistan and the interplay of U.S. interests with those of communist
China and the Soviets in South Asia.”
“The situation in Pakistan is changing,” Kissinger told Nixon in his forwarding letter, adding, “You will soon be called upon to make some
decisions on our economic aid and military supply programs for Pakistan on which it will be difficult, if not impossible, to find a neutral ground.”
Three days later, on 16 April, a Special National Intelligence Estimate on “Prospects for Pakistan,” produced at the State Department’s
request, sounded an alarm bell in Washington. “The current review of our posture toward Pakistan painted a bleak picture for Islamabad,” the
study said.
In addition, the estimate said, the prospects were “poor” that the army could substantially improve its position, much less reassert control over
the Bengalis. Whether the army was to face widespread non-cooperation or continued active resistance, would depend in part on how much help
India gave the Bengalis. India “will continue and increase” its arms aid to the Bengalis; this would enable them to develop at a minimum the kind of
insurgency capability that the army could not entirely suppress. Furthermore, whatever the extent of Indian support to the Bengalis, Yahya would
face “increasingly serious difficulties” in East Pakistan.
Assessing the prospect of foreign involvement in the conflict, especially by the Soviet Union and China, the document said the Russians firmly
opposed the military suppression of East Pakistan. India influenced the Soviet decision. China had come down heavily on West Pakistan’s side,
but a Chinese military intervention in support of West Pakistan “did not now seem likely,” although they might increase arms deliveries. China,
however, might in time face a dilemma should an extremist group came to the fore in the Bengali resistance movement and sought Beijing’s help.
If Bangladesh became independent “rather soon” it would possibly have a moderate leadership, the intelligence report predicted. A prolonged
war, on the other hand, could lead to a takeover by an extremist and radical leadership. Over a longer term, even if the moderates initially took
over, their inability to solve Bangladesh’s serious problems would lead to increased susceptibility to radical and extremist ideas and groups.
“Bangladesh would remain an object of continuing concern to India and, in the name of national security, would be an object of manipulation
and even of open interference on New Delhi’s part. Indeed, an independent Bangladesh is likely to remain very much in India’s orbit so long as
that New Delhi has a government strong and decisive enough to seek to exercise its influence,” the CIA concluded.
When Kissinger reviewed the National Intelligence Estimate on 16 April, he received a memo from Saunders and Hoskinson, who had
prepared an assessment of Farland’s recommendations about Pakistan. Farland, the U.S. ambassador to Pakistan, advocated “maintaining options
in both East and West Pakistan.”
What the Farland plan meant, they explained, was “in our public stance we would take a somewhat firmer line than we have so far. This would
include expressing concern for loss of human life, underscoring our desire to see an early end to the fighting and return to civilian government, and
making clear our continuing concern about the use of U.S. arms to suppress the East Pakistanis. Privately, we would inform the Pakistanis, without
threatening or lecturing, that we do not believe force will provide a solution.” This dialogue could begin with the president’s answer to Yahya, a
reference to the Pakistani president’s letter to Nixon on 30 March.
By 19 April, two days after the Awami League formally announced the formation of the government-in-exile in Mujibnagar, the Americans
started getting a clearer picture of the East Pakistan situation. A personal note that accompanied a memorandum by Saunders to Kissinger
captured the new reality.
“It appears that the situation is settling down to one of prolonged conflict. We must guard against moving too quickly to a view that the West
Pakistanis are regaining control, but it does seem increasingly clear that we are not going to be dealing with a situation in which the resistance
movement is so dramatically successful as to make it immediately apparent to the West Pakistanis that they cannot win.”
Fresh information emanating from Pakistan only reinforced America’s previous assessment that the Islamic nation could soon be history.
“Nothing has happened to alter our basic judgment that the breakup of Pakistan is inevitable, but events of recent days suggest that we may have
been overemphasizing its imminence. What this suggests to me is that time may have been bought for a second chance to try mitigating some of the
worst consequences of a split.”
Saunders advocated an even-handed policy in dealing with West and East Pakistan. “If we are to preserve some position in both East and West
Pakistan, we have to consider the interests of both sides,” he argued.
He noted the two sides represented conflicting interests, with the West Pakistani military seeking to preserve the country’s unity and the Bengalis
fighting to gain substantial autonomy. “We cannot assume that the problem is solved; it is only deferred.”
Going into details, he said the present situation in Pakistan “gives us an opportunity to reassess one of the options which we discarded before 25
March. We decided then not to inject ourselves into the negotiations between East and West. This was probably wise in that we really did not
know what was going on and we would have appeared to be meddling in a situation over our depth.”
“Now, however, we have seen the potential consequences – economic problems in West Pakistan beyond our capacity, the possibility of an
Indian-Pakistani war and the difficult choices which East Pakistani independence would thrust upon us,” he went on.
“The most important issue before us, therefore, may be whether we wish now to involve ourselves more actively in it attempting to help work
out a negotiated settlement between East and West Pakistan.”

“What I have in mind is fairly limited. It is still true that these negotiations are so intricate and involve such passions on each side that we are ill-
equipped to involve ourselves. However, the very problems we face lay the groundwork for an approach to Yahya which should be the product of
the present policy review. However gentle our tactics, I believe our objective should be to encourage movement toward the greatest possible
degree of East Pakistani autonomy.”
The day he received Saunders’ memo, Kissinger held a Senior Review Group session to gather an assessment of the East Pakistan situation.
Cushman, CIA’s deputy director, painted a picture that showed the Pakistanis were, to an extent, succeeding in quelling the Bengali revolt.
“After three weeks of fighting in East Pakistan, the West Pakistanis hold the cities and are moving along the roads west of the big river. They
can apparently move throughout the countryside as they wish, and it is only the fact that they do not have enough men that is limiting their
movement,” Cushman reported.
He also said that the Pakistanis were taking the Bengali villages without any real resistance. “It was only a matter of time before they controlled
all the population centers. The Bengali forces were not resisting; they were just melting away.”
Kissinger sought a clarification: “Are they melting away or disintegrating?”
Cushman replied: “They’re disintegrating. They are not in communication with each other and are not an effective force. Their morale is low and
they are disorganized and fatalistic. They could, however, be a long-term problem if the Indians keep supplying them and they turn to terrorism or
acts of sabotage. There is no doubt that the Indians are involved in clandestine support activities; they’re supplying them with arms, ammunition,
food and medical supplies, and have sent in advisers and sabotage teams.”
He told Kissinger that India apparently wanted to recognize Bangladesh but decided to hold off because the Bengali leadership “did not control
anything.” The Russians advised against the recognition because of their doubts about its viability.
China’s public statements, Cushman reported, remained favorable to Pakistan and accused India of intervening, “but we doubt that they will go
beyond verbal support.” The Soviets, for their part, were opposed to the bloodshed and specifically did not support the insurgents.
By late April, Washington had moved beyond discussing the East Pakistan situation as an internal matter of Pakistan and whether Bangladesh
would eventually become a reality. Now Americans saw a real possibility of an Indo-Pak conflict.
On 24 April Rogers sent a cable to the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad, saying the State Department had advised that Pakistan “exercise maximum
restraint despite what it might consider provocations from the other side.”
Washington sent the same message to New Delhi, saying India, too, “should act with restraint.” Sisco told Jha, India’s ambassador in
Washington, “India was now strong and stable as [a] result of the election and, consequently, could be expected to act responsibly.” (It was a
reference to Gandhi’s landslide victory in March 1971.)
Kissinger Offers Three Options On Pakistan Crisis
Four days later, Kissinger decided to give Nixon the developments in South Asia. He told the president: “I do not normally bother you with tactical
judgments. But in the case of the present situation in Pakistan, policy depends on the posture adopted toward several major problems. The
purpose of this memo is to seek your guidance on the general direction we should be following.”
He then outlined three options for Nixon to consider: first, to support whatever political and military program Yahya chose to pursue in the East;
second, maintain a posture of genuine neutrality; and third, make a serious effort to help Yahya end the war and establish an arrangement that
could be transitional to the East Pakistani autonomy.
Kissinger personally favored the third option. The first option, he elaborated, “would have the advantage of preserving our relationship with
West Pakistan. It would have the disadvantage of encouraging the West Pakistanis in actions that would drag out the present situation and increase
the political and economic costs to them and to us.”
The second option, meanwhile, “would have the advantage of creating a posture that would be publicly defensible. The disadvantage would be
that the necessary cutback in military and economic assistance would tend to favor East Pakistan. We would be doing enough to disrupt our
relationship with West Pakistan, but not enough to help the East or promote a political settlement.”
The third option “would have the advantage of making the most of the relationship with Yahya, while engaging in a serious effort to move the
situation toward conditions less damaging to U.S. and Pakistani interests. Its disadvantage is that it might lead to a situation in which progress
toward a political settlement had broken down, the United States had alienated itself from the 600 million people in India and East Pakistan and the
United States was unable to influence the West Pakistani government to make the concessions necessary for a political settlement.”
Nixon approved the third option and added a handwritten note: “To all hands. Don’t squeeze Yahya at this time.” He underlined “Don’t” three
times. Nixon did that because of a memo General Alexander Haig, deputy national security adviser, had sent to him on 28 April. Kissinger had told
Haig that it would help if Nixon included a note, saying he wanted no action that would squeeze West Pakistan.
On 29 April, just a day after Nixon directed Kissinger to pursue a policy that would help Yahya to bring about a settlement in East Pakistan, the
president telephoned Haig. Nixon wanted to know whether the United States was helping to end the fighting in Pakistan as the Russians were.
Haig prematurely declared: “The fighting is about over – there is considerable stability now.”
Over the next months, reports kept pouring in that the East Pakistan situation had turned worse. America then realized that the military solution
would yield no positive outcome. So, it wanted to see Yahya move toward involving more civilians in East Pakistan. As the food situation
worsened in East Pakistan, the Americans felt a famine could soon break out. To handle the situation urgently, Farland told Yahya to appoint a
food czar. The general appointed the former head of the Chittagong Port Authority, retired Commodore Rehmatullah Bajwa, as his personal
representative. Yahya also decided to go to Dhaka in July to examine the situation himself.
The Americans were not entirely happy with Yahya’s token move to give the East Pakistan government a civilian character. In July, Farland
urged Yahya to replace General Tikka Khan, the governor of East Pakistan, with a civilian governor, preferably a Bengali. Yahya replied it would
be difficult to appoint a civilian governor in East Pakistan and not in West Pakistan, where Bhutto was standing in the wings, urging a transfer of
power.
Yahya had just appointed Dr. A.M. Malik as his special assistant for Displaced Persons and Relief and Rehabilitation Operations in East

Pakistan. Yahya felt that the appointment would meet the need for civilian control in East Pakistan in that Malik would outrank the governor and
could issue orders to the governor in the president’s name.
Despite appointing the relief coordinator, Yahya refused to admit that the refugee problem was serious enough to deserve his special attention.
Francis L. Kellogg, secretary of state’s special assistant for Refugee and Migration Affairs, met with Yahya in Islamabad after visiting refugee
camps in India in June. When Kellogg noted that he had seen streams of refugees on the Jessore-Kolkata Road, apparently coming out of East
Pakistan, Yahya was skeptical. He said some people seem to be moving back and forth. Yahya thought that large numbers of people could not still
be coming from East Pakistan to India.
Kellogg commented he had spoken to many individual refugees, selected randomly by him, with the help of interpreters. They were ordinary
farmers and could not merely have been repeating a story they were told to relate. Moreover, most stated they had been trekking for ten days.
Yahya suggested that Kellogg go to East Pakistan and see for himself. There was no slaughter going on, the general insisted. Some armed
opposition to the government was continuing, and it was meeting with armed response, Yahya said.
When Kellogg mentioned that India’s foreign secretary had told the United States that “if the refugees can’t move back, something must be
done,” Yahya set off an outburst against the Indians. He said Prime Minister Indira Gandhi must have instigated the current problems through a
clandestine plotting with Mujib. Her people plotted against Pakistan. The Indians had armed the opposition. They had imposed a ban on
overflights. Now India hoped to get large amounts of additional foreign aid on the pretext of providing for refugees to help it cope with its own
existing problems.
Yahya said the impression might have been gained from the foreign press reports that East Pakistan was burning. “That is not so; it is not an
inferno. East Pakistan is now open territory,” Yahya asserted. The vast majority of the area was quiet, although border areas remained unstable.
Yahya referred to the action of the Indian Border Security Force and the Indian army in the border regions. The main support to the resistance
thus far had come from the Border Security Force, India’s frontier guards. But if the Indian army moved against East Pakistan, Yahya said matter-
of-factly, “of course, fighting can’t be limited to East Pakistan.” He threatened a general war against India. He said the Indians were maintaining
thirty to thirty-five training camps and arming East Pakistani civilians in them.
Responding to Kellogg’s comment that the Indian foreign secretary had said it was not in India’s interest to have an independent East Pakistan,
Yahya said vehemently, “Kaul is a damned liar. His actions don’t tally with what he says.” Yahya said it was important to see what was actually
happening. Pakistan’s borders were being kept boiling. He asked Kellogg to visit the border areas and see from which direction the firing was
coming. Then he could ask Kaul how the thousands of captured arms came to East Pakistan.
Kellogg repeated that none of the Indian officials with whom he had spoken had said they wanted the refugees to remain; nor had any one
referred to a desire to see an independent East Pakistan. Bangladesh was never once mentioned to him, he told Yahya.
Yahya Faces Pressure From World Leaders
By the time Yahya met Kellogg, he had started feeling increasing international pressure to reach a political solution. The latest pressure came from
British Foreign Secretary Alec Douglas-Home, who linked Pakistan’s foreign aid to reaching a political settlement. Yahya had already received a
report from Hilaly about Blood’s testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in Washington the previous week.
Feeling the pinch, Yahya wrote to Nixon on 28 June to express his disappointment over the donors’ decision to withhold aid until Islamabad
disclosed steps toward a political solution. The New York Times and the BBC had carried stories revealing the decision. Their veracity had been
enhanced by the British foreign secretary’s statement that “there can be no question of new British aid to Pakistan until we have firm evidence that
real progress is being made towards a political settlement.”
All these developments, Yahya told Nixon, had led to a strong and widespread public reaction in Pakistan. “In response to these developments,
I had no choice but to declare in unequivocal terms in my broadcast of today that external assistance with political strings will be unacceptable to
Pakistan.”
One day later, Kissinger and Sisco talked on the phone in the light of the national security adviser’s impending visit to South Asia. Kissinger
remarked, “India wants to attack Pakistan.” Sisco replied that the Indians wanted to keep the pot boiling. At the same time, Sisco noted, Yahya’s
proposed solution excluding the Awami League would not work, either. “It’s like telling Ted Kennedy not to be a Democrat,” Sisco commented.
Kennedy, a U.S. senator and brother of President John F. Kennedy, visited the refugee camps in Kolkata and supported the Bengalis in 1971.
Sisco elaborated his point in a note to his boss, Rogers, which he sent on the same day: “It is doubtful that promises of maximum provincial
autonomy will be enough to satisfy the Bengalis, who have in effect again been reminded that their earlier electoral decisions are not acceptable to
the West Pakistani establishment. Thus, a genuine political accommodation remains the crux of Pakistan’s internal crisis and Yahya’s speech offers
little basis for optimism over his chances of early success under the terms and conditions he has prescribed.” Sisco added in a handwritten
comment that “banning the Awami League makes a political accommodation almost impossible.”
On 17 August, the National Security Council staff produced a study that showed South Asia was headed for a new war unless West and East
Pakistan struck an accord and the refugees began returning from India by September or October. It predicted several scenarios that could develop
over the following few months, and U.S. actions would partly depend on how the situation developed. The most likely scenarios included the
following:
1. The Indian military forces will attack East Pakistan in an effort to seize and hold part of the area and drive out the West Pakistani forces.
2. India will step up direct support to enable the insurgents to seize and hold a portion of East Pakistan.
3. There will be a gradual process of escalation involving incidents along the East Pakistan-India border, with confusion as to who is most at
fault.
4. West Pakistanis will initiate hostilities by attacking guerrilla sanctuaries in eastern India and/or Indian military support bases.
5. West Pakistanis, either to divert Indian attention or to show India’s vulnerability, will try to stir up trouble in Kashmir along the ceasefire line,
leading to the situation rapidly escalating to full-scale hostilities as in 1965.

Should war break out, it would be in the U.S. interest to keep third parties, particularly China and the Soviets, out of it. America would reap
benefits by bringing a quick end to it, because a prolonged war could cause profound damage to the political, economic and social fabric of the
South Asian nations.
Kissinger discussed the ideas with Nixon’s foreign policy team the same day. The following exchange transpired, as recorded in the minutes of
the Washington Special Action Group meeting on 17 August 1971 ( Document 126, volume XI, South Asia crisis 1971, Department of State)
.
Kissinger: “Do you think the Indians will attack?”
Helms: “My personal feeling is that they will not do so.”
Kissinger asked Sisco: “What do you think?”
Sisco: “I don’t think they will launch an attack across the border. However, I believe they will feel free to support the liberation movement in
East Pakistan now that they have the treaty with the Soviets. This will be more likely to happen if the liberation movement picks up steam, the relief
problem continues and there is no political accommodation. My reaction is that in no circumstances will the Pakistanis initiate hostilities in the West.
If the Indian objective is to achieve a Bangla Desh that they can work with, they will continue to support the liberation movement.”
Kissinger: “Are the Chinese reinforcing?”
Helms: “No.”
Moorer: “There are no indications yet that they are. We do know that the Indians have activated some airfields near West Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “How quickly would the Chinese be able to reinforce?”
Moorer: “It would be very difficult for them.”
Helms: “The terrain is bad, and they don’t have the necessary equipment. We would know ahead of time.”
Kissinger: “Did they reinforce in 1962?”
Helms: “Yes.”
Kissinger: “Did we know?”
Helms: “Yes.”
Kissinger: “What did the Indians think was going to happen?”
Helms: “As I recall, the Indians had sort of decided to take on the Chinese before the attack took place.”
Kissinger: “Thus, their surprise was the result of a judgmental factor.”
Helms: “In that part of the world one still has the problem of passions outrunning good judgment.”
Kissinger: “Passions don’t have to run very far to do that in India.”
Irwin: “If Joe’s scenario is correct, what steps could be taken to reduce that possibility?”
Moorer: “Doesn’t it all boil down to whether the Indians take overt action? The Pakistanis are outnumbered four to one. They certainly are not
going to attack.”
Irwin: “What would cause the Indians to take action?”
Moorer: “The emotion you were talking about. Also the refugee problem.”
Irwin: “There are several possible contingencies that could cause the Indians to act. There could be a famine in East Pakistan, which would
stimulate a large wave of refugees. Failure to reach a political accommodation would be another factor. The execution of Mujibur Rahman might
touch off something.”
Kissinger: “Do we know what is going on at the trial?”
Moorer: “It is expected to last two months.”
Helms: “Until October.”
Irwin: “All we can do with India is to urge restraint and threaten.”
Helms: “I think the U.S. policy has been just right on this occasion. We are urging the Indians not to attack, we are taking action to prevent
famine, and we are getting the United Nations engaged. It doesn’t look like we are doing a lot, but what else is there to do? The only other thing
we should do is get Ted Kennedy home.”
Kennedy, chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Refugees, was in India at that time on an eight-day fact-finding mission.
Kissinger: “I’m not sure they would agree about that [Kennedy’s return] upstairs.”
Sisco: “In this contingency paper, there are a lot of unilateral steps indicated. I think we ought to realize that in case of war there is really very
little that we can do unilaterally. We will have to rely on what parallel interests the United States, the U.S.S.R. and China may have in localizing the
war. What bothers me is that we have channels to the Soviets, but we have to find ways to talk to the Chinese.”
Kissinger: “We can figure that out.”
Sisco: “By ourselves we have a limited capacity to influence the situation.”
Kissinger: “What should we tell the Soviets and Chinese that we want them to do?”
Sisco: “Before or after hostilities?”
Kissinger: “Before and after. Has anyone talked to the Soviet Union?”
Sisco: “It is difficult to say exactly what we would tell them at the present juncture.”
Kissinger: “Couldn’t we say, cool your new friends? Am I missing something here? Why not say that to them?”
Helms: “Sure. Why not? Conversation is cheap.”
Irwin: “I see no problem. At some point, we might move to that. The secretary [Rogers] was planning on seeing the Soviets, but the Soviet
treaty with India intervened.”
Kissinger: “You shake your head. Why?”

Helms: “This is the time [to talk to the Soviets]. If you don’t turn that stone and a serious problem develops later, you will kick yourself.”
Kissinger: “Is there something going on that eludes me, Joe? Why are you so mysterious?”
Sisco: “I have no problem with talking to the Soviets. Two weeks ago, we prepared talking points for that.”
Kissinger: “Well, can I assume that we [the White House] will be told if you decide to approach the Soviets?”
Sisco: “Naturally we will have to talk to the secretary [Rogers] about this.”
Irwin: “Certainly.”
Kissinger: “What should we tell the Chinese? It is so out of character for you to be reticent.”
Sisco: “We have such good direct relations with the Pakistanis that we don’t have to go to the Chinese to ask them to urge restraint on the
Pakistanis. I don’t see any immediate need to talk to the Chinese.”
Kissinger: “When you think the time has come, will you give us a hint? A reticent Joe Sisco is unknown. Usually when you come here you have
already done whatever is to be done. Maybe you have decided to change your strategy from one of telling us afterward to not telling us at all.
Anyway, we assume the State Department will let us know when a message is to be passed to the Chinese. What do we do when a war starts?”
Moorer: “As for evacuation, there are 7,698 U.S. nationals to be evacuated from India, some 2,000 from West Pakistan, and 242 in East
Pakistan.”
Sisco: “We should look at the evacuation plans.”
Kissinger: “Can we get these plans in shape?”
Sisco: “Some of the things we do in connection with evacuation are standard. We need to get suggestions on what to tell the Soviets and
Chinese.”
Kissinger: “Can someone study what we mean when we say we are going to cut out economic aid [to India]? We should look at the
consequences.”
Irwin: “What we do is cut down on Indian possibilities for economic development. This increases the burden on the Indian governmental system,
may stop their democratic evolution and might lead them to make a pact with the Soviet Union.”
Kissinger: “Can we cut off aid through the consortium?”
Sisco: “We will produce a paper on this. Some of the steps might be to delay a commitment on the 1972 development loan program, to
mobilize other aid donors to delay their assistance, to delay signing a PL-480 agreement, and to stop things that are in the pipeline.”
Kissinger: “Could you do that [prepare a paper]? We will also be getting talking points for the Soviets and Chinese both before and after an
attack. You will let us know what you are doing on this, and we in turn will let you know about anything we are doing here that may affect the
situation.”
Sisco: “We and the Chinese and the Russians have certain common interests in this.”
Kissinger: “We can’t have solo efforts on this.”
Irwin: “Yes, we should coordinate as much as possible with the Chinese and Soviets.”
Kissinger: “I mean bureaucratically.”
Irwin: “Oh. I was looking at it from a somewhat broader perspective.”
Helms: “Can we assume that the Chinese know about our efforts to keep Pakistan together?”
Sisco: “I think they ought to know that our basic policy is to be helpful in maintaining the integrity of Pakistan.”
Kissinger: “I agree. We should make sure that they don’t misread us. Everyone can get together and assemble these talking points. Let us have
those for the Chinese fairly soon.”
By opting for the united Pakistan posture, Kissinger and his colleagues ignored intelligence estimates only to end up in a fiasco in South Asia.
They neither helped Pakistan nor boosted U.S. interests. On 6 December, Admiral Elmo Zumwalt, chief of Naval Operations, expressed his
displeasure with the panel’s policy prescriptions. He wondered aloud what would be the outcome of America’s South Asian policy. What he saw
was not a pretty picture for Washington.
“We have come out on the side of the Pakistanis. East Pakistan will go down and it will look like we are ineffective allies. The U.S.S.R. will gain
with the Indians. In the short term, the military balance in the Indian Ocean area will go against us,” the admiral said.

12 
U.S. Warns India:
Don’t Start War
s early as May 1971, Sisco saw India and Pakistan going to war over East Bengal. The escalation could develop in two ways, he told
Rogers on 18 May. If India felt intolerable economic, political and internal security pressures from the influx of the refugees, it might strike
against East Pakistan to end the struggle. Alternatively, the West Pakistanis could attack India if they felt that they had to halt cross-border
activities by the Bengalis from Indian sanctuaries to keep their control over East Pakistan.
Sisco thought Pakistan’s steps to restore normalcy and strike a peaceful deal with the Bengalis were critical to averting an escalation. Unless the
conditions returned to normal, the refugee flow would continue. Without a political compromise, India’s support for cross-border operations
would go on, potentially making the situation dangerous, he cautioned.
On 23 May, Kissinger told Nixon that India was amassing soldiers along the Pakistan border.
Nixon asked, “Which one, East or West?” Kissinger replied, “East.” Kissinger had already instructed the U.S. ambassador to let New Delhi
know that Washington opposed India’s invasion of Pakistan.
Nixon supported Kissinger. He said, “If India went in there with military action, by God we will cut off economic aid.” Kissinger emphasized
that Washington could not afford to see the Pakistan government thrown out now, “given the other things we are doing,” referring to America’s
secret contacts with China.
Two days later, Kissinger received a memo from Hoskinson and Richard Kennedy, member of the National Security Council (NSC) staff:
“There are some disturbing indications that India and Pakistan are moving closer to the brink of a new war. Neither side really wants a war at this
point, but they are drifting in this direction.” The NSC said mortar barrages and small-arms fire had been exchanged frequently across the East
Pakistan-India border for the past weeks. The big Indian army forces in the area were on high alert and the situation appeared very tense.
On the West Pakistan-India border, intelligence reports indicated, the Indians were taking military preparations, such as dispersal of fighter
aircraft in the potential combat area and perhaps the movement of additional combat troops and armor into forward areas. The Pakistanis
reportedly had their forces in forward positions along the border, too.
In addition, Gandhi reportedly had ordered her army to prepare a plan for a rapid takeover of East Pakistan. She was particularly interested in
an “Israeli-type lightening [sic] thrust” that would present the world with a fait accompli .
India’s campaign at home and abroad to bring attention to the refugee crisis gave the Americans another clue that Gandhi was preparing for
war. Besides, her warning before parliament – that “Pakistan must provide “credible guarantees” for the return and future safety of the refugees” –
raised suspicions in Washington.
America got yet another hint when Gandhi issued an even stronger threat: “Unless the great powers take action to remedy the situation, India
will be ‘constrained to take all measures that might be necessary’ to safeguard its own well-being.”
One day after Hoskinson and Kennedy issued the memo, the secretary of state sent a report to Nixon, noting that the possibility of a war
seemed more likely now than before. “The situation in East Pakistan is evolving to the point where we now believe it is possible that it could touch
off a war between India and Pakistan. In the event of such a conflict, the possibility of Chinese pressure on India along their border, followed by
increased Soviet military assistance to India, cannot be excluded,” Rogers wrote.
Differing with Nixon’s position, Rogers hinted at his preference to press Yahya to solve the crisis politically and thus avoid a war. “We agree
that President Yahya is not likely to take steps to bring about a political accommodation until he realizes, himself, how essential it is. We cannot
force him to this realization and, therefore, we are not imposing political conditions on our assistance. We believe, however, that we should avoid
taking actions which might ease the internal pressures on him to take such steps on his own accord.”
In the afternoon of the same day, Kissinger chaired a twenty-five-minute meeting of the Washington Special Action Group, a panel that
implemented the Nixon administration’s policies. It was attended by officials from the State Department, the Pentagon, the Joint Chiefs and the
National Security Council staff.
Kissinger asked the panel, “What do you think the Indians really want in East Pakistan?”
Van Hollen replied, “The Indians want, first, a cessation of the civil strife in East Pakistan so as to stem the flow of the refugees. Second, they
want a moderate, independent regime in East Pakistan. They’re concerned that over a period of time the radical element there may take power
and link up with the radicals in India.”
Kissinger: “They’re aiming for an independent Bangladesh under moderate leadership?”
Johnson: “Yes.”
Van Hollen: “Until 25 March, India saw its interests served by a united Pakistan in which the Bengali element would be the dominant. When the
Pakistani military moved into East Pakistan, India’s estimate of their own best interests shifted, and they now favor an independent Bangladesh
under a moderate leadership.”
On 29 May, India’s ambassador met with Kissinger in the White House. Hoskinson also attended the thirty-five-minute meeting. When Jha
briefed Kissinger on the latest situation, the crisis had assumed a new dimension. Jha first talked about the refugee issue, saying it was not simply a
question of money and relief. India could no longer absorb so many people, Jha said, and it wanted to find a way to send them back into East
Pakistan. Jha warned that “tensions are high” both politically and socially. A high percentage of the refugees were Hindus and that there were
communal conflicts between the refugees and the local population. This was particularly serious in West Bengal. Jha called the situation “very
explosive.”

Kissinger asked what the choices were, adding, “You can’t go to war over the refugees.”
Jha said some people wanted to arm the refugees and send them back into East Pakistan. Others advocated bringing pressure on Yahya. The
prevailing high level of tension could result in serious disruptions in the already unstable West Bengal. It could also pose a serious threat to Indo-
Pak relations, which in turn would have a “backwash” effect on Indo-U.S. affairs. Jha said he hoped the president could reply to the prime
minister’s letter in such a way as to convey support for India in international forums and inform her of what the United States was advising Yahya.
Kissinger asked what the United States could do, noting Yahya claimed he wanted a political settlement.
Jha said what India needed was a sense of movement in that direction. “We need confirmation that he is moving toward a political settlement,”
he said.
Kissinger said East Pakistan’s evolution should be “gradual and most delicately handled”. He told Jha he was unsure if an “independent East
Pakistan is in India’s interest.”
Jha replied India did not favor Pakistan’s breakup, nor could he see Pakistan surviving. India feared guerrilla activity and China’s involvement
eventuality in East Pakistan, an eventually that he predicted would tear the Muslim nation apart.
Kissinger advised the ambassador to tell Gandhi, “We are concerned and are doing here what we can with a low visibility.”
Jha said Gandhi wanted to keep the situation under control, but needed a feeling of confidence from Nixon’s reply to her letter.
Kissinger assured the response would reflect Washington was “trying to move in a constructive way”.
Jha again stressed the need for some indication of support for India in international organizations.
Kissinger responded that Nixon had “personal influence” with Pakistan, which needed to be used privately.
By June, the Americans had started voicing their opinion that Pakistan’s partition was unavoidable. On 3 June, the U.S. ambassador to India
told Kissinger, “East Pakistan will eventually become independent.” He advocated that America move to resolve the crisis and retain its influence
with the Bengalis.
But when Nixon and Kissinger, who were deeply submerged in their secret China plan, discussed Keating’s outlook on 4 June, they disagreed
with the ambassador. Kissinger said, “It was important to buoy up Yahya for at least another month, while Pakistan served as the gateway to
China.”
Nixon, widely known for his disdain of Indian leaders, replied: “Even apart from the Chinese thing, I wouldn’t do that to help the Indians. The
Indians are no goddamn good.”
Nixon fumed that every U.S. ambassador who went to India “got sucked in”, including Keating.
Bangladesh: “Ripe Field” For Communism
Kissinger saw no sense in Keating’s advice. “If East Pakistan becomes independent, it is going to become a cesspool. It is going to be 100 million
people, they have the lowest standard of living in Asia, no resources. They’re going to become a ripe field for communist infiltration. And, then
they’re going to bring pressure on India because of West Bengal. So the Indians in their usual idiotic way are playing for little stakes, unless they
have in the back of their minds that they could turn East Pakistan into a sort of protectorate that they could control from Calcutta.”
Nixon concluded that all the Indians had in mind was to damage Pakistan.
On 6 June, Farland met with Yahya. He told the general that the continued stream of refugees indicated a serious situation in East Pakistan. “I
pointed out that the embassy continued to receive reports of Hindu villages being attacked by the army, that fear is pervasive and that until this
situation changes the refugees will continue to cross over into India,” Farland said in a cable to Washington.
He cautioned Yahya that the Hindu exodus, if not checked, could lead to a military clash with India. “I said that the continued massive flow of
the refugees remains the most explosive aspect of the East Pakistan situation.”
Yahya did not admit the Hindu repression. He said “he was equally seized with concern over the refugee situation and realized all of its
ramifications and its potential for the direst of developments.” He told Farland that every effort was being made to seal the borders and to expedite
the return of the refugees. He promised to give this matter his continuing attention. He insisted that his information indicated the outflow had
substantially decreased and that many were moving back into East Pakistan.
Yahya’s assessment differed vastly with reports reaching Washington. On 9 June, Irwin painted a bleak picture of the East Pakistan situation. In
a memo to Nixon, he said the people, fearful of army action, were hesitant to return to work, whether in government offices or the private sector.
There was evidence of an increasingly organized insurgency, including guerrilla disruption of transport and commerce as well as intimidation of
those who ventured to cooperate with the martial law administration. Yahya’s political initiatives had thus far failed to draw any significant
response. There was a continued low level of law and order, and a partial breakdown of the local government apparatus, outside major urban
areas where the military had achieved some security.
With no progress in sight in East Pakistan, and India gearing up for war, the Nixon administration sought to use its influence to prevent hostilities
from breaking out. On 11 June, Kissinger met with India’s ambassador to Washington, and cautioned Jha, “If India took unilateral military action,
it would have to mean the end of any assistance on our part. It would turn the issue into an international problem involving China, the Soviet Union
and other great powers, in which the Bengal problem would soon be submerged.”
Defending India’s position, Jha said the presence of six million refugees in most heavily populated states could shift the voting balance for the
communists, especially in West Bengal. “It was a matter in India of its internal stability – there was nothing that the government wanted to do less
than to go to war, but something had to be done.”
When Kissinger asked how the situation could be resolved, Jha replied: “What was needed was a political conversation and a political solution,
which he personally believed were unlikely except on the basis of independence for East Pakistan.” By June, India had become convinced that the
only possible solution to the crisis was the creation of Bangladesh.
As Kissinger and Jha talked in Washington, a furious U.S. chargé d’ affaires in India sent a blunt note to the State Department on 11 June.
Noting that many refugees were still pouring in to India, Stone said, “This should be evidence enough that no matter what noises President Yahya

