144
Tragedy of Errors
The Islam Pasand parties, of which the Jamaat-e-Islamj Wag
the most organised, concentrated on religion versus state Which
cut no ice in East Pakistan. The Jamaat was mainly a Weg
Pakistani party. There were hardly any political leaders in Ray
Pakistan who were members of this religiously oriented Party,
The only notable Bengali leader who joined the Jamaat-e-Islam;
was Professor Ghulam Azam - a second or third Stringer .
politician. All that the intelligence services could report about hig
political activities was "Professor Ghulam Azam (JI) addressed g
meeting at Dacca on June 2°. No mention was made of how
many attended and what had he to say.
The Bengali Muslims participated in the Pakistan movement
because they wanted to get rid of Hindu domination but having
achieved their goal they were more concerned with their economic
uplift and participation in their own affairs than in the
propagation of Islam as the unifying factor between the two wings.
The theocratic approach of the Jamaat-e-Islami had little appeal
to the liberal and secular minded intellectuals of East Pakistan
which included the highly volatile and militant students
community. the Jamaat-e-Islami in East Pakistan was devoid of
leadership. Maulana Maudoodi’s occasional visits to Dacca did
little to create a dent in the growing Bengali nationalist feeling
amongst the Muslims of East Pakistan. Instead of tackling serious
issues all that the Jamaat-e-Islami could come up with was
protesting against the playing of tombola in a local police hall"! A *
country’s integrity was at stake but Maudoodi could only see an
innocuoys departure from his interpretation of Islamic
injunctions. Air Marshal Nur Khan’s address to his party workers
at Kushtia on October 23, made no impact on the political scene in
East Pakistan.
Another reason why the rightist parties could not make any
headway in East Pakistan was because of a shortage of funds. Not
much could be generated from East Bengal and what was raised
in West Pakistan was confined to meeting the expenses for
campaigning in that wing alone. Khwaja Khairuddin, a cousin of
Khwaja Nazimuddin and a member of the Council Muslim
League, complained that Major General . chief of
the National Security © ajor General Ghulam Umar, chief ©
Abdul Qayyoom K * y , ouncil gave Rupees 40 lakhs to Khan
ul-Amin, Faud Ahmad th Rupees 5 lakhs each to him, Nut
, ad and to the Nizam-e-Islam Party°?,