. . 169
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End)
was a senior Bengali armed forces officer. Brigadier Iskender-ul-
Karim (Bachu) and three Bengali ministers were sent to Dacca
but they too failed to convince Mujib to change his stand. Mujib |
paid no attention to the appointed ministers even though they”
were Bengalis.
General Farman, by now an old hand in the government house
in Dacca,and on the best of terms with Mujib and other Kast
Pakistani leaders, was also unsuccessful in getting Mujib to accept
the president’s invitation to him. On Farman’s insistence Mujib
promised to be in Islamabad on February 19, but when on
February 18, Bhutto again announced his refusal to go to Dacca
saying that there he would be a double hostage, Mujib renegeg®8,
Yahya was getting more and more upset at the turn of events,
The smooth path which he had planned to charter soon after the
election was now strewn with obstacles, "He was feeling let down",
opined Peerzada. To get to know the mood in East Pakistan
Farman was asked to come over and brief the CMLA with regards
to the local situation And if possible bring Mujib-ur-Rahman with
him. |
On February 17, President Yahya dismissed his nominated
civilian cabinet, which in any case was only a show piece, as all
‘Major decisions were being taken by the President, advised by an
inner circle of military officers headed by the PSO,
In the meantime Bhutto, Sensing that he might be by-passed
asked for an interview with the President which was immediately
agreed to. They met on February 19. By now Yahya had begun to
have second thoughts about Mujib’s real intentions. It did not
need a great deal of effort by Bhutto, therefore, of painting Mujib
as the real villain in the piece. He told Yahya that if he gave in to
Mujib West Pakistan would be exploited and there would be no
one to‘look after West Pakistan’s interest. Mujib would become a
dictator and could manipulate things in favour of East Pakistan |
alone.
He exploited Yahya’s desire of sorting the constitutional issues
outside the assembly before the inaugural session for which more |
time was needed. He also convinced the President that_a walk — |
by the Ppp would create a bigger crisis, hinting that he stern
enough strength in West Pakistan to creaté trouble in the we
Wing,
i