274 Tragedy of Errors
ivision of India. He said th
expressing his bitterness Se eon he given up a claim of
"neither the Congress nor the freedom that India had achieve
united India. Accordingly ~ he unity of India®. India’s interioy
would not be complete without the ur Sardar Valebbhai P
‘lator and a well respected politician, Sardar at atel,
ne f the view that "sooner or later we shall again be united ip
: bane diesen to a country’, Sardar Patel was So angry with
the Quaid-e-Azam that he burst out saying ‘The poison has been
removed from the body of India" referring to . Mr Jinnah’s
departure for Karachi on 7 August, 1947. Mrs Sarojni Naidu (the
nightingale of the Deccan), governor of Uttar Pradesh, Was
confident that "sooner or later India will be one again"? Mps
Vijaya Lakshimi Pandit (sister of Jawahar Lal Nehru) never
accepted the break up of India. She like others, did so merely
because according to her "failure to do so would have perpetuated
foreign rule"!®. B.G. Kher, chief minister of Bombay was certain in
his mind that "even if there is a partition of India.it would only be
temporary and would even be a prelude to a closer union"!
Subramanyam Swamy, member of parliament, acknowledges that
the main stream of India wants to undo Pakistan!2.
Keith Callard, author of the book Pakistan - A Political Study
opines that "many Indians feel that the creation of Pakistan was a
beacon eat can be corrected, at least as far as Fast
cerned"!3.
‘Even the Quaid noticed the adverse propaganda being carried
al Renal oe to arouse the feelings of the Bengalis against
98 Maret, i ee his Speech, broadcast by Radio Dacca on
Jinnah asked his Beng i list ii om suet ns ‘
phenomenon’ that the ve tener whether it iit peaiaha i
Indian press’ who “e <——— See een Rad oman of Ye
‘suddenly found with a t aoa the creation of Pakistan.have
just claims of the Musli Sof ee science for what they call the
ms of East Bengal!4,
werenae son aay Panera as emationl a
Wf & 'on when the wounds of the surge!)
were fresh. But what Should be mak f f the
internationally known Indian sch ee f
. ot Cholar, K. Subramanyam, head 0
the Institute of Defence and Strategic Analysis (IDSA), whos
within Tnda and anand Peg, 8%4_ government opinian
"What Indi ates € stated as late as 31 March, Jot
at’andia must realise is the fact that the break up of Pakist2"