Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 165
Awami League’s demand that .
ux of Pakistan’s international ian Pre bear the
mai f Rs. 40 bill - 38 billion out of
a total external debt of Rs ition), however, ‘Was a major factor
which worried Bhutto and the other West Pakistani leaders
The same day the Awami League a roved —
of their own which inter alia stated der fo ast Pek tution |
be re-named Bangladesh; (2) there would be two seats for th
national assembly sessions - In winter Dacca and in eetitiaey
Islamabad; (3) either air headquarters or the naval headquarters
to be shifted to Bangladesh; (4) foreign affairs, defence and
Atrrency be central subjects; (5) there should be two reserve
banks; (6) foreign loan to be paid according to ‘utilisation by the
two wings; (7) Centre to have no taxation power but they could
levy a tax on provinces at the rate of: Bangladesh 27%; Punjab
37%; Sindh 21%; NWFP 7%,
Bhutto in addition to discussing Awami League’s 6 Points
programme during his meeting with Mujib, talked of ‘power
sharing and allocation of portfolios to the PPP”3. He was wanting
to be made the vice president or the foreign minister. If this was
promised to Bhutto he would probably have given in on the
remaining half point as well. Mujib had all the cards stacked in his
favour. He was in no mood to placate his biter rival. Bhutto came
back, his wishes unfulfilled.
Postponement of the National Assembly Session
The date of the inaugural session was initially not a major
Point raised by either Mujib or Bhutto. The Sheikh did mention
February 15, 1971 as his choice. Bhutto, on the other hand was in |
favour of March 23, as that was the day when the Pakistan
resolution was adopted at the Muslim League session at Lahore.
He, Was however, not very stringent on the date and just said
‘March 23, would be good, Sir’.
Yahya, wanted to give some time more to the political eo
to discuss the major issues of the proposed constitution ou 7 4°
the assembly. He, therefore, chose the middle of the two a the
xed March 3, as the date for the inaugural session. In had
Legal Framework Order had not specified the date and he had,
; ria t important
= vet due consideration to the wishes of the two mos uld be
Political leaders he was in no doubt that March 3, wou'
ac 13, the President
“eptable to both of them. And so on February 13,