si Tragedy of Errors
constitution which had been accepted oon eague, This
would have avoided the damaging Pos an Pal YS. One COuly
¥2 dvocating 41s oints formulg
not prevent Mujib from a an
Le ’s manifesto. But he would have to
including that in his party $ Ber
h ssed in the national assembly where he would have t
rre two-third majority. Zulfigar Ali Sate ould NOt have
been able to play the destructive role that he did if the nation,
assembly was to meet under a restored constitution.
| A short electioneering period of say three months, could have
reduced the danger of a breakdown of law and order In either or
both of the two wings. The year-long election campaign cam,
under criticism by almost all who had given some thought on the
development in East Pakistan after the army’s take over. There js
much weight in this reasoning as it gave a considerable amount of
time for the Awami League to whip up sentiments against the
West Pakistani leadership and drum up support in favour of
Sheikh Mujib’s 6 Points. |
Forming a government and framing a constitution is quite
different. The former requires a simple majority the latter a
consensus amongst all federating units. Comments on the legal
frame work order have been given earlier but it bears repetition to
say that a major error was not to specify that a constitution would
need the approval of atleast two thirds of the members of
parliament before it could be passed. This would have ensured the
need for modifying the 6-Points to make it acceptable to the
political leaders in West Pakistan. Leaving the voting procedure to
the national assembly to decide was a major error. The question of
the extent of provincial autonomy should have also been made
clear so that it would not have become the main stumbling block
= ne Stections, This should have been settled before and not
r the elections.
a be.
their intlige nae oe eeeneies ave to blame for being subjective
Shor’ hal whiites 4 eaaiee and putting up to their seniors W ‘
Bhutto. He was ear, "They performed miserably" surmis
Bhutto. hot too far wrong. A detailed study of the
intelligence reports submitted b : “ i thei!
superior headquarters in Isl y. the official concerned to Jent
years of 1970-1971 show S my, pertaining to the turbu os
true situation. The’ a remarkable absence of depicting
€ popularity of the Awami L had not, bee?
assessed correctly. C ‘ x cague na ‘on
results wer y. Vonsequently their predictions of the electi?
esuits were way out. On the contiiahy the Js/am-Pasand groups