374 Tragedy of Errors
kilometres wide, and surrounded on three sides by India was an
easy target for the enemy. A metalled road cut across its base
connecting the Indian towns of Jalpaiguri on the east to Titulya,
Another metalled road ran right down the western border of the
salient. It was an ideal target for an attacker as an »dvance of
merely a few kilometres would bring a fairly large area under his
occupation. Patchagarh salient also produced 4 narrow neck of
land between Nepal and East Pakistan which connected Assam to
the rest of India. If adequate forces were available to Eastern
Command it could pose a threat to India in this sector.
71 Indian Mountain Brigade supported by the Mukti Bahinij
occupied Bajanpur and Baura inside the salient on the night
between 31 October/1 November as it was virtually undefended,
The territory north of the town of Pachagarh was thus lost to
Pakistan well before the main battle started. Having obtained a
launching pad 71 Brigade was given the task to capture Saidpur as
soon as possible. It had four infantry battalions; 5 Grenadier; 7
Maratha Light Infantry; 12 Rajputana Rifles and 21 Rajput
Regiment. The brigade was given two armoured regiments and
the divisional artillery in support. Some 2,000 to 3,000 Mukti
Bahini were carrying their heavy loads on rickshaws, bicycles and
even on their own shoulders. "In addition a horde of local —
inhabitants volunteered to obtain information of enemy |
dispositions’, writes Palit. According to him informers recruited |
by the Indians "would melt away at night and return -next
morning with details of enemy strong points and gun positions”.
The Indians had complete air superiority.
the salen, by an ney betalon tae oe aah |
November against a co —_ oe Same on night 4
Sena athank mpany of 8 Punjab. The attack failed. A
November Tt ee ee In, this time by three battalions on 26
Rijpu Riffes and the Ra onc days for the Grenadiers, “
tana ‘ ,
which fell on 29 November but th Seoul eens Patel
body" of soldi h ’ ey could not overrun the sm
y of ers Who escaped to fight another day. General
a who was commanding 71 Brigade in 1971,
ac ne aain that none of the road blocks reached their position
er € enemy escaped*’. Another 5 days elapsed before the
lans could reach the town of Thakurgaon 8 kilometres to the