Causes for the Military Debacle (Eastern Th eatre) 463
give maximum support to the Mukti Bahini from their own Side of
Lo re AWaml Lonny 2 Chunk of East Pakistan terion
enable the Awami League leadership to establish a prov; ry
Bangladesh government on East Pakistan sail : Ovisional
November 21, GHQ continued to believe that the India ven after
not launched an offensive but that the Mukti Bauka " had
operating in the border areas supported by the fire. owen
provided by the Indians. No deep thrust towards any tide tow
and certainly not towards Dacca was visualised at that stage.
‘The Indian intention was no doub first t
lines. The capture of Dacca was not the initial dastie Leo
always in the back of their minds.
Niazi’s visualisation that his formation in the Jessore Sector in
the West and Comilla and Sylhet Sectors in the east would fall
back on to Dacca was unrealistic. He should have been aware of
the major water obstacles in between them and Dacca, the total
air superiority enjoyed by the enemy and the risk free
environment in which the Mukti Bahini were operating in rear
areas. As it turned out only one depleted battalion came into
Dacca and that too when the ‘game was up’.
Out of the 26,250 men in uniform he had in Dacca’, just before
its fall none were from the fighting arms. They consisted of
/Signallers, maintenance personnel, drivers, supply corps troops,
doctors and office orderlies. Such a motley crowd could not even
hold the Muktis leave along the Indian army which was knocking
at the gates of Dacca on December 16.
Though GHQ is partly to blame for not fulfilling their promise
'o General Niazi he alone should bear the responsibility of a ren
“oncept of operations which left its vitals, unprotected, “ camne
to make adjustments to his original plan, when that became
necessary, to ensure that he is not caught with his pants down.
Distribution of Forces ;
Misappreciation of the Enemy’s, intention - int —
“onclusions. The Central Sector, was very ay ee cross.
though it had no major obstacle which the oy ciiiticaliea As it
The Indians also did not give this sector ac i proach which
finally turned out it was the troops along ‘Bo Thad
Were the first to reach the Mirpur bridge outside