208
Tragedy of Errors
Notwithstanding the fact that the Awami League Negotias
team were equally non-compromising I stage In the negotiat ng
had come on March 22, when with a little give and take on ‘ie
sides a mutually agreed formula could have been found as five =
half points out of the six and had been agreed upon. At that Hay
Yahya, as the chief executive, should have given a firm decig; lage
. . = ; 10n
how to settle the foreign aid and foreign trade issue with in
weakening the Centre too much. Out
Justice Cornelius. did not help in finding a solution to
questions of lifting martial law. He was either not aware of i:
| consequences of his rigid interpretation of a legal vacuum or a
man on the bench, he was only looking at it from a legal poi “i
view. His attitude was not conducive to arriving at a sol ee
acceptable to both the parties. ution
From the statements made by some of the generals clo
President and the presence of the principle staff officers of CHO:
Dacca during the negotiations it appears that the hardliners i .
army were not willing to allow General Yahya to hand . aw
to the Awami League. The President should not have allov ie
hawks to have had their say. sine
The latter group of milita .
conclusion that Mujib could ‘ Stier Come fo Bway
biect jib could be prevented from achieving hi
objective by using the full for ’ ieving his
party. The effect of Loree martial law against him and his
. ect of the proposed military action of 2
1971 under the directions of a loyal and —~ Kagheore
Wis reputation of carrying out ord x a ne acetone
“" ofgthere is not to reason why b tt according to the soldier's code
appreciated. | oo! he: to do and die" was not correctly
His mission was
; to r : .:
he did - fe dldaE matte to ine writ of the government whic!
throw the baby out with the ae that in the process he woul?
tenuous link that existed Soins and that he would deste
ew or after-effect’ of a the two wings, , Politic!
sublie % He ensured that the Paki “ep wae a
Pt ic buildings, that school istan flag flew once again 0!
ndance in office ols and colleges r d. that #
ldier s and factories r eopene”
soldiers were ries returned . hat
Zine aoe no longer humiliated to normal and t
he heard Bhutto say that ‘ on the streets. He felt satisfie!
at but what W@ did St at ‘Thank Allah Pakistan has be”
eater . B see or . ae
ater catastrophe yet to se Th, nea was the rumbling. a
- The bitterness and animosity ha