Military Action as
31 March, 1971 mentioned that the situation in Dacca and other
cities was fast returning to normal. No indepth study of the mood
of the people of East Pakistan after the military action, was made
by the intelligence agencies. No investigative réporting was
carried out.
Military action was launched to restore the authority of the
government and save the country from total disintegration. This
action was mostly directed at the elimination of the rebellious
elements of the East Bengal Regiment and the East Pakistan
Rifles and other 2nd-Line Forces including the civil police, It was
directed against the Awami League supporters and other militant
groups who tried to Tesist ‘the military forces in their attempt to
restore normal SS an ae it ended by the indiscriminate use
| of force against an ethnic majority which proved to be
counterproductive.
Pacification
The military administration in East Pakistan did begin to work
out ways and means of pacifying the Bengalis after their military
action. They tried to repair the material and psychological
damages resulting from the unavoidable action taken by the
armed forces against the anti-state elements. Efforts to win the
loyalties, confidence and willing cooperation of the people were
made. They tried to convince the people that the armed forces
were there to protect the life, property and honour of the people.
Planning began for the restoration of the morale of the civil
administration and for building up confidence among the people.
General Tikka Khan, as governor and martial law
administrator Zone B issued a directive to Lt. Gen. Amir Abdullah
Khan Niazi, the newly arrived commander of Eastern Command,
on the course of action to be followed after the first phase of the
, llitary action was over. The directive dated June 7, 1971 was as
followsy"It is of the utmost importance that no punitive action, is
"esorted to. If it is considered unavoidable it will be sanctioned in
writing by an officer not below the rank of a brigadier". These .
Were General Tikka Khan’s instructions after the initial phase of
the Military action was over. Martial Law authorities and civil
administration were to sit together and work out further steps &
testore normal conditions. Emphasis now was on soft Ae
General amnesty to all displaced persons who had been misled by