452 Tragedy of Errors
Bangladeshes all over the world pee aan prot
Union" shouted Pakistan's acting foreign e
microphone. He was not far wrong. Twenty years later USSR had
broken up into eleven independent states. But his words fell on
deaf ears.
Another draft resolution by Italy and Japan CON Document
$/10451) dated 13 December was tabled in which India and
Pakistan were asked to bring about an end to the confrontation. It
also asked the President of the Security Council to appoint with
the consent of India and Pakistan, a committee of three members
of the Security Council to assist them in their efforts to bring
about normalcy in the area of conflict. Nothing was heard of this
draft resolution again.
The US resolution was put to vote on 13 December. Eleven
countries voted in favour of the resolution, Britain and France
abstained and the Soviet Union and Poland voted against it.
Polish Resolution
The next day, 14 December, Poland circulated another draft
resolution (UN Document S/10453). The Polish draft resolution
stated that (a) In the eastern theatre of conflict the power will be
peacefully transferred to the lawfully elected representatives of
the people (b) Immediately after the beginning of the process of
power transfer, the military actions in all the areas will be ceased
and an initial period of ceasefire will start for a period for 72 hours
(c) after the immediate commencement of the initial period of
ceasefire, the Pakistan armed forces will start withdrawal to the
pre-set locations in the eastern theatre of conflict with a view to
evacuation from the eastern theatre of conflict (d) similarly the
entire West Pakistan civilian personnel and other persons willing
| to return to West Pakistan will be given an opportunity to do s0
under the supervision of the United Nations. Agha Shahi cabled
the text of the draft Polish resolution to Islamabad. President
' Yahya tried to get in touch with his foreign minister and wanted
to direct him to accept the Polish resolution, Bhutto was not
available for quite a while on 14 December. When he was finally
contacted on the telephone he allegedly avoided listening t the
| at 'S voice asking him to agree to the Polish resolution
| y saying "| cannot hear you". One valuable day was wasted.
When the Security Council met agai ember, news
dad coming in to the United Nations that arenas of the
Pakistamarmed foree on 16(Deécenibe? was being arranged. Bhutto