Causes of Alienation ia
language. By not accepting the proposed amendment to the
constitution by the Congress member he gave a_stick to the
Bengali politicians to beat the West Pakistan leadership with.
Professor Ahmad Hasan Dhani, an internationally accepted
authority on the history and archaeology of the subcontinent, a
one time professor in both Rajshahi and Dacca University and the
curator of the Dacca Museum, gave a very valid reason for the
gradual change that took place in the schools and colleges on the
question of the place that Bengali should occupy in Pakistan.
According to him, while the Bengali elite, specially those that
came from Calcutta spoke Urdu, along with a smattering of
Bangla, the rural population in East Bengal, who were now
entering the academic world, did not know Urdu and it is they
who were in the forefront in demanding the acceptance of Bengali
as the second national language. Since they could not read or
write Urdu it is they who insisted that Bangla should be accorded
its rightful place in East Bengal and that Pakistan should be a bi-
lingual state? C. . ion § .
Dr. Aafia Dil, a Bengali lady with a Ph.D in linguistics from
Michigan, USA, while tracing the history of the Bengali language
movement felt that the spirit of independence in Bengal was
expressed in the form of having the freedom to make their mother
tongue the means of all communication. According to her the
demand for Bangla to be made an official language of Pakistan
was initially made by a small group of communists’ When the
communist party was banned the Bengali language movement
entered the Dacca University (Fazlul Haq Hall) from where it
spread far and wide and assumed a volatile configuration.
Mr. Jinnah made a statement in the Constituent Assembly on ,
25 February, 1948 that Pakistan being a Muslim state Urdu would “
be its state language. Quaid-e-Azam was to visit the Dacca
University during his stay in East Bengal in 1948. The students
asked Khwaja Nazimuddin, the then chief minister of East
Bengal, to put forward their demand for Bengali to be accepted as
one of the state languages of Pakistan. But apparently he did not
Convey that to Mr. Jinnah or could not convince him to accept
their demand‘. The students could not have been very happy
When the founder of the nation told them during his speech at J
Dacca on 19 March, 1948 that "Urdu and Urdu alone will be the
lingua franca of Pakistan".