Military Action aa
into a confederation, had been explored With no effect. No amount Z
of persuasion, reasoning or discussion had made Mujib or Bhutto —
change their rigid stand. Having set the country on the path of self
destruction, by initially postponing the national assembly session;
Yahya, now brought it on the edge of a precipice. The point of no
return had arrived.
Yahya called General Tikka Khan and Major General Rao
Farman and asked them to finalise the Operation order for
OPERATION SEARCH LIGHT. The plan prepared earlier by
Farman and Raja was given the final touches. "The killing of a few
thousand would not be too high a price for keeping the country
together. Show them the teeth and they will be quiet", said
Yahya‘,
Objectives of Operation SEARCHLIGHT
The long term objective of Operatioii SEARCHLIGHT were:
(1) to seal-off the borders; (2) to create conditions for selecting a
civilian set up; (3) to regain the administration of the province and
(4) to accommodate the non-radical elements of the elected
representatives into a new political arrangement.
The immediate objective of the military crackdown were,
however, (1) disarming of all Bengali troops. This meant taking
away weapons from the six East Bengal Regiments, the 30,000
personnel of the East Pakistan Rifles and the police. (The reaction
of such an action on the Bengali troops in the mixed units were
hot, however, assessed); (2) arresting of all prominent Awami
League leaders; (3) imposing of martial law strictly; (4) controlling
of all airfields; (5) securing of the Chittagong naval base; (6)
*nsuring the security of all towns; (7) cutting off of East Pakistan
from the rest of the world in terms of communication links and (8)
taking away Radio and TV stations from the clutches ‘ ~
Awami League and placing them again under the control of the
sovernment®,
: . +7: i nd the
on “ major difference between caapaprann Spe that the
© to be carried out in East Pakistan in a cut in a civil war
military action this time was to be carried out 1 had passed
Situation and not in aid of civil power as all authority had pas
; all the objectives
0 the hands of the Awami League. Whereas tion to be
Were to b rly as possible the first ane
fanaa € achieved as early - League of it’s leadership.
"ed out. was to deptive the Awami Leagu