426 Tragedy of Errors
When Niazi was told by the Chief of the General Staff Major
General Gul Hasan on 12 December that the Yellows are coming
from the north and the Whites from the south, he got emboldeneg
and announced his famous last words "tanks over my chest", [p
actual fact it was the Browns (Indians ) which were coming from
all directions. General Gul Hasan had passed this fake message in
Pushto to the operator in Dacca as, according to him, he was told
of this by the Chief of Staff, General Abdul Hamid.
Niazi put up a brave face based on false bravado when he sent
a signal to GHQ on 13 December. He tried to assure them that the
Dacca fortress was well organised and that he was determined to
fight it out (G 1282 dated 131500). He followed that with another
signal eight hours later (G1286 dated 132300) informing them
that he was moving to the built up area for the final battle.
Both GHQ and Eastern Command were playing a game of
bluff at that stage. Neither of them were willing to tell the other
that they had gambled and lost.
On 13 December government house Dacca was strafed by the
Indian air force. Several other targets in Dacca were being
bombed. The Indians had stepped up their psychological warfare
by spreading false rumours using Pakistan army wireless
channels. Dr Malik had come to the conclusion that East Pakistan
would soon become Bangladesh and his own life and that of his
family would not be safe if he stayed in the government house and
so on the very next day he decided to resign and move to the inter
continental hotel which by then had become a neutral zone.
General Yahya finally accepted the defeat of his army in East
| Pakistan and directed the governor and commander Eastern
| Command, in his unclassified signal of 14 December that they
should now take all necessary measures to stop the fighting and
preserve the lives of all armed forces personnel and loyal elements
in Kast Pakistan. He also informed them that his government had
moved the United Nations to urge India to stop hostilities in East
Pakistan forthwith. (G 0013, DTG 141332 EF).
The signal from the President was received at Eastern
Command headquarters at 2 P. m. on 14 December. Air
Commodore Inamul Hag, Rear Admiral Muhammad Sharif and
Major General Farman, who were also present at the
Headquarters at that time, gave their respective interpretations to