|
200 Tragedy of Errors |
= _ however, did not oblige. On yy,
te ee ae ert sent another message to hint
. A . -efused the invitation as he wag | oUt
once again he politely re Mujib Deinp
invited to meet the president and not Mujib.
i ured that Mujib is now willing to meet };
Bh paccheys join the West Pakistani leaders, already i
Dacca, to try and reach an understanding on the broad Principleg
of the new constitution His arrival in Dacca on March 22, Was
ironically commented upon by a leading local newspaper "Like the
despotic Chengiz Khan the arch villain, on the stage of Pakista
politics, has arrived on the scene under the fabulous protection
machineguns to the front and rear’, wrote the daily People in jt
editorial of March 23, 1971, in a reference to the escort provided ‘i
him by the army. Slogans of "Bhutto the killer of democracy"
were raised.
Bhutto was opposed to the formation of two separate
committees to draft the constitution. He felt that such,
committee in West Pakistan would be unmanageable as serious
differences existed between the various political parties in that
wing. He, therefore, felt that instead of putting up a common front
against the Awami League the politicians of West Pakistan would
being quarrelling among themselves. His own party may split on
the question of the constitutional draft. "It would mean two
Pakistans, different measures of autonomy to the two wing
would be difficult to control’ surmised the PPP chairman!®!. He
ae ot not being able to mould other West Pakistam
Balochistan a dicing i manning. He quotes a leader from
could they wt ni at i there could be two committees why
€ committees! *2,
lesson"!53, General Akber. ¢ tea firm. We will teach them 2
_ bastards rule over West Pakistan wre OTL Bet
Bhutto .
between idtvead See € president on March 22. A med
them were at ease in was arranged the same day. Neither
brought Bhutto upto wy each other face to face. The preside!
them that copies of the mr. the presence of Mujib. He als0 tol
two leaders that afte € proclamation would be. delivered to
rnoon.