Causes for the Military Debacle (Eastern Theatre) 461
ore oie deas eeenman Commission do ina
d given clear indications (not ‘cate that
“HQ ha g1 . 3 0 Clear Orders) that territ
ad become less important’, According to the Commice:,. se
; tions) was given by th mumission "advice
not instruc gi Y the chief of the Seneral staff and
e vice chief of the general staff during their last Visit to ns
eastern theatre for the re-deployment of troops"4. a
| Whatever be the truth Genera] Niazi Should h :
‘ ‘ ave al
niltary pobey radically and pulled in his troops 1. meet an
impending Indian offensive in the last week of November.
Operational Strategy
_ In order to fulfil the given political requirement a forward
posture was the correct strategy to follow but totally in violation of
military consideration. To ensure a viable defence the major
‘portion of the force should have been retained for the protection of
ythe linch pin viz the Dacca triangle. Troops ahead of it and in front
of other important political centres Should have been used for
causing attrition on the enemy only. Retrograde manoeuvre
(organised withdrawal) should have been permitted to a ground of
own choosing i.e. the designated fortresses and strong points.
By sticking to an exaggerated forward posture far too long
‘Niazi lost his strategic balance only a few days after the battle was
joined. The enemy succeeded in by-passing the forward defences ;
and by penetrating behind the defensive position forced the
defenders to fight on reverse fronts. This hastened their
| capitulation,
| Concept of Operations
The concept of operations sent by HQ Eastern ae Ge
GHQ in July, 1971 contemplating a forward posture ere How
_ accepted by them but certain offensive tasks vt were Rona
| "emoved the brass hats in General SEE chan at that time
Security environment in and around East Pakis
“an be judged from this fact alone. ——
: as not a fa
The holding of fortresses and ip nocadaty for’ a
| Concept per se. However, the pre-con , tesy were absent. A
Successful defence based on such a par a positions
fortress defence model requires 4 os be well fortified by
Should: (1) be initially strongly he ,ith hardened bunkers; (3)
minefields, barbed wire and trenches W