|
142
Tragedy of Errors
Intelligence reports also referred to the attempt by Awan;
League workers to disturb the meetings of the other Politiog
parties. The Jamaat-e-Islami procession at Chittagong on May 31
1970 was allegedly lathi charged by orders of the loca}
superintendent police*”. The Pakistan Democratic Party Meeting
at Habibgang on May 30, was disturbed by students belonging {,
the Pro-Mujib East Pakistan Students League.
Mujib and his supporters did not openly preach secession
because if he had done so there would have been a sizeable
opposition even in East Pakistan at that time to the break up of
Pakistan. Whenever the people used to ask him whether he was
for the separation of the two wings Mujib, who used to carry the
Holy Quran with him, used to put his hands on the Holy Book
and say "I do not want separation’, There were many saner
elements in the eastern wing who were on the extreme right of |
the political spectrum. They certainly would not have voted for the
Awami League if total independence was their goal. But while |
saying that "Pakistan has come to stay and there is no force which
can destroy it’, Mujib had dismemberment at the back of his
~ mind. He was aware that by gradually building up emotions
against West Pakistan he could bring the Bengalis to a pitch when
the people themselves would clamour for a complete break from
their so-called exploiters. Khondkar described Mujib. as a
Frankenstein which West Pakistan had helped to build by their
wrong policies.
Mujib is reported to have said after the creation of Bangladesh
that "he had been working for a separate state of Bangladesh since
1968. In fact the struggle for independence according to him began
from 1948"44,
Mujib got a free hand in East Pakistan also because the PPP
(the strongest political opponent of the Awami League) made no
effort to counter his propaganda. None of the PPP stalwarts
visited Fast Bengal during the election campaign, Bhutto made no
nat eriticlse or See eee mas er appearance, 7° a
While rejecting 6 Points steadily ih ek a r perm
into his campai ely Bhutto did not drag this issu
iis campaign. He concentrated instead on the economic
exploitation of the capitalists j k
about the removal rs aS in West Pakistan but did not tal
In fact he "showed hs interser aes between the two wing>:
——— est in East Pakistan at all"4, According .
|
i