Causes for the Military Debacle (Eastern Theatre) 465
Gen. Niazi used up the few rege
pale was joined by raising adhoe divising P89 before the main
were no reserves at the divisional oy corps level] ust because there
Narsingdi which continued for 18 hours Gia the heli-landing at
para drop at Tangail which Sealed the fate of Ee ctallenged. The
could have been tackled Successfully if adeau astern Command
available around Dacca. In spite of the fact ny reserves were
was there to welcome and give Protection to the ee Siddiqui
Counter Insurgency
Since the central leadership had fail ™
settlement with the Awami League a" "hat to a political
indiscriminately to quell the Uprising, the insttgeney s i
Pakistan had turned into an Open revolt against this Bek
army. Although Eastern Command had been able to restore Sn
writ of the government by the middle of June and almost all
border outposts were once again in friendly hands, The eight
_ months long counter-insurgency Operations had caused a great
deal of attrition. Troops were tired of continuously being
employed on internal Security duties, They were losing their will
to fight as it became more apparent that it was a futile war, in a
distant land, cut off from the home base and against one’s own
citizens.
Subversion
Subversive activity on a large scale in rear areas by a fifth
column can cause the defeat of even the best equipped and best
tained army. The Chindits played havoc with the Japanese forces
in Burma in World War II. The Free French created a lot of
Problems for the German occupation troops in F Jie 1944,
The communists insurgents caused considerable casualties to =
British in Malaya. The Viet Cong humbled a super-power scien
60s. The Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka pushed back the 80,000 In 7
Peace Keeping Force the freedom fighters in Afghanistan bough
the Soviet th ’ their knees and the Kashmir Intifada 1s
keepin socal in Indian Held Kashmir.
§ 500,000 Indian troops at bay in —
The Pakistan army in East Pakistan, during we mais by
Var of 1971, had not ntend with subversive activities
uh 1, had not only to co body of well-trained army
and of guerrillas but by a large ‘alin of their hand as they
ytsonnel who knew the areas like the ks whole populace had
re °perating in their own country.