« 438 Tragedy of Errors
Eastern Theatre ‘
in East Pakistan was virtually non-
‘The Pakistan Lana faced an aircraft carrier supported by
existent. Four gu he Indian navy in the Bay of
destroyers, and submarines of the le niittle boy Davi
Bengal. It was even more adverse a situation cohen y David
facing Goliath the giant. The lone destroyer ee Nii
used to be docked in Chittagong had sailed for Karachi on 3
August, 1992.
Rear Admiral Muhammad Sharif, Flag Officer commanding
Fast Pakistan (FOCEP), assumed command of the naval
establishment in the eastern wing on 9 June, 1971. His
headquarters was at Dacca. His total naval strength consisted of
eight Chinese coasters, four converted gun boats and two landing
crafts (LCTs). Eventually with local assistance he managed to
increase his force to 24 converted boats and 20 coasters. With this
in hand he had to defend East Pakistan against any external or
internal threat.
FOCEP’s tasks in East Pakistan were numerous. They
included: patrolling of sea and riverine routes to meet external
and internal threats; assist the army in amphibious operations
and provide naval gunfire support when needed; move troops and
stores by sea or by river; ground defence of naval installations and
vital port facilities; keeping ports of Chittagong and Chalna
functioning; ensuring safe movement for all riverine traffic
throughout East Pakistan and advising Eastern Command and
the martial law headquarters on all matters pertaining to inland
water transport (IWT) and maritime problems. The tasks were,
quite obviously, much beyond FOCEP’s capabilities which was
pointed out to the higher naval authorities by Admiral Sharif.
Throughout the period from June to late November FOCEP
continued to patrol most of the waterways, clearing them of
limpet mines which were being laid by the Mukti Bahini frogmen.
Naval gun boats also escorted river convoys carrying troops;
ammunition and supplies. Anti-smuggling operations to prevent
weapons being smuggled from India, Hong Kong and Singapore
were also carried out. From June onwards and right upto
November the naval gun boats cargied out combined operations
with the army to clear various areas of armed rebels.
Mukti Bahini armed with rifles, automatic weapons, 2 inch
mortars, stenguns and grenade-launchers operated, from the