18
those who had witnessed the changing scenes from close quartey,
to put down, for the sake of prosperity, the true picture.
As one who was not directly involved but who had seen even},
unfolding themselves by being physically present In East Pakistay
just before the volcano erupted, | consider myself in a betta,
position to record the happenings in a detached and objectiy,
manner.
The author cannot claim in this exposition to have solved ajj
the mysteries. Many questions have remained unanswered, many
issues have not been dealt with in all their manifestations. It jg
hoped that others would carry forward the research and add to
the archives further chapters of the ‘last days of a United
Pakistan’.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to General Mirza Aslam Beg, the former chief of
army staff (COAS) of the Pakistan army who encouraged me to
write about the East Pakistan crisis. His successor, the late
General Asif Nawaz, was gracious enough to permit me to contact
some branches at General Headquarters for obtaining unclassified
material pertaining to the Indo-Pakistan War of December, 1971.
My thanks are due to Major General Mian Ahmad Mushtaq
Tariq, director general of combat development at GHQ, who
provided me with all the facilities needed to carry out my research
in a very comfortable environment. It was very considerate of the
Late Lieutenant General S. G. M. M. Peerzada, who was the
principal staff officer to President Yahya, to have agreed to talk to
“ me for long hours over several sittings, in spite of his failing
health, about General Yahya’s policies during the East Pakistan
Crisis. Major Generals M. Rahim Khan, Rao Farman Ali Khan,
Khadim Hussain Raja, Nazar Hussain Shah, Qazi Abdul Majeed,
Ghulam Umar and Jahanzeb Arbab were all very helpful in giving
their individual accounts and their perceptions of the
developments in East Pakistan. Former Brigadier Bagqir Siddiqui,
COS Eastern Command, gave his side of the story Which proved
ey eee Fe nner Commander Eastern Command Lieutenant
| Bie on ae : Niazi and Lieutenant General Gul Hasan Khan,
oes : of the general staff, excused themselves from being
interviewed.
Sanihies da Yaqub Khan and General Tikka Khan spared theif
valuable time to recount the military situation j East Paki in
1970-71, Mr. Agha Shahi, wh an Egy Pasunee
na Shahi, who. was Pakistan’s permanent
|