Military Act ion 249
bdur Rab aroused the emotions of th ;
a asked them to treat the West Pakistes pa pos army
alien forces of aggression and to eliminate such force 15 oes i. |
them to cooperate with the brave freedom fighters s ; e a
them in dealing with the non-Bengali ghettos ie B . “ip |
Chittagong, Saidpur and Mirpur/Muhammadpur which rine
Bihari loralities im Dacea. The Swadhin Bangla Kandnc Chen,
Sangram Parishad (Central Students Action Coinmittes. of |
independent Bangladesh) was formed to implement all decisions |
taken by the radical students! "Radical groups in the grounds of |
the Dacca University started training students in the use of fire |
arms" reported Paul Martin!?. |
It is not surprising, therefore, that the Dacca University was,
made the first target of the military action on the night between
25/26 March.
Dacca University had several hostels called halls, Jinnah Hall
was the residence of junior lecturers and all in-house-teachers, |
Jagannath Hall accommodated the Hindu students; Iqbal Hall
was the centre piece of all political activity Rogaya Hall was meant
for all girl students. Jagannath Hall was barricaded. It was
surrounded by barbed wire and within its perimeter ‘Mukti
Jogda’ (freedom fighters) received their training using dummy
and service rifles. The University area harboured most of the |
armed dissidents and had become a stronghold of the rebellious |
students, professors and other intellectuals.
18 Punjab Regiment, part of 57 Infantry Brigade, was given the
task to clear the university of all rebellious elements. It i“
difficult task as it involved fighting in a built up nos -
battalion was, therefore, given the support of tanks and ant ay
'n the hope that the rumbling of tanks and the presence 0 tie
“sat the university would compel the students to OT Ri ceata
Weapons and surrender. But that was not to be. fire, mortar
military Operation had to be launched. Machine an had to come
shells and recoilless rifles, had to be used. rs secessionists,
arn and to put the fear oO as "Rach room of the
Joo,» Tounds screeched over thet hed out. Iqbal Hall and
“8annath Hall had to be individually flus d later searched for
feay 4 Hall were also fired upon an
"minating evidence.