Causes of Alienation a
intelligentsia were more at home with Bengali Hi , /,
Bengal than their fellow countrymen in Win Pie i -
not peculiar to Bengalis alone. Linguistic affinity, sometimes,
transgresses national boundaries but only to the extent of cultural
exchanges. It does not necessarily result in disowning one’s own
country. I have known many Punjabis abroad who enjoyed the
company of Sikhs more than the company of Urdu speaking co-
citizens because of the attraction of Sharing jokes in their own
language.
A Sindhi Hindu businessman in Thailand was quite happy
when he learnt that Mr. Muhammad Khan Junejo had been made
the prime minister merely because he felt proud that a Sindhi was.
once again the chief executive of a country more so because none
so far had reached that position in his own homeland of India.
These are momentary expressions of happiness which have now
bearing on the serious aspects of national unity.
_- ulfigar Ali Bhutto (ZAB), chairman of the Pakistan People’s
_ Party (PPP), was quite conscious of the fact that Pakistan was
culturally divided. He felt that in Pakistan "unity was not flowing
from the fountain head of a single nationality"®, He, however, also
believed that cultural unity was wrongly being forced on the
different provinces of Pakistan. He writes that "there is a
fundamental difference between unity willingly forged by a people
and that forcibly imposed"2’. The Bengalis had a distinct culture of
their own. It was, according to Hafeez Malik, a Pakistani professor
at Villanova University, USA, "a particular brand of Islamic
Bengali culture"*® which they were determined to preserve, and
rightly so. Any attempt to unify the culture of the two people
would have amounted to forcible imposition of an ‘alien’ way of
life on the local Bengali Muslim. | |
A remark by a Bengali attendant at a rest house in Dhaka
aptly reflects the misunderstanding of the cultural life in East
Pakistan. While watching the TV in Dhaka during my visit to that
city in 1992 I saw and heard the maghrab azan (call for evening
prayer) being telecast on the national hookup. Being Shab-e-Barat
the significance of that day was being explained in Bengali. I was
pleasantly surprised and asked the attendant whether the azan
was telecast every day just before prayer timings. He replied with
a tinge of bitterness. Ab apko malum hua ki hambhi Musalman
hain, Hamko Hindu samaj kar mar dia" (you have now come to
|