288 Tragedy of Errors
therefore, deserved all help. Bijay Singh Nahav, chief ministe; of
West Bengal, was prepared to recognise Bangladesh even jf his
own central government did not yet feel it prudent to do sof”, 1
India played a dual role. On the one hand they encourageg
* gecession and on the other they build up world opinion in favour |
of a military involvement by India to bring normalcy in Eagt. .
Pakistan. By the end of May Indian leadership came to the
conclusion that the external powers would. be only peripheral
factors in East Pakistan,,and would also{ not) place any serious
obstacle in the way of direct Indian intervention if this should
become necessary”.
| Leo Rose harps on the theme that India’s assistance to the
Awami League was meant to force Islamabad to come to a political
‘solution. This could be true as Sheikh Mujib’s 6-Points formula
suited India. It would have made the eastern wing dependent on
India and away from Pakistan. But when things did not turn out
~ her Ways she eventually chose a military solution. By the end of
May Néw Delhi had come to the conclusion that without an
Indian’contribution a satisfactory solution to the civil war in East
Pakistan was not possible”. Ea
Bellicose Statements
Joya Prakash Narayan, also openly supported the secessionist
movement. He was willing to call his own people unworthy of the
salt they ate on Indian soil if they were not prepared to go to war
in support of Bangladesh. According to him “defeat for Bangladesh
would be defeat for India”. K. Subramanyam, the hawkish
bureaucrat turned academician, called the year 1971 as a year
which saw "the greatest genocide of the modern era in Bangladesh
and an unparalleled hospitality by India of millions of (Bengali)
refugees"”!. Indigenous newspapers argued for immediate
intervention by India.
. It is true that thousands of people were killed including
innocent men, women and children by both Bengali militants and
by the law enforcing agencies. This fact cannot be denied but
where Subramanyam becomes totally biassed is when he calls the
military action ‘the greatest genocide of the modern era’. How
could he forget the extermination of the Jews in the gas chambers
‘in Nazi Germany. The killing of hundreds of thousands of civilians
at Hiroshima and Nagasaki in a matter of moments by the United