Indo-Pakis
ndo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 413
d as all troops were ah
yndefende ahead of j
of, A company of infantry alongwith bs an had now been cut
mpany and some maintenance eopl nts of q commando
comp People could not h
Chandpur. ave defended
The enemy was having a field day picki
Division deployed on a wide front to i 68 Cae remnants of 39
they were without any artillery support, Th ee moves as
operating in the rear helped the Indians i sf ukti Bahini
isolated troops. Pping up the
By 6 December Hajiganj was secured the Tua
remnants of the division still at Lalhaor Change with the
directly threatened. Genera] Rahim decided to pata
Chandpur. The evacuation started on 6/7 December but it was a
slow process as the rearward movement had to be done across the |
_ mighty Meghna. No bridge existed to enable a quick withdrawal. ,
| General Rahim had to wait till sufficient naval craft and ferries
_ were assembled. All moves had to be done by night as enemy air
would not permit any day light traffic on the river!
39 (Adhoc) Divisional headquarters and all the 700 personnel
including the Razakars and West Pakistan police left Chandpur on
8/9 December and reached Narayanganj on the west bank of the
Meghna, a few kilometres southeast of Dacca. General Rahim and
those with him in the gunboat and landing craft, were the last to
leave Chandpur. By the time they neared Narayanganj ne sun
was shining brightly. The two boats got a direct hit apie
‘hemy aircraft. General Rahim was wounded and evacuate L
hospital. All other members of his divisional cnet y excep
forthe ADC and one staff officer were killed or wounde h 4 b
‘ j a een
89 (Adhoc) Divisional Headquarters, er Foveuiber.
Pocished on 20 November, ceased to exis + cll beaistins
lements of 53 and 117 Brigades were stil! a of them tried to
Nien enemy’s ground and air attacks. and Lal Mai, others
‘nk up with the battalion in Comilla a d in breaking out of
attempted - A few succeeded In Mai
th Pted to reach Chandpur. Laksham and Lal Mal
© €hemy cordon. Some troops at the time elements of 23
otinued to hold on till 16 December. OY ae jast water obstacle
er Division succeeded in rane Dacca. The war in East
patkha river) and reach within ts at Singh the privilege of
wantan Was over denying General 5a8
8g Niazi to give up the fight.