122
Tragedy of Errors
against it as, according to him, a civilian government would not he
able to handle the situation. The ISI chief felt that a military take
over was necessary. General "Yahya interposed and said “how
about imposing martial law in East Pakistan?’ General Wasiuddin
was against imposing of martial law in East Pakistan as it Would
_mean that the army was discriminating against East Pakistan,
Finally Yahya made up his mind "The army will have to take
over" said Yahya to his PSOs. "How will you tackle Ayub" querieg
Wasiuddin "using troops if necessary replied the General",
The final decision to assume power was taken on the night
between 22/23 March, 1969".
The letter from President Ayub to General Yahya asking him
to assume power could not have come as a surprise to Yahya as a
few days earlier he had come to know about the coming events,
He was, therefore, mentally prepared. He gave a ’warning’ to his
adjutant general, and is reported to have said "Peeroo. You will
come with me in case I am called upon for some extra curricular
activities. So you start thinking about it". General Peerzada says
that he was taken aback. When Major General Gul Hasan Khan,
who was the chief of the general staff, came to know about this he
reportedly was angry for being passed over, as according to
Peerzada, he thought it was his right to have been picked up as
the principal staff officer when Yahya became president. Since
- then the two (Peerzada and Gul Hasan) remained at logger heads.
Major General Rao Farman Ali Khan, major general political
affairs with the East Pakistan government said that when Major
General Gul Hasan, visited Dacca on April 10, 1969 he told him
that “Yahya was not taking over I.(Gul Hasan) forced him to do
/8o". Farman recalled that Gul Hasan went on to quote the full
conversation between Ayub and Yahya. Ayub is reported to have
told Yahya that the imposition of martial law was the only
solution left to get over the political crisis Yahya agreed but said
ccard moo ee oat law but the army will control it" Ayub
Sita ouse od Lee and powerless as he had become he
p Is fate. "I understand Yahya what you meal
prepare my speech and the papers for my handing over" is what
Ayub told Yahya, confided Gul Hasan to Farman!6 ns
man!®,