186 Tragedy of Errors
- General Yahya as his vice chief of
He first served Wnrmer was the CGS. Yahya thought hin
be “a officer of a very high calibre with unbiassed views". He was
sess an “exceptionally wide knowledge of his
ateniten ye deep thinker". In 1967 General Yahya, who jy
Pow had become commander-in-chief, always ‘found his advigg
balanced and sensible and rated Yaqub as “highly intelligent ang
clear-headed with an analytical mind which could assess intricate
problems correctly". But yet the same reporting officer two years
| later demoted Lieutenant General Yaqub Khan for not handling a
critical situation in East Pakistan to his satisfaction. Perhaps this
was due to the trait noticed by Lieutenant General Bakhtiar Rana
who in 1963, remarked that Sahibzada Yaqub has a "trend of
mind, behaviour and liking which is more on the staff side than
_/ command”.
It was Yaqub’s moral strength, however, which enabled him to
resign rather than carry out orders of his superiors contrary to his
belief.
To prevent the volatile situation in East Pakistan from going
completely out of hand Farman. was sent to Rawalpindi on March
5. He briefed the CMLA Headquarters about the fact that if no
political solution is found within the shortest possible time East
Pakistan would blow up in flames.
Yahya then realised that he had to go and talk to Mujib and try
to pacify him and make him more accommodative. He spoke t0
Mujib on the telephone on March 6, 1971 and told him “not
take any hasty decision as he will be coming to Dacca shortly and
will discuss details with him"!5!, Belatedly and as a reaction to the
ee in Kast Pakistan Yahya announced March 25, as the fresh
or the national assembly session.
pice ee resorted " - parc 26, (the date on which "alin
burning, looting anitugehi ‘ the. government) there bis s “ay
Bengalis. Some’ Mivee rickbatting and ae aeAOD oak
Pakistanis Kat put the figure of Biharis and
ar ; ed by Awami League militants as 100,000
| including 15,000 at Santahar, 10 000 at Chi d 2,000 2
| Mymensing!33, Thej; sho ae itlagong uae thei!
| | women folk tak PS Were gutted, their houses looted, ie
| “4 pv away and raped and bodies mutilated. A W»°
community had gone heser mutila oe
erk.)The pent up. feelings of yirule”