Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) M41
Awami League leaders did not hold their punches when
attacking the West Pakistani leadership and those Bengalis who
were not seeing eye to eye with them. At Hazari Bagh, on March
11, Mujib promised to eliminate the political Mir Jafers (a word
used for traitors) and parasites from the sacred soil of Bengal. His
trusted Lieutenant Tajuddin continued to spit fire "we will wipe ~
out the exploiters and the dacoits. History of Pakistan is a history
of conspiracy of continuous oppression"®® said the Awami League
secretary general.
There were, of course, many politicians in East Pakistan who
were against Mujib and his 6-Points formula. Nur-ul-Amin and
Mahmood Ali continued to address meetings also and drew
reasonable crowds. They criticised secularism, socialism and
communism. The intelligence agencies were wrongly impressed
by the size of the audience at such meetings and gave the
impression to their higher authorities that there was a gradual
assertion of rightist forces in East Pakistan, which was not true,
The so-called alliance of Islam-pasand parties was being wrongly
interpreted in intelligence circles as a "useful development”.
Fazlul Quader Choudhry of the Pakistan Muslim League
(Quader Group) was also critical of the Awami League’s demand
for full regional autonomy and was against slogans of ‘Joy
Bangla’. But his voice did not carry very far and got lost in the
thunder of pro-Awami League demonstrators at his meetings. So
did the voice of Ata-ur-Rahman of the National Pakistan League
who criticised Mujib for his dictatorial role.
The Awami League, which even before the election campaign
had begun to show its muscle, became a fascist. and militant
organisation which was not prepared to brook any rival. It was
determined to crush by force any opposition to its formula for total
regional autonomy. Consequently no other political party was ~
allowed to hold public meetings in East Pakistan. The Jamaat-e-
Islami (JI) meeting being held at Paltan Maidan, Dacca, on
January 18, 1970 was disturbed and not allowed to continue. Four
days later its offices were raided and all its literature destroyed.
Similarly the meetings of the Pakistan Democratic Party were
disrupted on February 1, 1970 and two of its newspapers the
Bunyad and Sangram were gutted‘! by the Awami League
workers,