Military Action aa
The troops available to General Tikka Khan to carry out this
stupendous task were 14 Infantry Division ents
. g of four
‘nfantty brigades, an armoured regiment, five artillery regiments
two mortar batteries, one light anti-aircraft battery one
commando battalion; The six East Bengal Regiments and the |
16,000 strong East Pakistan Rifles were to be disarmed hence
would not be part of the force required to re-instate the writ of the
Centre. In fact as events eventually turned out they joined the
rebels. In all, therefore, General Tikka had about 12,000 men in |
uniform from West Pakistan and 13 battalions of Mujahids and
Razakars against over 100,000armed Bengalis and 60 million |
volatile local population spread over 55,000 Square miles of |
isolated territory cut up by non negotiable rivers and streams.
(Map 3 gives the deployment of 14 Infantry Division immediately
prior to the military action). |
Realising that the troops in East Pakistan were not enough to
deal with a military uprising some additional troops began to be
sent to East Pakistan. Although one brigade of two battalions was
earmarked to boost up 14 Infantry Division only one battalion
reached Dacca before March 25°.
The Crackdown
The military crackdown began at 1 a.m. on the night between
25 and 26 March 1971. The next day Major Zia-ur-Rahman’s voice
on the radio proclaimed East Pakistan as People’s Republic of
Bangladesh. "Today Bangladesh is a sovereign and independent
state’ said a voice from a clandestine radio!®. General Yahya Khan
on arrival at Karachi let out his anger and frustration by
outlawing the Awami League, banning all political parties,
imposing complete press censorship and denouncing Mujib’s
action as an act of treason. (Ironically te did not put his signature
on the findings of the special tribunal headed by Brigadier
Rahimuddin Khan who found Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman guilty of
treason and sentenced him to death in August, 1971)!!.
Within 15 minutes of OPERATION SEARCHLIGHT Sheikh
Mujib-ur-Rahman was arrested from his Dhonmandi jeep
> Swift action headed by Major Bilal under the overall command o
Ut, Col. Z. A. Khan. The double storey building on Road 32 was 8
ple structure with a very small courtyard in front. Not vhich
effort was needed to surround it. The commando company, W