146
Tragedy of Errors
from the election contest. By the time the news was contraqj,
the elections were over and Mahmood Ali’s cousin, an Ava
Leaguer won hands down. : |
President Yahya and the Martial law authorities had giy,
complete freedom to the political leaders to say what they lik
during their election campaigning. He did appear to adopt a gq
attitude towards Mujib so as not to hinder the political proces.
This, however, made Mujib bolder and more assertive and },:
slowly converted the elections into a referendum for his 6 Points \
The LFO was disregarded, loud statements which clearly violate \
its contents were allowed to be made. The military junta was not _
inclined to take any action which might give an impression to the
outside world that they were interfering in the election campaign,
A noble thought indeed. In well established democracies and
where the territorial integrity of the country is not threatened
from within, such complete freedom would be considered
normal. ERutever, in newly emerged states, where national
cohesion is yet to take place, certain curbs are absolutely
necessary to maintain the solidarity of a country.
Governor Vice Admiral S. M. Ahsan and Commander Eastern
Command, Lieutenant General Sahibzada Yaqub Khan were not
strong enough nor were they directed specifically to prevent Mujib
from openly advocating his 6-Points formula which would at best
have led to a confederation between the two wings and at worst
total separation.
"No instructions were received from CMLA Headquarters to
prevent Mujib from speaking against Pakistan"®, said Major
General Khadim Hussein Raja, General Officer Commanding 4
Infantry Division sand one who was directly involved in martial
law duties. Even if instructions were given to the military
authorities in East Pakistan, they did not have the strength no!
the support of the Bengalis to stop Mujib from obtaining his
pound of flesh, by force if pseaeany:
General Raja Tintaned that tl + tially, was
wut thy Gereagon Ce z " . the Awami League, initia ys si
future constitution of P, —_ i e 6 - Points formula for
with President Y hk . akistan. Mujib had a tacit understandnt
fact not meani me Sout making fiery speeches in public butt |
t meaning to insist on his 6 - Points. "Yahya swallowed th _
theme" said Raja. But : “Yahya swalloy ;
hetould not ea hacen having made his promise to his vo™
E go back on what he had heen saying. |
|
|