262 Tragedy of Errors
: the ‘devotees’ of Sheikh My:
play the atrocities ee genocide. Some amongst ther
and still call the es Se of Pakistan to apologise publically for
would like the a by the army during their attempt ty
the atrocities committed by
crush the insurgency.
Reaction in West Pakistan
. istan were torn between loyal
Bengali —_— ne oul of Bengali nationalism, By a
Se they nana at their posts though their hearts were wit},
| their kith and kin in East Pakistan. f th
so ul Hafeez, director general of the Bangladesh
Peas Ae al and Strategic Studies (BIISS), Dhaka,
recalled how he (then only a major) and five to six other Bengal
officers in Sialkot gathered together to hear the electrifying’
speech of Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman on March 7. Lieutenant
Ahmad-ul-Hagq, a signal’s officer, had heard the speech on some
foreign radio and had taped it, as it had been suppressed by the
government controlled electronic media. Hafeez described Sheikh
Mujib’s outbursts as ‘classic’ and "spell binding". He felt a spark
kindle in his heart.
But then came the March 25, military action. Hafeez got the
news from the next day’s newspapers and was "shocked". He rang
up his Bengali friends and switched on the radio to get more
information. When he heard the President’s announcement about
| the arrest of Bangabandhu the banning of the Awami League and
_ Stricter application of martial law, he said that he was dazed for a
few minutes. When he recovered he went out of the house and
| walked for hours alone contemplating as to what should he do.
, . The Bengali officers gathered at his house next day. They
~~ planned to defect. They decided to take 3 East Bengal Regiment
which was stationed in Sialkot, a few miles from the Indian
border, to Marala headworks right on the frontier betwee?
Pakistan and Indian Held Kashmir (IHK). The unit could then
tea $ Bea bees However, Yefore their pla
Pakistani jy ast Bengal was moved out to Kharian. Probably
/. telligence agencies had come to know of the!
ae ce Cn Tahir was doing a senior tactical course at .
; 'y Senoo’ at Quetta when he heard about the military ©"
own. He too like Brigadier Hafeez was stunned and walked #0"