366
Tragedy of Errors
that was the toughest, 202 Brigade was to work its way eastward
capturing Hilli, Palasbari and Goraghat thus linking itself with
the downward thrust of 71 Brigade ex 6 Infantry Division. 66 ang
340 Brigade were to contain Dinajpur and act as reserves. The
plan was based on breaking through the Pakistani defences on a
narrow front so as to turn the defences and get to their rear as
soon as possible with a view to trapping then and not allowing the
Pakistani forces to fall back to their well prepared and well
stocked defensive position at Bogra. Though it took much longer
than they had planned they did succeed in disintegrating 16
Division before its troops could fall back to their designated
fortress of Bogra.
‘The Battle Begins
8 Guards Battalion of 202 Brigade launched a frontal assault
against Hilli at 0100 hours on 24 November. The attack was
preceded by intermittent artillery fire concentrations for over
seven hours, which was a sheer waste of ammunition as it
achieved precious little. The Indian artillery commander failed to
point out to his supported infantry of the futility of such a long
preparatory bombardment against well dug in positions. So
instead of a walk-over the attackers, in spite of their numerical
ea Si got entangled in a web. C Company of 4 Frontier
=i inom bala imal the main brunt of the attack held on
aa b i. ee - m1 vo erat nent battalion had to put in two
were able to vernal Ce - i ap pia ee ee
That too only for a short while. area ff ere oars mre
9
Second Lieutenant Salim was undeterred by the presence of
ne vei around him. His personal bravery in the thee of the
rs encouraged his men to get out of thei h d
| push the Indians back in a hand feademan. 4 a schaaetines
fall unon th in a hand to hand fight. Havildar Isaf Khan
aca . the enemy with his section and charged those who had
“ay . ice Gen He succeeded in driving the enemy
umbered for which action he was
awarded the Tamgha-i-Jurat. A third attack on the same platoon
Md a fresh company was again beaten back. By now it was day
nln hemi ee decided not to disturb the hornet’s nest any
| and settled down to lick its wounds. 8 Guards had lost 139
men including 8 officers and 4 JCOs in this attack.