|
48
Tragedy of Errors
The Bengali language was formed as an ee ate betwee)
Sanskirt and Pali. In the distant past the inhabitants o thie land of
Bengal spoke their own dialect which had soe eer ms the
two ancient languages. As Islam spread ovel - 4 eon ersian
and Urdu began to be spoken‘amongst the urban elite. Bangla
however remained the means of conversation in the rural areas, j;
was nurtured and nourished over the years by extremely talented
Bengali scholars and became, without doubt, a rich and beautify
language.
A.M. K. Maswani, goes to great length to prove that Urdu was
the language of the Muslims of Bengal earlier in the century and
that modern Bengali was introduced by the Hindus. Colonel Syeq
Faroog Rahman, president of the Freedom Party of Bangladesh,
maintains that the Bengali script was introduced by Ram Nivas
Banerjee, principal of Hindu College Benaras (India) in 1862!
Raunaq Jahan, the well known analyst of South Asian Affairs,
accepts that the "secular renaissance of Bengali started in the 19th
and 20th century due to the contribution of Hindu writers?’
Azizur Rahman Mullick, a one time ambassador of Bangladesh to
India, also writes in his Ph.D thesis on the ‘British educational
policy for the Muslims of Bengal’ that the court language of
Bengal was Persian in the days of the Moghuls.
It is also true that in all the All India Muslim League sessions
held since its inception in 1905 the representatives from Bengal
spoke in English or Urdu. None spoke in Bengali. However, this
_ does not take away the fact that the Bengalis were very proud of
~ their language and literature be it from a Muslim or a Hindu pen.
Written Bangla remained the domain of Hindu Bengalis which
reached its heights because of the writings of Sarat Chander
Chatterjee, Bankin Chander Banerjee and the legendary Rabinder
ath Tagore. These luminaries on the cultural stage of Beng
;) Projected mainly Hindu emotions and secular feelings which
‘unwittingly permeated into Muslim minds in Bengal.
in February, 1948 (less than a year after the creation of
Pakistan) Mr. Dhirendranath Dutt, a Hindu member of the East
Bengal Congress Party, moved an amendment to the proposed
anne eee that Bengali should also be made the official
guage 0 akistan. Instead of giving the proposal some cod!
consideration Liagat Ali Khan, the prime minister + tan
er of Pakista!
opposed the motion saying that Urdu was the cultural heritage 4
the Muslims of India and hence should be the only nation#!