Naval and Air Operations 439
panks of the rivers oe ee and often ambushed naval gun |
ts and troop convoys. In order to ensure a safe |
hoa n waterways over 80 naval oper, Passage for own
ae 1 June and 21 November The waHons were carried out
be Bahini strongholds bombard wnt opened: destruction of |
wukti B seit titea Ment of areas held by Bengali
webelS; preventing - ooting and plundering of villages by anti-state
jlements; ambushing miscreants operating on Naukahs (count
boats); carrying of troops to comb Mukti Bahini concentration |
‘reas; evacuation and clearing under-water mines},
When the all-out-war broke out on 3 December i |
allocated his gun-boats to the western, central and sac cocnes
to cater for the needs of the local divisions in each area. The
Indian air force, however, destroyed a large number of them as
the war progressed. For the Indian Pilots it was a duck shoot
whith the added advantage that the duck could not fly,
After the withdrawal of the remnants of 39 (Adhoc) Division to
Dacca on the night of 8/9 December Admiral Sharif became
despondent. His personal, optimistically assessed, situation on
that day in reference to the Pakistan army was that their heroic
effort may not last more than a week, This was conveyed to the
naval C-in-C by FOCEP at 6 p.m. on 9 December”. The war ended
on 16 December exactly after 7 days as visualised.
Admiral Sharif also succeeded in getting one of his gun boats
out of Chittagong immediately after the surrender. PNS
RAJSHAHI managed to go through the minefield and LAE
int nn Ag i
» one PIA official and 37 sailors
Penang (Malaysia) safely.
Air Operations (Eastern Theatre) —
" = Commodore, Inamul Haq, a he Sistan en base
% © over as Air Officer Comman ry Commodore Masood
Mien once. He bad -paplace emoved because he had
een” who is reported to have pees eae be taken in East
Paki ended that no military action ut of control. Masood
taj Stan as the situation . could om vaetitl in the eastern hen.
Wome that the small air force e aie support in the event 0
an ob ne be able to provide eon Air Marshal Rahim ae
then eu Conflict with India. eset! put he could not alter the
thai C-in-¢, accepted the argumen
" Of events that, followed.