. : 157
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End)
Hussein, who had been elected a member of the national
assembly, urged the people to remain prepared for the
implementation of the six and eleven points through a struggle in
case the constitution is not formed within 120 days’6,
As expected Bengali troops in the armed forces were jubilant
on the success of Mujib. They felt that they would get a greater
representation in the military and that Naval Headquarters may
be shifted to Chittagong’’ which would enable them to serve
longer in their own province.
| Bhutto assumed political control in the West. He was not “
~ prepared to sit in the opposition. "No constitution could be made"
said the civilian dictator and feudal landlord "without PPP’s
cooperation". Ignoring PPP meant ignoring West Pakistan roared
the self_styled Quaid-e-Awam (leader of the masses),;The real
power lay in the Punjab said the strong man of Sindh. PPP and
Awami League should share power at the Center’®, was what ZAB
wanted. His lust for power and his determination not to be over-
lookedsmade him make statements which increased tension in
Kast Pakistan. Counter statements by the Awami League
leadership brought matters to a state of confrontation between the
two major, though regional, parties. Post election politics became ,
a power struggle between Bhutto and Mujib with the military) /
regime playing the role of an arbitrator. Neither of the two'
politicians were by now interested in maintaining the integrity of ©.
Pakistan if that is what would come in their way. The rulers were
saddled with a situation which had gone out of their hand.
__ The major cause for the political impasse after the election was
» the absence of a constitution under which the country was to be
administered. The previous two constitutions, (1956 and 1962)
had been abrogated by the military generals. Pakistan was once
again under martial law and before handing over power to the
newly elected parliament a new constitution had to be framed. the
Awami League was insisting that this should be done inside the ,
assembly which could meet initially for this purpose alone. PPP
Which was the second major party but confined to West Pakistan
alone,was insistent that the principles of the new constitution be
“greed upon between the PPP and Awami League outside ,the
“ssembly. The president and his army generals were inclined to
Support Bhutto on this issue.