252 Tragedy of Errors
narrate that after that date
Mujib-ur-Rahman””, He goes io _- the movement of he
1 began to secretly J
East Bengal bega he city hoisted black flags on Pakistan’,
cooperation. When the IIs that in his heart of hearts he was no
national day Safiullah reca ae flags on a day whet le isa’ ,
opposed to the fluttering © 4 star on his housetop?".
proudly display the crescent an | sine oft
On March 27, Major Safiullah told his commanding officer ‘We
“ch Mujib-ur-Rahman you may go away jf
intend to go over to Sheikh Mu) sa
e most welcome to join us. We can even tie yoy
nd Nerd gon in one room to give the impression that you were
nee oart of the mutiny. Lt. Col. Raquib, who had taken over from
Lt. Col. Masaudul Hasan, left the unit quietly as disloyalty was
not what he had been trained for. He was heard of no more.
Safiullah concentrated 2 East Bengal in Mymensingh and took
an oath of allegiance to Sheikh Mujib from his troops. He
broadcast a message on his regimental frequency to all those who
may have been listening. "I, major Safiullah of the East Bengal
Regiment, have taken up arms against the Pakistan army. If you
are a Bengali, wherever you are, take up arms with whatever you
have against the Pakistanis and begin an armed resistance to
liberate your country from the colonial fetters of Pakistan". He
sent Captain Aziz-ur-Rahman to Haluaghat to establish contact
with the Indian Border Security Force. Aziz met the commandant
of the BSF while Safiullah met Capt. Baljeet and Lt. Col. Sinha of
the Indian intelligence. The response, says Safiullah, to his
request was favourable. 2 East Bengal was joined by three retired
officers. Major Qazi Noor-uz-Zaman (2nd IMA course) Captain
Mati-ur-Rahman and Captain Abdul Mateen, Safiullah claims
that he was able to organise a force of 3,000 with eight officers
including Captain Sehgal who had defected from the army
aviation squadron,
2 East Bengal began to ambush the Pakistan army around
| Fenpnaingh ana in the vicinity of the Mahdopur forests which
most important one be mi Ce; They blew up bridges YY
river Ganges, Th ing the Ranipur railway bridge across the
Rajshahi virta 7 © Unit later moved across to India throug!
Sand a fom 2 East Bengal had 4 West Pakistatl
officers and a few West Pakistani soldi e ‘led
by Safiullah’s men? Oldiers. All of them were ki