116
Tragedy of Errors
emergency to be lifted; (2) section 144 to be withdrawn and (3) al
political prisoners to be released. Ayub yielded to all of them hs
RTC was held briefly on February 26, 1969 and adjourned to .
assemble on March 10. The President also agreed that he would
not contest in the next elections, that his 1962 constitution could
be scrapped and another constitution introduced, and that af
An against the Agartala conspirators would be withdrawn. Eve,
: then Bhutto and Bhashani did not agree to attend the RTC,
“Phe conference was reassembled on March 10. Nawab
Nasrullah Khan presented a two point formula to the conference
viz:- (1)The country should have a federal parliamentary system
of government with regional autonomy and (2) The assemblies
should be elected on the basis of direct adult franchise. There
were differences of opinion on the exact definition of federal
parliamentary system and the measure of regional autonomy to be
given to the provinces’. Mujib then elaborated his famous 6 Points
formula and the 11 Points of the Student Action Committee. He
was supported by Justice S.M. Murshed and Professor Muzaffar
Ahmad both from East Pakistan.
By now the 11 Point’s demand of the radical students of the /
East Pakistan had become part of the Awami League’s manifesto”
The 11 Points included among other things: (1) introduction of
postgraduate classes in the Jagannath college in Dacca; (2)
withdrawal of a book entitled Pakistan Dresho Krishti from the
syllabi; (3) improvement of science laboratories; (4) secular
education ; (5) reduction in the price of paper; (6) release of
student leaders and (7) renaming East Pakistan to Bangladesh.”
Mujib reiterated that "This (6 points) was the only formula
that would ensure the integrity of the country’. Ayub
' spontaneously asked him "which country". He was obviously not
happy with the 6 Points of Mujib which he felt would amount to
the break up of the country. "If I allow the 6 Points formula ! will v
undo what Quaid-e-Azam had done” said Ayub to Mujib with 4
tinge of anger, Khan Abdul Wali Khan leader of the National
ieee Party urged that the objective conditions both in East and
- ralistan should be taken into consideration when deciding
wie _ “ee oe Unit and regional autonomy. Maulana Mull
Mehmood of the damast Lett simply wanted that ls
president of the Pakistan Di cle san Mahmood Al A
kistan Democratic Party, supported pall