Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 415
d 97 Brigade at Dumghat ; .
9 - eeapecHively ede Loe, a Hat) and Chittagong
pill tra ce’ out of battle), The enemy
disregarded their presence as they were fay removed from the
strategic direction towards Dacca. An abortive naval landing near
Cox’s Bazaar was an exercise in futility by the Indian Navy.
Central Sector
36 (Adhoc) Division was a hoax. It was a misnomer. A patch-
work of a formation put on crutches two weeks before the
shooting war started in real earnest. Major General Muhammad
Jamshed Khan was in the martial law headquarters when he was
asked to raise and take over the command of 36 (Adhoc) Division.
A tall, handsome, well built Punjabi, Stalwart from the martial
belt of Jhelum. Soldering was his families occupation for decades
but physique and family background are not the only criteria for
success in the battlefield. He only had one brigade and that too of
two battalions. A two-star general was commanding a couple of
infantry units and that’s all. His artillery support no more than a
bow and arrow. Twelve 120 mm mortars is all that he got.
His area of responsibility stretched from the northern borders
of East Pakistan between the Jamuna and the Surma rivers to its
very heart - The capital city of Dacca. The central approach was
not given any importance as the enemy threat in this area was
listed as a beefed up brigade. However, there was no major water
obstacle in between the commander of the Indian L of C troops
and his vital objective.
Ironically, it was the weakest enemy force which pushed
through the lightest held territory to reach the outskirts of Dacca
and demand a surrender from a theatre commander.
Jamalpur Sub Sector
Brigadier Fazal Qadir, commanding 93 (Adhoc) Brigade
leployed Lieutenant Colonel Sultan’s 31 Baloch between ae ae
towns of Jamalpur and Kamalpur a few kilometres south if t ‘
international frontier. His second battalion, 33 Punjab, he vee "
around Haluaghat. Major Ghaffar Shah, distributed is
Mortars equally between the two infantry units.
0 The left flank of 93 Brigade was protected a soicomullah’s 202
an Night flank across the Surma river was
hoe) brigade part of 14 Infantry Division.