sai Tragedy of Errors
not lie in a continuation of military rule. It is the task of an ele
government to run the country and it is the politicians who sho!
have been given the responsibility to do so and accept the blame
» they failed. The army should not have stepped. In again, Yah.
could have said No, even if Ayub had voluntarily asked the Ay “
to step in. Ayub should have been advised to hold elections Unde
the existing constitution within three months supervised by the
army and power transferred to an elected national assembly Why
could have sought amendments to the 1962 Constitution in
accordance with the rules. The army should have stayed away.
and confined themselves to their role of the defence of the |
country. But a precedent had been set in 1958. The temptation 1,
assume power once again was too great for the generals.
The important and vital difference between the elections hely
under Yahya in 1970 and those that could have been held unde
Ayub in 1969 would have been that in the latter case the
summoning of the national assembly, whatever the results, would
not have created such a problem. The 6-Points formula of the
Awami League, which may have still gained a majority, would
have been discussed inside the assembly as in other democratic
countries. Even if their demands led to a confederation or
eventual parting of ways,the military would not have been blamed
y for the break up of the country.
J Old Wine in New Bottles ¥
_5,Géneral Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan was a Persian
~ speaking Pathan whose ancestors had migrated to Peshawar from
’ Iran. Yahya’s grandfather was a subedar major in the famous
Guides Cavalry and an ADC to the viceroy of India. General Yahya
was commissioned in the third battalion of the famous Baloch
Regiment in 1938. During World War II he was serving in Italy
where he, along with others, was taken a prisoner by the
Germans.
Piers a was a smart, intelligent and hardworking young officer
elore the partition of India he was a general staff office?
grade II (GSO Il) in the military operations dir t GH@
India. A vrestic; irectorate a
( .. 4 prestigious appointment for a major. Lieutenant Coloné
S.H.F.J Manekshaw,.. th : cher ‘ ip
. Shaw,,the officer who was instrumental
humbling Yahya in 4971, was his i ‘or in 194?
Manekshaw found Major Yah to eran epee king
officer who had a logical mi ya to be "an excellent, hardwor
3 nd and could think clearly".