62
Tragedy of Errors
Provinces, India) and who in spite of being the governor-generg} ”
Pakistan wanted to be buried at Haji Saheb’s feet at Bara Bank
in India.
Amir-ul-Islam a well known barrister, and a former chief Whip
of the Awami League went to the extent of saying that "Pakista,
was destroyed at that very moment when the constituent
assembly was dissolved". He felt that Pakistan’s supreme cour,
swas responsible for the break up of Pakistan**. This, of-course, ig
‘an extreme view in which sentiments more than cool reasoning
played a part. But the supreme court decision overturning the
high court judgement in the Maulvi Tamizuddin vs State case did
set a precedent for all future unconstitutional acts under the cover
of the law of necessity. Tamizuddin was from East Bengal. The
‘unwarranted dismissals of Khwaja Nazimuddin and Maulvi
‘Tamizuddin greatly angered the Bengalis.
The Provincial elections held in East Bengal in 1954 not only
saw the demise of the Muslim League in that province but it also
threw up political and socio-economic issues which had been lying
dormant so far.
In December, 1954 the One-Unit scheme, whereby the four
provinces of West Pakistan, ‘viz Punjab, NWFP, Sindh and
Balochistan were grouped together to form one political unit to be
called West Pakistan with its capital in Lahore, was approved. The
grouping of the provinces of West Pakistan into one
administrative unit was initially mentioned in 1948 and ‘aired’
again in the constituent assembly by Malik Feroze Khan Noon in
1949.
| The 1956 Constitution was passed on 2 March, 1956, Pakistan
then took the shape of two administrative units one in the East \
ee with parity between them. Although some
carsasal ste aoe eaders accepted parity between the two wings, the
a pproved of the One-Unit scheme as it reduced thel!
majority status at the Centre. They also resented the change in
the name of their province from East Bengal to East Pakistan.
According to Zulfigar Ali Bhutto "One uni d the
polarisation between East and We e unit accentuate
the two wings vyi ist andWest. It was chiefly responsible for
appears to be a tie Day sw other as two rival states"®5. This
that Mr. Bhutto-o: Sent a8 there is no recorded evidence to prove
member of the eee the One-Unit-Scheme when he was ?
cabinet in the days of Field Marshal Ayub.