Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 419
Aurora was being asked to r
pefore it is reinforced by the toope b eae 4S soon as possible
. Ing back
force of even three regular brigades, in D "A concentrated
, considerable period of time. One Was ian could delay him for
was at Ashuganj and a third bould Beane there. The other
Rangpur sector. eakthrough from the
Aurora decided to use hi
reinforcements reaching Dacca. The arene to prevent the
for the airdrop as it was sufficiently dicaes * Tangail was chosen
to the capital. Besides, Tangail an its a acca to pose a threat
was invested with Mukti Bahini forces Matti. countryside |
‘shera’ Tiger Siddiqui. Their presence in arid g another self-styled |
zone would facilitate the operations of the anki dropping |
on.
With safety from the air and
para troopers floated down in broad oe the Indian |
to ‘friendly’ territory. Their immediate task was t hemp “ |
with Siddiqui and to block all routes leading southward to ies |
so that Qadir’s brigade is unable to reach the capital “Thi = |
accomplished because of the assistance and co-operation of ‘the )
wou hing aes rpnel ace e |
cks by 93 Brigade. Qadir kept |
the para battalion occupied around Tangail for 3 days.
General Nagra’s brigade which was moving southwards linked |
up with the para battalion on 14 December. With no further |
Tesistance in sight Nagra pushed his brigades towards Dacca, by-
passing wherever light opposition was met by making limited
cenit manoeuvres. The leading elements of the para
attalion reached the outskirts of Dacca on 16 December.
Defence of Dacea
The initial plan for the defence of Dacca was sound and if
reeented would have kept the enemy out of Dacca for several
Jam . if not months. The capital was located between the
kilomer” Ganges and the Brahmaputra. Each of chesriiey i
trangp, tie is eit sie hours 0 vyhe icors ais
ee and that too at designated places oath witoait
tame, eable even without opposition. The only ye and the
Br Jor obstacle was from the north between the Jamuna
tahmaputra, .