394 Tragedy of Errors
Indian troops alongwith Mukties had crossed over ie se
territory and were now entrenched east of the river athabanga.
The company was ordered to clear the Mukties from own
territory. To accomplish the task 12 rounds of 3.7 artillery were
allotted. This was probably to scare the Mukties and obviate the
need for a company attack. On 9 November the company moved
‘nto a forward concentration area by midnight. At 0530 hours D
Company debouched from its forming Up place with two platoons
up. On reaching approximately 300 yards from the objective the
troops suddenly came under intense artillery, mortar and machine
gun fire. The right forward platoon led by Lieutenant G.M. Sipra,
had suffered heavily. His platoon junior commissioned officer
Naib/Subedar Akram was seriously wounded. The gallant
company commander decided to forge ahead. By now one third of
the company’s strength had been depleted, but the battalion war
cry “Nara-i-Haidri” gave them the extra courage. They assaulted
the enemy bunkers, regardless of their exposure to enemy fire.
Approximately 22 men reached the objective forcing the enemy
to take to their heels. Naik Yaqub was seen madly charging on the
enemy with his right hand raised over his head. Lance Naik
Mehdi fell at 10 yards distance from an enemy bunker with 5
bullets in his skull through his steel helmet, Lance Naik Sher
Muhammad (driver) sat on top of one of the enemy machine gun
bunkers and ordered the inmates to surrender one by one.
Subedar Ayub faked loud messages and foiled the enemy counter
attack, by indicating the pressure of a complete battalion in the
area. A Company of 29 Baloch after having crossed the river also
appeared at 0800 hours at the rear of the fleeing enemy and
inflicted heavy losses to them.
In this operation six prisoners from 1 Nagaland Battalion
(regulars) were captured for the first time in East Pakistan. It was
then learnt that this position was held by two Companies of 1
Nagaland Battalion. The position was prepared and fortified over
the last 5 days. There were approximately 100 Mukties under
command of this force. From a monitored wireless message 12 the
divisional headquarters it was learnt that the enemy had lost two
officers in this operation. D Company had also suffered heavy
losses but the enemy was routed. Captain Imtiaz and seven other
ranks were recommended for gallantry.