494
Appendix - |
Awami League’s Six-Points Formula
As announced in the Awami League election manifesto the Six Points were:
1. The character of the Government should be federal and parliamentary, jn
which elections to the Federal Legislature and to the Legislatures of the
federating units would be direct and on the basis of universal adult franchise.
Representation in the Federal Legislature would be on the basis of
population. |
2. The Federal Government would be responsible only for defence and foreign
affairs and, subject to the conditions provided in (3) below, currency.
3. There would be two separate currencies mutually or freely convertible in each
wing for each region, or in the alternative a single currency, subject to the
establishment of a federal reserve system in which there would be regional
federal reserve banks which would devise measures to prevent the transfer of
resources and flight of capital from one region to another.
4. Fiscal policy would be the responsibility of the federating units. The Federal
Government would be provided with the requisite revenue resources for
meeting the requirements of defence and foreign affairs, which revenue
resources would be automatically appropriable by the Federal Government in
the manner provided and on the basis of the ratio to be determined by the
procedure laid down in the Constitution. Such constitutional provisions
would ensure that the Federal Government’s revenue requirements were met
consistently with the objective of ensuring control over the fiscal policy by the
Governments of the federating units.
5. Constitutional provisions would be made to enable separate accounts to be
maintained of the foreign exchange earnings of each of the federating units.
The foreign exchange requirements of the Federal Government would be met
by the Governments of the federating units on the basis of a ratio to be
determined in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Constitution.
The regional Governments would have powers under the Constitution to
negotiate foreign trade and aid within the framework of the foreign policy of
the country, which would be the responsibility of the Federal Government.
6. The Government of the federating units would be empowered to maintain &
militia or paramilitary force in order to contribute effectively towards
national security.