India’s Role in the break up of Pakistan 291
“fighting a war agai
re aoe humane solution the pra Would be a cheaper
ang a ’ Problem being faced h
le of India and Bangladesh. Ge § faced by the
pe. 7 etal B.N. Sarkar roduced
operational plan JACKPOT, Published jn the London Ti
the occupation of East Bengal because of which he imes, for
West Bengal to train the Mukti Bahini?® Was Gent to
Teg Roe’ nner titi: that the Indian army was prepared
neither for direct intervention in East Pakistan nor for th
inevitable counter thrust from West Pakistan’? jg therefor "
based on facts. Although Subramanyam felt that Mrs Gandhi; Was
a vascilating woman she could Strike back when driven to a
corner. It was as early as 28 April, 1971, that she conveyed her
intention of attacking East Pakistan as her hopes of a client state °
on her eastern border, had been frustrated by Yahya.
At a cabinet méeting to which the chief of army staff of the
Indian army General S.F.H.J. (SAM) Maneckshaw was invited .
she told him \Be prepared to go into East Pakistan" Maneckshaw”
is reported to have replied "that would mean going to war with
Pakistan”. "We do not mind it" was her response®*®, Her military
leadership asked her to be patient and wanted more time. India’s
|military machine had to be ‘oiled’. Spares had to be obtained,
| deficiencies were to be made up. Time was also needed to gain as
much information about enemy’s strength, location, gap and
* reinforcement possibilities, They also required breathing space to
move and concentrate their own forces against East Pakistan. It
was harvest time and troops on leave were engaged in harvesting
their family crops. An infra structure for the launching of a large
scale offensive in an area cris-crossed by rivers and streams pad
to be developed. Monsoons in Bengal “slow down military
‘Perations Considerably. For quick results the dry period in winter
Would be more suitable. They had yet to convert the Mukti Bahini
into an effective guerrilla organisation which had to be equipped,
armed and trained to act in support of the Indian army. Some sort
of guarantee was needed to ensure that Ch{na would not teach
‘nother lesson to India on the Himalayan border. ae ae
therefore, advised Indira to await and suggested November as oe
Most suitable dates for the. invasion when the Himalayan em
Would be closed due to they-hecoming snow bound. = ashen
“riticised by General D.K. Palit for not attacking eas a os
farlier ag according to him,it would have prevented the g
millions of Hindus, ;