458 Tragedy of Errors
the nation for a war against Pakistan and winning friends ang
sympathizers abroad the armed forces were gearing up foy ‘
campaign against East Pakistan in winter when the passes would
be snow bound. Mrs. Gandhi planned and orchestrated the whole
operation to its highest pitch by November. Through skillfy]
propaganda she obtained the willing support of her entire nation
as well as that of the members of the United Nations barring
China and the White House (The Congress and the US media
-were on her side). Her psychological warfare damaged the morale
of the Pakistan army in the east.
Pakistan, on the other contrary, due to its faulty foreign and
domestic policy, stood isolated. It was faced with a suspension of
western arms. A lingering insurgency coupled with numerous
cases of licentious living and indiscipline had sapped the energies
and the morale of the troops in East Pakistan. The so-called
genocide against the Bengalis by the Pakistan army had been
widely accepted by the international community. Mutiny by the
East Bengal Regiments and the East Bengal Rifles and other law
enforcing agencies had weakened their strength. The formations,
which were flown into East Bengal, were without their heavy
weapons. Some arrived only a few weeks before the
commencement of hostilities. Commanders took charge of their
depleted formations only a few days before the Indian invasion.
Grouping and re-grouping of units left quite a few unprepared
when the war started. The troops were uncertain of thé cause for
which they were fighting as the very people they were supposed to
protect had joined the enemy and wanted to get rid of them. From
a national army they had turned into an ‘occupation force’
overnight.
The strength of the armed forces in East Pakistan in 1971 was
woefully inadequate to defend a vast area surrounded on all ‘four’
sides by India. A large force was needed to protect a 2,000
kilometres border with humerous salients against a powerful
enemy, many times the size of the defenders. Formations, units
and subunits were defending areas twenty times their laid dow?
frontages. The enemy had only to pierce through the crust behind
| which lay undefended terrain. Five major approaches, from three »
widely different directions al] leading to the vital ground were t
be covered by the equivalent of three infantry divisions. The
minimum required was one Standard infantry division along each
|