At the UN iad
hen the news about the fall of J €ssore r
she United Nations they began to ion ee opi
| round and the emphasis shifted from demanding the withdrawal
- of Indian forces from East Pakistan to implementing a ceasefire so
gs to stop the fighting on the western front as well.
On 8 December Bhutto, who had been appointed as the foreign
minister, spoke to Agha Shahi from Bonn and informed him that
he would from now on lead the Pakistani delegation at the United
Nations. Relations between Bhutto and Shahi were far from
_ cordial as the former felt that Agha Shahi had been supporting
Field Marshal Ayub. So when Shahi tried to explain the current
developments he was curtly told by the foreign minister "The
responsibility is now on my shoulders. I will handle the
situation". "Most welcome" replied Shahi.
On 9 December Agha Shahi informed the UN Secretary
General that Pakistan accepts the General Assembly’s call for a
cessation of hostilities and hoped that the UN would secure the
withdrawal of all armed personnel and post observers on both |
_+sides of the border!°, "Under instructions from my government, I
_ have the honour to state, that even though resolution 2793 (xxvi)
_ adopted by the General Assembly on 7 December, 1971 fails to
| rlake note of Indian aggression against Pakistan (which has been
admitted by India) the government of Pakistan has decided to
accept the call for an immediate ceasefire and withdrawal of
| troops contained in that resolution"!! was Agha Shahi’s statement
to the General Assembly.
Early morning on 10 December, Agha Shahi was woken up by
4 UN official. He read out a message which had been sent by Paul
Mark Henry, the UN representative in Dacca to the UN aoe
General, The message, was signed by Major General “ial power
Ali Khan, military adviser to the governor of East a a f the
©as also told that U Thant is going to inform the mem ip: Red
sceurity Council about the collapse of the ee sine
akistan and their request for an immediate ceaselire. N
Shahi asked the UN official to convey his a the an
seetetary General not to circulate this ee ai Agha Shahi,
he “ontents from Islamabad. "General E Tie request for a delay
cha nN authority to ask for a ceasefire”. d get an official response
8 hours within which he would try and ge