Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) sais
Yahya is reported to have slept in the staff coll ‘
the Indian instructors were leaving for India to earl an
taking away some of the books of historical importance to their
country.
Brigadier. Lauder, commandant of the Staff Coll |
Major Yahya “as an outstanding officer" in 1948 Canara De. |
Gracey, C-in-C of the Pakistan Army, thought Lieutenant Colonel |
Yahya_to be "an outstanding all-round Officer", Major Generals |
)Akber, Hayuddin, Sher Ali, and later Ayub and Habibullah Khan |
all gave excellent remarks in Yahya’s annual confidential reports
(ACR). To them he was an “asset to the army, a very valuable
officer; an officer who possessed a sharp brain", should be
earmarked and trained for higher command", Right up to 1963 he
_ was judged by General Musa as "an officer with/clean habits| and a
first class chief of the general staff". :
"Well above average as Brigadier, outstanding as a general". He
was living a simple and dignified life till 1965 according to
Lieutenant General Bakhtiar Rana who was his corps
commander. Yahya proved his professional ability in the Indo-
, Pakistan War of 1965 by capturing Chamb and Jaurian in Indian
P held Kashmir. On the face of it, if a general was to assume power
again General Yahya seemed to be the person, but Yahya’s life, ‘>
* had changed as he became senior. Power corrupts and
abgolute power corrupts absolutely. Even before becoming the
head of state his personal conduct was becoming questionable.
, After becoming president and the chief martial law administrator
he fell into bad company. His over-addiction to wine and women
‘earned him a bad name.
___In spite of his nocturnal activities, he retained his qualities of
ntelligence and quick in the uptake. Colonel Ejaz Azim (later to
become a Lieutenant General and Pakistan’s ambassador to
United States of America) who was then at CMLA Headquarters
us that General Yahya was. quick to dispose of files and gave
Clear cut decisions. He maintained that General Yahya did een
the Ome, in spite of his preoccupation with non promede
Activities, to read through all the minuting and absorb t ra
before acceptin 2) f - them. Brigadier Iskander-ul-Karim
(later major G hel 1) and Col ‘l KM. Arif (later General) who
Were in the CMLA’% ) anc olone firmed this fact to the author.
Lieutenant Cer al pay ver owledges that General Yahya
Was profess eneral Gul Hasan ac oe Vatva’s military secretary
found hi Ssionally competent. Gener y
m sober during office hours, :