342 Tragedy of Errors
Too Little Too Late
The scene in East Pakistan had changed completely after the
military action in March, 1971. The Bengali units had deserteq
and had gone over to India, the civilians, though subdued ang
frightened because of the fear of the stick, had turned againgt the
Pakistan armed forces.
In view of the growing threat from India in support of the
Mukti Bahini and the need to control an ever increasing hostile
population more troops were flown in to East Pakistan soon after
the military action. Elements of 9 Infantry Division and 16
Infantry Division began arriving by air via Sri Lanka. The two
newly inducted divisions came without their guns and armour,
They could only carry their infantry weapons and even lacked
engineer support. The Corps signal battalion was only sanctioned
in March, 1971.
Lieutenant General Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi (54) took over
the command of the eastern theatre of operations from General
Tikka Khan on 7 April. He was a highly decorated officer having
earned a Military Cross and Mention in Despatches as a junior
officer during World War II and a Hilal-e-Jurat in the Indo-
Pakistan War of 1965. As an officer in 8 Punjab Regiment he had
seen active service in Egypt, Iraq, Palestine, Burma, Malaysia,
Singapore and Java and hence fighting in different environment
was not new to him. But what affected his professional ability in
East Pakistan was his rigid ideas and his false sense of pride of not
falling back in the face of the enemy. His Mianwali background,
and his limited academic achievements may have had much to do
with his narrow military outlook.
General Niazi had earned good confidential reports in his
career but his superiors had emphasised his knowledge and flair
for tactics only. Command of an independent theatre requiring *
understanding of national Strategy was not what he had been Oe
out to be. He was a Shera (lion) but only at the lower net
command. He was "practical and bold" but unable or owing ‘
visualise the intentions and capabilities of a powerful part
General Yahya, however, could not find any other senior ° few of
go to East Pakistan in April, 1971. It is believed that quite @
them got out of it when asked to do so.