|
58
Tragedy of Errors
realise that we too are Muslims. You took us to be Hindus and
killed us all)". This remark coming spontaneously from a Sen.
literate, lower middle class Bengali youth, twenty one years afte,
the break up, shook me. :
Behaviour of Government Officials ;
Much of what is generally believed about the arrogance ang
haughtiness shown by the West Pakistani officials while Serving in
East Pakistan towards their Bengali subordinates was tr, /
Mr. Aziz Ahmad, who was chief secretary in East Bengal in the
early 50s, is reported to have held open kutcher les (public
meeting) while sitting within a mosquito net to save himself from
the omni-present hordes of mosquitos. Such behaviour by the
West Pakistani bureaucrats while serving in East Bengal created g
feeling of bitterness against the Punjabi officials in particular. The
same gentleman is reported to have asked Mr. Nur-ul Amin, then
the chief minister of East Bengal, to dress properly on_ official
occasions as the Sherwani and pyjama, he was wearing was not
acceptable. ,
Brigadier Hafeez, recalls how a Punjabi non-commissioned
officer from Pind Dadan Khan, West Pakistan, used to address
Said-ul-Islam, one of his Bengali soldiers, as "Kaloo" (a black
_ " Person) just because he was dark. "The amusing part being that
the NCO himself had even a darker skin", said Hafeez29.
Professor Munir-uz-Zaman Taluqdar of the Dacca University
while recalling his visit to Lahore talked about a shopkeeper who
is alleged to have asked him "where are you from" on hearing that
he was from East Bengal the shop keeper without batting any eye
lid said "But you look like a Hindy30" Taluqdar, naturally felt
insulted.
Dr. Dhani relates an incident which occurred as early as |
August, 1947. While he was on his way to Dacca he stopped ove!
at Rajshahi. A local resident, who met him there, remarked "s0
you have ‘Come to rule over us", Dhani took pains to explain to him /
ee was simply a professor and he had been sent to teach at
aq ara niversity. But he certainly was taken aback by what
In several cases the Bap in the social attitude between the
armed forces in East Pakistan (Mostly Punjabi and the populace