1
aio Tragedy of Errors
A fresh attack by 8 Guards was put in on 9 December. The
attack was beaten back. The next day both 17 Kumaon ang 8
Guards tried to push through but again the defences at Bahaduria
held out and the two Indian battalions could not break through, A
third attack on night of 10/11 December enabled the Indians to
overrun some positions of the forward company. Captain Ashraf
and Lieutenant Munir, the artillery observer, were Seriously
‘wounded. The remnants of this gallant body of troops, who defied
the advance of a force three times their strength for three days,
finally fell back to brigade headquarters a few miles away, 17
Kumaon lost 132 killed and wounded including 5 officers and 4
JCO'®, in their second attack.
Seeing, that the encirclement of Tajammul’s brigade was
causing heavy casualties and delaying the advance towards Bogra,
General Lachman, had ordered his troops to make a second
outflanking manoeuvre. His troops succeeded in capturing Pirganj
further east. They then turned south towards Palasbari in order
to cut the route of withdrawal of 205 Brigade. So while the battle
of Bahaduria was being fought the enemy was already behind
Tajammul’s brigade and sitting on the road Rangpur-Bogra which
was not known to the divisional and brigade headquarters!?.
Major General Nazar Husain Shah, general officer
commanding 16 Division, and Brigadier Tajammul were coming
back to divisional headquarters (then located at Bogra) from
Rangpur on 7 December after attending an O Group (orders
group). They ran into some enemy tanks near Pirganj at about 5
p.m. They immediately Stopped and jumped into a ditch for cover. |
The tanks opened fire, but luckily neither of the two commanders _
were hit. Nazar Husain and Tajammul managed to escape t0
Rangpur on foot with the help of some Bengali guides. Tajammul |
later passed through the enemy lines to rejoin his brigade at Hilli
General Nazar re-deployed 34 Brigade, which had been split in
two with Brigadier Naeem and newly arrived Brigadier Nawab
Ahmad Ashraf commanding a battalion each. It had so far not
come under attack. The brigades took up counter penetration
positions along the Karotaya river astride Gobindganj. The
position was occupied on 8 December well in time to block the
enemy’s advance to Bogra.