Role of Other Countries 317
Mrs. oxha Soviet eal on only a month after her
vapor had met General Yahya ope inet ct Mile
- odgorny) had rejected Yahya’s offer of ‘GhE ae
pakistani armed forces from the border if India maulK op
supporting the Mukti Bahini. A week later he came over to New
Delhi and reinforced the total support of the Soviet Union to Indi
in its so-called hour of crisis. Later in the same month ‘Soviet
Deputy Foreign Minister Nikolai Firyubin visited Delhi. It was no
surprise, therefore, that the Soviet reply to the proposals b
United States to work towards a peaceful solution to the political
crisis in East Pakistan was the same as that of India ie: release of
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahfnan and come to a political settlement
acceptable not only to the Awami League but also to New Delhi.
‘The aim of both the Soviet Union and India was to isolate
Pakistan and not to let it get the support of the international
‘community.
On November 1, the Soviet airlift of military equipment to
India started. Marshal Pavel S. Kutakhov, deputy defence
minister and chief of staff of the Soviet air force, was also in New
Delhi to assess for himself if any more assistance was needed.
After the invasion of East Pakistan by India on 22 November
the Soviets concentrated on preventing the Security Council from
passing a resolution fora ceasefire and the withdrawal —— to
their respective border On November 26, the Soviets blocked a
Japanese feeler to call a Security Council meeting. Moscow,
according to Henry Kjssinger, had-made it clear that the Howick
Union would support én end to military operations only if there
_— e
was a political solution satisfactory to India”. The same strain
was repeated by TASS on December 5, which opposed a ceasefire ) |
unless the lawful rights of the people of East Pakistan were met.’
This condition for a ceasefire was repeated in a Soviet reply =
Nixon’s letter of December 6. Since the top tnaeralily 60 Se
Awami League were in Indian Se oa ea vt
political settlement according to the dictates of India.
During the visit of D. P. Dhar and Genera! bape
Moscow on December 10, Kosy gin ee nee Brezhnev was
nention about pursuing the war in oe Bat al,.sineé he wanted
Pressing India to get on with it a et! 1 tte was building
the conflict to end quickly as considerable ca ns
Up against the Soviet Union at the United Riatinne