Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 423
| surrender
Lieutenant General Amir Abdul] .
Mention in Despatches, signed the ea Niazi, H. J, S.J, MC,
431 p.m. on 16 December, 1971 ana banded a. of surrender at
Pakistan’s eastern province to its bitterest ¢ over the control of
ending the conflict, however, had begun Witigh nt The process of
er.
The military situation in East Pak;
rapidly after the Indians launched thee ean to deteriorate
‘Bangladesh’. Although no major city. exee ‘sn invasion of
the Indians had succeeded in making nen on peere, had fallen
sectors. The Mukti Bahini operating idee the Gn oS ene
umbrella, were increasing their subversive acti ep army’s
isolated the units and formations. Losses of ten nd wach nad
were rising with no replacements possible. n and equipment
The governor of East Pakistan, Dr A.M. Malik held a meeting
at the government house on 7 December and discussed the
oe ae with commander Eastern Command and his
rinci ior . ;
vostearlhg thie toe ge ilar an a Ali Khan. After
to place before the President the sail “ Tikewiege
erlousness of the situation and
recommend to him the immediate need to negotiate a peaceful
transfer of power so that unnecessary loss of life is avoided.
A telex to the chief martial law administrator was
consequently drafted and sent from the government house to the
President in Islamabad on 7 December. The signal painted a grim
picture of the situation. Even more serious than it actually was.
But since Dacca was defenceless Dr Malik could see the writing on
the wall (Signal A 6905, DTG 07 Dec).
General Yahya in his reply assured Dr Malik that he was
tying for a ceasefire through the assistance of certain world
Powers. He also informed him that General Niazi was being
Instructed regarding the military strategy to be adopted to prevent
further loss of territory. He was advised to adopt stringent
measures to ration food supplies. The signal ended with a prayer
lor the safety of the governor and all those in Kast Pakistan. This
Was followed by another signal on 8 December from the President
'o the governor assuring him that all possible efforts were being
*xerted at the political level.