52
Tragedy of Errors
It was only after the spilling of a lot of bad blood between the
two wings that the 1956 Constitution accepted Bengali as one ¥
the state languages. Had the demands of the Bengalis beg,
accepted in 1948 a major plank from the disgruntled Benga}
politicians would have been removed.
The importance of Bangla in the life of the Bengalis can },
judged from the fact that almost all the sign posts, name plates
- pill boards, graffiti, road signs and number plates on automobiles
in Bangladesh are in Bangla unlike what is seen in West Pakistan
where English sign boards are even more prominently displayed
~ than those in Urdu.
A remark made by Mr. Khondkar Mushtaq Ahmad, a
prominent and senior Bengali politician who later became the
president of Bangladesh, aptly described the importance Bengalis
attached to their language. When I visited him in Dhaka, during
the course of my research, I was greeted by him in polished Urdu.
Later he began speaking in English in which he was equally
fluent. Hearing him speak both Urdu and English I asked him
politely. "In which language shall we carry on the conversation. In
English or in Urdu as I do not know Bangla". Pat came the
spontaneous remark "Janab Isi wajhe se Pakistan toot gaya".
- (that is the precise reason why Pakistan was dismembered). The
_- schwerpunkt (linchpin), according to Professor Abdul Qayoom,
president of the Institute of Regional Studies, Islamabad, lay in
the language issue".
Culture
When the Muslim majority provinces were grouped together to
form the new state of Pakistan it did not mean the creation of an
entirely homogeneous society. Pakistan, like the country it had
broken away from, was also multi-racial and poly-ethnic. The vast
oat hen of the Pakistanis were indeed followers of the same faith
a there was much in common between them. But ae
Pakists ad there a of India the areas that became part °
rasaria? None of f mceageent cst hich they had every right
domination of one om, wnt SEhbly so, was veilling io accept, the
attemipuat takeatl set over the other. When ever that we
arial ermine he” hagas helmet
groups concerned.