568 Tragedy of Errors
adversary. Raibagh was retaken on the night of 1/2 December ang
the Indians were thrown back into their own territory. 165 and
902 Brigades of 20 Infantry Division kept on trying to create a
dent in the defences around Hilli but even after ten days of battle
in front of Hilli the enemy had not been able to break the will of 4
FF inspite of its vastly numerical superiority of six battalions
against one battalion. 5 Garhwal, alone, lost 65 men, 4 JCOs and 4
officers.
On 5 December the Indians resumed their attack against Hillj
This time they combined an outflanking move from the north
with a direct assault on Hilli. The attack again floundered because
of the tenacity of C Company which held on to its defences in spite
of four consecutive attacks and inspite of heavy casualties
Subedar Gul Muhammad sacrificed his life for the honour of his
en ie mom one trench to another keeping up the
‘ irty odd men.
Major Akram whose company was under attack decided to
a io agp sei were firing on his position. He
mm Chinese rocket launcher and alongwith sepoy —
Akram crawled to within 100 yards of the enemy tanks. Then
firing from different positions he destroyed three enemy tanks —
before being hit in the throat by a machine gun bullet while —
a aed to fire at the fourth tank. He died instantly. His blood —
. ee oa soil which he was determined to keep out of —
ames and. Alor Akram received the highest honour the |
Sears (anh Hes eT enemy ir Nishan-e-Haider. But more
a shin
eared theseedl of dite ing example. of bravery in battle
Contrary to what some India i i
Division contained Hilli and oe — claim that 20 Infantry
tixtada its chicctive furth anked the position by advancing
e further north, the division did its utmost to
capture the town to salvage som i
hack e of its lost pride. Repeated
attacks continued to be put in but every time it failed to evict 4 FF
from its defensive positions. ae .
After a hard fight lasting 19
from Hilli on 11 December. 7
The enemy in the meanti
: time h . ‘ the
inter-brigade boundary at Phulb ad already broken me f 4
PE with the two other be ari about 10 kilometres north ©
er brigades of 20 Infantry Division. 66 and 54°