: |
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 181
The President appointed a Council of Admin} ; ir ¢
consisted of himself as the CMLA and his eae pn
Lieutenant General Abdul Hamid Khan, Vice Admiral a; 4
Ahsan and Air Marshal Nur Khan as Martial law administrators
(MLAs). General Peerzada acted as the secretary of the Council of |
Administration. Each member of the Council had three or four
ministries under him. Later in August, 1969 a civilian cabinet of
) Vg members, five from each wing including one retired general
was instaled. The Bengalis were reluctant to join the cabinet as
joining it meant siding with a military regime which was not
appreciated in the eastern wing. General Peerzada says that he
had to coerce them to join the cabinet. The Bengali members were
Anwar-ul-Haq, Dr. A.M. Malik, Professor Shamsul Haq and G. W.
Choudhry.
The cabinet, however, did not have any powers as these
remained with the CMLA Secretariat and the senior bureaucrats,
Major General Sher Ali Khan, who was the minister of
information in this cabinet, felt that his colleagues had little
confidence in themselves as they represented no political party or
constituency. They realised that they were there only to show a
civilian face to a military government!9,
This view was expressed by most of the politicians and
intellectuals interviewed by the author in Dhaka. "The central —
leadership did not come through any political process and hence ,“
did not represent the polity of Pakistan" said Amir-ul-Islam \
‘Politicians should have a representative character" opined Munir- +’
ul-Hussein, editor of the Ittefaq. "Nazimuddin, Nur-ul-Amin,
Whaeed-uz-Zaman, Subur Khan, Mahmood Ali and Khairuddin
were all swimming against the current” were Dr Kamal Hussain’s
omments on the Bengali representation at the centre. “All
‘awanted people were picked up"”” remarked Khondkar Mushtaq,
When I told him that Bengalis got an equal share in the cabinets of
Ayub and Yahya.
General Peerzada, however, maintains that the civilian cabinet
Was quite helpful as in the regular weekly meetings some of them
Were quite vocal and assertive in giving their views. The last word,
of course, was always that of General Yahya said Peerzada.
_ The effective element of president Yahya’s government was the .
[MLA’s Secretariat headed by General Peerzada, and the Martial
" Administrators, (ndtygovernorg)ih;the provinces, Though a