Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 207
been shown as gaining more stren ;
ae nikon sth. This was contrary to
_ ‘The intelligence SEpOres od, however, occasionally mention
violation of the legal framework order by the Awami L
politicians and recommended that stern action be taken mains :
them. But the martial law authorities in Dacca had me ith
received clear cut orders nor did they posses the ability to dam th :
flood gates which had been opened by allowing full scale political
activity by the Yahya regime. It is also true that both the governor
and the martial law administrator were gentlemen of the highest
order who saw nothing wrong 1n allowing a fully unhindered
democratic process which was set in motion after the date of the |
general election had been announced.
The Awami League, under a benign government at the Centre |
and with a non effective martial law was given full reign to whip
up emotions in favour of complete regional autonomy amounting
to a virtual confederation. Yahya made the mistake of believing
Mujib when he said that he would modify his 6-Points formula, -
He should have read his intentions more profoundly. After a
landslide election victory fought on the basis of obtaining complete
regional autonomy,jt was naive to except the Awami League Chief
to adhere to his earlier promise. Mujib was correct in saying that
his 6-Points formula was no longer his objective alone but the
trust of 60 million Bengalis. — |
The mistake that made the transfer of power reach a point of
ho return was the postponement of the national assembly session
Without specifying a new date. This not only _witnessed the
dismissal and resignation of two very senior, brilliant and honest
representative of the armed forces, it also was the proverbial last
straw on the Bengali back. The democratic train had been ersiled
and it required a herculean effort to get it back on the tracks
again. Mr. Bhutto drove the first nail in the coffin by refusing he
attend the assembly session at Dacca, Yahya, goaded 7 the
hardliners in uniform, did the rest by going back on his word.
The response to the postponement had not been pay
analysed. The sudden outburst at Paltan Maidan o she-anntife
1971 and the total control of Mujib-ur-Rahman nae the fatal
administrative machinery in East Pakistan atte
“nnouncement.was totally unexpected.