324 Tragedy of Errors |
way and that the Chinese army would mee ane te North
East Frontier Agency on Indias border * at urs™. General
Gul Hasan speaking in Pushto to the ee or In Eastern
Command Headquarters convey at Ow ee,
Lieutenant General Niazi. "The whites and yellows are coming’
said Gul Hasan. According to him he did so on orders of Genergi/
Abdul Hamid the then chief ofstaff. These utterances were
apparently meant to keep up cee = - = eves i Bast
istan; but any army’s mor alse
vtatemetts, Credibility is soon lost when lies are exposed.
Even as late as December 16, when Eastern Command had
surrendered in East Pakistangthe Chinese government continued
to attack the Indian leaderstip and accused the Indian forces of
"most brutal atrocities”. It referred to India as an expansionist
power which still cherished the dream of a greater Indian empire,
. "They want not only to swallow East Pakistan but also to destroy
Pakistan as a whole. If a timely stop is not put to such aggression
committed by the Indian government » other countries,
neighbouring on India, will also be endangered" , stated the
Chinese in their hard hitting statement directed not only at India
but also towards the Soviet Union which,they blamed for building
up India and turning it into a superpower on the South Asian
subcontinent®!, Mr. Chou-En-Lai also accused India of massacring
the people of East Pakistan.
In a note to the Security Council on December 16, the Chinese
government alleged that Indian armed personnel had crossed the
Sikkim border into Chinese territory on December 10, and
demanded that India should immediately stop its intrusion. This
veiled threat to India was meant to prevent them from attempting
to occupy Azad Kashmir and continuing the war on the western
front,in the hope of destroying the Pakistan army in West
Pakistan as well. Although China could not prevent the break up
be Phe ap certainly played a significant role in checking
at the manta te te unten
nent. China’s close ties
Pakistan can also be judged from the fact that China vetoed
Bangladesh S application for membership to UN. The late Chou-
En-Lai told a military delegation headed by General Tikka Kha?
in February, 1973 that China would not r ‘se Bangladesh till
Pakistan did so. (The author je ee
was a member of the delegation).