402
Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre |
33 Baloch defending Kaska delayed the attackers till they Were
asked to withdraw and join 12 FF. Although the guns of 31 Fiely
Regiment had been re-deployed to support 12 FF and 33 Baloch in
their new locations, unfortunately the defensive Position at
Brahamanbaria could not be organised in time. When the hastily
prepared defences were threatened on 6 December, 27 Brigade fe}
back to Ashuganj on the eastern bank of the Meghna astride the
road/rail bridge.
_ The Indians made a frantic effort to encircle headquarters 14
Division and 27 Brigade before they crossed over to Bhairab Bazar
and to capture the all important bridge intact, but they could not
succeed, After holding the attackers at bay divisional tactical
headquarters and remnants of the brigade were safely on the
home bank of the Meghna on 9 December having destroyed a few
spans of the erstwhile life line. Just_before slipping away
Lieutenant Colonel Aftab (33 Baloch) counter-attacked the enemy
and captured eight enemy tanks. All the guns of 31 Field
Regiment and section of 53 Field Regiment managed to get across
the Meghna at night through improvised ferrying.
Commander Eastern Command, had by now realised the folly
of not keeping any troops in Dacca. He was now clutching at
straws. General Majeed received a panic call from General Niazi.
He wanted two companies to be sent to him immediately to
defend Dacca against an imminent attack. Majeed dispatched two
companies of 12 FF by river transport to Dacca on night between
. ane 7 December*”, They never reached their destination. Even if
toe latat it would have had no impact on the outcome. Too little
Pi rare Saadullah was organising the remnants of his
rigade at Bhairab Bazar to put up a last ditch battle, the ene
. : ae “ y -passed him totally. It was Sagat’s idea to helilift
withdrawal “= 7 S the Meghna and cut off 14 Divi
helicopters for thi acca. Aurora agreed and provided him 4
D pters for this pur pose, "The airlift began at 3.30 p. m. On
ecember and by next morning a ¢ , lion of 311 Indiaa
Brigade al g a complete battalion 0 the
P ari sient ong with a section of heavy mortars was on
stani side of the major water obstacle. On 10 December they
rested"4 said Aurora. Th 235 e. On and
finally two § rigs helilift was resumed the next day é
y two infantry battalion guppo
were air-landed betw 's along with some artillery
etween Bhairab Bazar and Narsingdi.