Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) sal
between East and West Pakistan saying that it had been agreed
upon at the time of Liagat Ali Khan and again by Khwaja
Nazimuddin. It was also endorsed by the constituent assembly in
September, 1953 when Muhammad Ali Bogra as prime minister
put forward his formula. No headway could be made at the Round \
Table Conference which ended without achieving anything. |
The secretary general of the Al] Pakistan Awami League,
L.H.M. Qamur Zaman, was sent by Mujib to West Pakistan with a
proposed bill amending the 1962 Constitution in order to bring it
in line with the Awami League’s regional autonomy demands. It
required 100 amendments to the existing constitution. Accepting - |
it would have resulted in a confederation with Bangladesh and
made it a nominal component of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
Ayub did not agree with the proposed amendments as according
to him it would mean the break up of the country, But by now
events had moved rapidly towards the imposition of another
)s martial law‘,
Towards the beginning of 1969 the towering figure of Field
Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan began to lose its impressive
image. His health was failing so was his popularity. His ability to
manage the political crisis, which had developed after the failure
of the Round Table Conference of all major political leaders in the
country, was being questioned both in the civil and military
circles. Although his close aides including his military secretary,
Major General Muhammad Rafi, secretary information Altaf
Gohar and Syed Fida Hasan, his advisor on political affairs, tried
to give him the much needed back up support, he no longer could
withstand the pressures being built up against him both by the
+ Politicians and the top army brass at that time.
Mr. A.B. Awan, the home secretary, after visiting the
Provincial capitals in March, 1969 reported a complete defiance of
authority specially in Dacca and Karachi®, The law and order
situation had deteriorated considerably. A thousand houses had
been reduced to ashes in Parbatipur, a prominent railway. junction
In the Dinajpur district of East Pakistan. The death toll in the
incidents at Dacca had risen to 39, curfew had been imposed and
Violated at several places. The East Wing secretariat was ’geh-
ra0ed’, Hartals (strikes) were becoming a daily feature, even
Sweepers began raising their voices. In many towns electric
Supplies were cut off by disgruntled government employees.