Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 137
Comments
The LFO did specify a large number iti
authors thought would ensure that an eee "4 aaa
acceptable to the majority of the people of Pakistan ‘would “he
| democratically installed and that the solidarity and integrity of the
country would also be assured. However, the LFO did not receive
the willing approval of the politicians and some senior generals. It
was criticised in East Pakistan as it was considered a retreat from
the plan put forward by Yahya on November 28, 1969%8. The
authentication by the President of the constitution framed by the
newly elected members of the national assembly was considered
by the Bengalis to be a curtailment of the sovereignty of the
parliament. Article 25 Gostheniestion) was considered to be
totally undemocratic and article 27 (according to which any
question or doubt as to the interpretation of the LFO would be
resolved by the President) created doubts about the sincerity of
the army to hand over power. Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman is
reported to have said "I shall tear LFO to pieces as soon as the
elections are over"29. He knew he could do that if he gained the
overwheming support of the East Pakistan electorate.
Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto was apprehensive that the elections held’ ‘/
under the LFO could endanger the integrity of Pakistan*’, He did
not approve of the 120 days time limit after the elections to frame
a constitution. He had also wanted the autonomy issue to be
~ settled before the people’s mandate was asked for, either through
parleys between political leaders or by means of a retereniusy | q
In this he was supported by several generals. They wanted a/’
‘ constitutional document prepared before the elections , which
, would define the limits of provincial autonomy. If this had been
done and East Pakistan, due to its geographical separation from
West Pakistan, was given a large measure of provincial autonomy
in the LFO, Sheikh Mujib may not have been able to whip up the
bitterness and anger against the Punjabis and spit. fire against the |
West Pakistani leadership as he did during the election ey
is a correct view expressed by a western author”.
The Legal Frame Work Order had not been accepted willingly
by the iwo-main contenders for the ‘throne’. Mujib had t ay
intention of adhering to it,and Bhutto had serious reservations. */
- THe biewest flaw in the LFO was not
was, therefore, a non starter. The biggest a the elected
Specifying the fact that a constitution framed by the