| Indo-Pakistan War - 197 | Eastern Theatre 305
communications, to Chittagong and Sylhet could be cut off
without difficulty as the rail and road network Passed very close to
the international border. Due to major water obstacles the defence
had to be compartmentalised. The concept of keeping central
reserves would not work as movement. to threatened sectors
would take a considerable amount of time. With hardly any air-lift
capability it would be virtually impossible to react £. ie
threat in time.
sae the centre of gravity lay in West Pakistan and the
political and military power was concentrated in the hands of the
non-Bengalis the policy of defence of the East lay in the West
found favour amongst the national Strategic planners. From the
Bengali point of view this recipe was not palatable. It would have
been little consolation for the Bengalis, if their own province came
under Indian occupation, to know that the Pakistan army was
holding a chunk of Rajasthan territory.
Distribution of Forces
Militarily the distribution of forces was sound. The direction of
threat, the terrain and infrastructure and the location of enemy
offensive formations all pointed to the fact that in any conflict with
India the major and secondary efforts of the Indian armed forces
would be against West Pakistan.
However, national strategy should not only take into account
military considerations but should also analyse the political and
socio-economic fall out of major decisions - on various segments of
Its citizens,
The presence of troops in an area in peace time does not only
help in achieving a measure of security but it also contributes to
nation building. Cantonments bring with it economic benefits to
those who live in and around it. Contractors, petty shopkeepers,
wtisans and a host of other traders derive their daily bread from
the money circulated by the armed forces personnel. Cunlign
“dlonies come up around cantonments to serve the need of a _ oa
Uniformed population. That being so it was West Pakistan t a
benefitted most from the defence budget. A natural response,
East Pakistan, to a significant imbalance in the eS aes
mn otments between the two regions acne - exploit
the el Standable. It gave an opportunity to the p
Situation to their advantage.