Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 363
infantry divisions were short of field guns as well. Armour and
engineer units were mostly deficient. Brigadier Arif Raz h
was commander Corps Signals in Eastern Command ee who
his debriefing report that signal communications wae ae
dependent on radio sets imposing immense Security probl ainly
T&T and PL routes were not extensive and subject i. om as
disruption by subversive elements, aetna
Second line forces were totally ill equi
communication infrastructure had my yp raliry ‘ee
insurgents. Inland water transport had been depleted i to
sabotage activities. Expected air Support was minimal. East
Pakistan had been completely isolated because of a naval blockade
and banning of overflights over India. Out of the 8 battalions
promised only two had arrived and Dacca had no regular troops at
all for its defence.
Battle of Hilli
Notwithstanding the fact that the entire concept of operations
of Eastern Command, for the defence of East Pakistan, against a
full fledged Indian attack, was wrongly conceived one can derive
some solace by recalling those few battles which were fought with
courage and determination, irrespective of their outcome. If one
was asked to pick up a few pieces from the ashes of the military
debacle the most significant amongst them would be the actions of
205 Infantry Brigade, part of 16 Infantry Division, which was
responsible for the defence of the Hilli - Bogra section in the
north-west sector of East Pakistan.
Hilli was a small town containing a few thousand inhabitants,
most of whom had fled to safer areas during the ensuing battle
between the army and the insurgents. The town was _—e
tight on the border between West Bengal and East Pakistan. ‘ :
city being only a couple of hundred yards away from the ee aad
The main railway line from Calcutta to north Bengal ie aati |
India had passed through Hilli. So close was the frontie ie
the two arch rivals that many of the windows of the mu
*Pened on Indian territory.
‘ : ich jutted
_, illi was located on the eastern Up ore Sedat land
nto Pakistan. The protruding Indian finger creates * ded an ideal
between it and the river Jamuna. It, therefore, provicet’ ld
abe : this direction cou
objective for the enemy as a rapid thrust along
Unhinge the defences completely in this sector.