51
Causes of Alienation
Dacca University, along with a professor of political science, were
jailed for propagating the demand for Bengali to be also given the
status of a national language. Both of them were later re] eased. A
language Day began to be celebrated year after year to recall the
1952 Language movement. A platform Was now available for
Bengali politicians to whip Up propaganda against their West
P akistani counterparts. Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, then a non-
entity, took up the cause of the Bengali language, an issue which
touched the hearts of all Bengalis, and soon became a hero.
The significance of this event can be judged from the fact that
the first stamp issued by the government of Bangladesh comm-
emorated the two students who died during the language riots.
Brigadier Abdul _Hafeez, the director of the Bangladesh
Institute of International and Strategic Studies (BIISS), felt that 7
Nazimuddin became extremely unpopular in East Bengal because
he had not supported the Bengali Language movement?. The
bitterness against him, for not giving Bangla its due status, still
exists in a section of the Bangladeshis so much so that they are
demanding that his body, lying buried along with Maulvi Fazlul Bun
Haq and Hussain Shaheed Suharwardy in Dhaka, be removed
from its final resting place.
"The seeds of the secessionist movement were sown in the
1950s when Urdu was declared to be the only national language!
said Professor Shamsul Haq, a former minister in the Yahya
Cabinet and later chairman of the BIISS, The view was supported
by Enamul Haq Choudhry, Secretary Planning, Economic
Resources division in the government of Bangladesh!!.
Nazimuddin, was dismissed by Malik Ghulam Muhammad,
the eccentric and paralytic but powerful governor-general of
Pakistan, for being soft towards his people and for not handling
the language agitation in East Bengal in a more firm manner.
Ghulam Muhammad's answer to the language riots was the
language of bullets, a response which comes easily to a
government servant. This further alienated the Bengalis. Field
Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan, as president of Pakistan, also
could not rise above parochial issues when he said "It is quite clear S
to me that with two national languages we cannot become one
nation!2." He should have known that there are three official -
languages in Switzerland and two in Canada. Their states are
allowed to retain their respective mother tongues.