432 Tragedy of Errors
peaceful settlement to the East Pakistan a Roedad Kh ‘i
then information secretary, confided ae the ‘senior civilian
officials supported the attack in the western theatre because they
believed that the Pakistan army would be able'to overrun. large
chunk of Indian territory in the west which would force India to
give up its evil designs.
On the other hand, so far, the Indian armed forces were
engaged in a clandestine war in support of the Mukti Bahini. War
had not been declared and regular army units with their full
complement of artillery support had not openly participated in the
operations. The Indian air force had restricted itself to the border
areas. India concious of the reaction by certain countries friendly
to Pakistan, had not yet made deep penetrations nor had they
posed a direct threat to Dacca by air and ground forces. Eastern
Command had successfully kept the Mukti Bahini at bay for eight
months. Even after India’s open aggression on 21 November only
border areas had been overrun in the two weeks of fighting.
Although the outcome of the conflict was a foregone conclusion
Eastern Command had the ability to keep the Indians embroiled
for a longer period of time if an all out war was not declared. An
attack across the western border of India would give India the
excuse to invade West Pakistan using its superiority in men,
weapons and material to telling effect. India could make its
supporters believe that it was Pakistan, not India, which started
an all out war. The onus of proving otherwise would be on
Pakistan.
Both China and the United States were advising General
Yahya not to widen the conflict.
. The decision to open the second front, therefore, was a difficult
one for General Yahya. The pros and cons were discussed at
General Headquarters. General Abdul Hamid, Air Marshal
Rahim and Major General Gul Hasan were preseitt at a crucial
meeting on 30 November. The Naval Commander-in-Chief was
out at sea and could not attend. He was briefed the next day. No
joint operation plans were, however, conceived or executed. The
navy was only informed of the decision a day before the attack was
to go in. Commander Eastern Command was not kept in the
picture. If he was told early and directed to do so he may hav¢
ledpnated fine flung units and formations on to Pr&