Indo-Pakis r
aKistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre 385
a gap between 6 Punjab and 21 Punjab
st the company/battalion level ba fons A spirited battle
night 27/28 November 1971. sht, on this ground on
At about 1930 hours all localities ;
: S in
intense artillery shelling. After a ly soy sector came under
reliminary bombardment b an hour and a half
P ' ©gan as a prelud :
) attack. The artillery observer engaged three q ‘ to a full fledged
front of Brunda position. the enemy ady elensive fire tasks in
-hours. 21 Punjab held its fire till the Sates started at 2200
yards. Subedar Haq Nawaz (21 Punjab) Closed in up to 200
millimetre recoilless rifle (RR) hbnniatt ll ee to man, a 75
rounds of HEAT. The fire alongwith oth ne he fred 7
k ‘ia er automatics broke th
enemy's attack and inflicted heavy losses on th e
two dead bodies in olive green littered the area ri ten nn. Roly
of the trenches. Soon the enemy fire died away eee eat
At 0530 hours next day a troop of tanks wi
with
again attacked the defensive position. The move ae Fi
accurate artillery fire. The defenders again stood there like a rock.
A battalion size attack was blunted and finally destroyed by a
small force of a company of 21 Punjab”®, An Indian havildar
(Bansi Lal) of 1 Jammu and Kashmir Battalion, who was taken
prisoner and was brought to the battalion headquarters for first
aid and Interrogation, spelt out the orders given to his unit which
left no doubt about the Indian army’s military intervention in
Fast Pakistan,
According to him 1 Jammu and Kashmir was to capture
tunda and Kaim Khola by first light 28 November, 1971. H
our was 2200 and A Hour 2300 hours. (This was clear evidence
at the Indian army had begun its planned offensive against East
akistan before the second front was opened by General Yahya). A
tery of foreign correspondents and photographers visited the
ttalion headquarters. They met Havildar Bansi Lal of 1 Jammu
my eashmir Battalion. They also saw the dead bodies of Indian
diers ang other captured weapons and equipment. This ates
le proof of Indian’s blatant aggression which was being denie
them go far.
,eneral Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi visited 107 rhage
*mber, Hayat recommended to him that some Aevolntling
Pulled back to Jessore as the threat to the city was