Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 195
Mujib that the lifting of the martia) law '
ret to be done by the national iments -_ handing over power,
Mujib objected to the composition of the inquiry committee -
according to him, an Awami League member should also have |
been incorporated. He also did not agree to the terms of et ave
as it pertained only to the circumstances under which the arms
was called in aid of civil power whereas he wanted the comnin
committee to pin down responsibility for the ‘unwanton’ killin a
‘innocent’ civilians by the army. He rejected the proceedings The
commission of inquiry. Mujib also remained firm by saying that
the other two points should also be carried out before the national
assembly is convened. Yahya replied saying "In Principle I am not
even entitled to agree to the lifting of the martial law and handing
‘over power but for the sake of peace we would consider these two
points before the meeting of the nationd] assembly but some
modalities have to be worked out". Mujib accepted this view.
The President then went on to Say "let us prepare the
modalities together. We have our teams. Let us ask them to meet
and work out the modalities. We will keep overseeing them",
Mujib agreed to send his team to discuss the details, but before
. leaving, he created a stir by telling the President "why not we have
/ confederation, We will still have one president, one flag". Yahya
' was taken aback. There was dead silence for a while. But he kept
his cool. "Sheikh Sahib I have come to talk about the
alrangements for a federation of Pakistan not about
Confederation. We are all prepared to give absolute maximum
autonomy to the provinces in some cases (referring to East
Pakistan) even more than the others".
The meeting which lasted one hour and forty five carr
11.45 am to 1. am) ended on the note that the two negotiating
teams Should meet, The President asked Peerzada not to mention
the word confederation to any one. The Awami League ing
'0 point out that the negotiations should not be tripe. .
sould not include Bhutto. Dr Kamal Hussein ole Yahya,
done that they would address all drafts to |
i .
Of : lieus
After Mujib left Yahya called all his aides. need Comers .
argued against the lifting of martial law before the p
hand ° - is lifted there would be a vacuum
ed over as once martial law is lifte
www.balochlibrary.com