Military Action 267
Tikka kept a watchful eye
Haroon. “Bhola island has only e day ge roeress being made by
said the East Pakistan governor, "Hay rations do something"
fertilizer to Bogra’? queried the MLA‘ pu ‘ispatched the
Balochistan had his human side as wel) Ar. So-called butcher of ,”,
he concentrated on the economic aspect and . = military action
between April and October. Pe nothing broke down
By the middle of May the gover |
over almost all of East Fubidtan Shope he restored normalcy |
started running, schools and colleges began ri er factories |
showed normal attendance, TV and radio stations wo offices |
control of the administration. Even Brigadier Ja er under the
Indian army acknowledges that the hold by ae mee of the |
i i . Stanis
was improving by the day. The claim made by the Mukti B hini |
and the Indians, he believed, were highly exaggerated “When re |
Indians invaded East Pakistan in November they rer a :
Pakistanis right on the border" confided Jagdev Singh. But an
under-current of hatred against the army persisted.
Critical Analysis
1 Out of the 8 immediate objectives of Operation SEARCH
LIGHT, only a few could be achieved and that too partially. Some,
but not all, of the six East Bengal Regiments were indeed
disarmed. Those that went across to India almost intact with their
weapons formed the core of the Mukti Bahini.
Only two of the die-hard Awami League leaders were arrested.
Although they were clever enough to be frequently on the move »
the intelligence agencies should have kept a tag on them,specially
when it was becoming obvious that an action against them would
probably be necessary. If the majority of the Awami League
stalwarts would have been taken into a the secessionists
Would have needed more time to reorganise themselves.
Although all major towns were secured the —
still under the control of the dissidents and the mobility 0
army remained restricted and it’s security jeopardised. 1 of
Radio and TV stations came once again under seraing. fron |
the government, but clandestine radio stations Op rfare against,“
Indian territory continued to wage psychological me : :
: ry continued to wag ‘de in East Pakistan,
Pakistan. News about the so-called Gee tapmatiotiol media.
therefore, was still being picked up by the in
i