|
266 Tragedy of Errors
the Indian propaganda was declared. Indian propaganda of a) ee
‘genocide and the flight of Hindu population from East Pakistan,
had tarnished Pakistan’s image abroad. Incentives had to be Riven
|to encourage them to return.
General Tikka ended his directive to Eastern Commang by
saying that "minority communities were to be assured that they
would continue to be guaranteed their right of equal citizenship
like any other Pakistani. That they would be given full freedom in
their religious affairs and their places of worship would be fully
protected’. He wanted maximum publicity to be given to this, 7)
ensure border security, however, a 5 mile belt along the Sylhet/
India border was to be evacuated. ‘It is quite possible that
saboteurs, infiltrators and enemy agents will attempt to cross into
East Pakistan. Selective screening of returning personnel will be
necessary" continued Tikka. Armed forces were required to take
initiatives to establish contact with people to ascertain their
_ problems.
"Our behavior should remain fair, firm and friendly’
emphasised the General at the end of his directive. But Alas! that
was not to be ‘ethnic cleansing’ became the order of the day.
Immediately after restoring the writ of the government
General Tikka Khan set about the task of revamping al’
commercial activity in East Pakistan which had come to a
standstill during the Awami League’s confrontation with the
ee authorities, Since much of the traffic moved on Inland
ber ie ansport (IWT). Tikka laid stress on getting that
Commander Haroon-Ibn-e-Ali had jJust been posted to East
Pakistan. Being a naval officer he was dir ted P
moving both withi : ected to get the goods
within the province and to the ports for exporting
Bengal’s golden fibre Har : .
IWT Che, - “aroon conducted daily meetings with the
Chairman, Mr. Abdur Rash d ,
road - nasheed and secretary railway and
| oad transport board, Mr Qazi Jalal
Kecon eee al, (both Bengali gentlemen).
cording to Har cna
them and shape aealen maximum cooperation from
Coasters carried food — began to move along all routes.
launches loaded with ine, ms from Chittagong ports inland;
IWT was able to export igi ee a m the interior to Chittagong.
corr ; nin greater quantities than the
sponding period of the year before!l, Pes HAP