sac Tragedy of Errors
warned by Major General Khadim Hussein Raja not to announo,
a unilateral declaration of independence (UDI). or else he Would
use his full military force against him and the Awami Leggy,
Mujib was, however, under pressure to do so from the Students
and hardliners. He deliberated on this issue for a long while and
was, therefore, late in arriving at the race course ground that
evening. He correctly decided that prudence is a better Part of
valour, "UDI - not yet” was his reply to a questionnaire fro, te
foreign journalist.
It was by all standards Mujib’s day. His baritone voice Was fy]
of passion. He was in full command of the situation. The people
responded spontaneously to every inflexion in his tone. There
were several climaxes both in voice and substance. All in all it wag
a powerful speech which could have moved stones and trees, The
impact on a volatile audience was electrifying.
Reporting the meeting on March 7, the intelligence agencies in
Kast Pakistan recommended that all suitable steps by armed
forces be taken to plan for the worst contingency on assumption
that there would be complete non-cooperation from locals.
Sheikh Mujib started a non cooperation movement against the
Centre - ala Mahatma Karamchand Gandhi of India. His 10
points of ‘Ahimsa’ included: (1) Bengalis not to pay taxes to the
government; (2) all government officials to observe hartal and not
to attend offices; (3) railway and port workers not to cooperate
with the government; (4) radio, TV and press not to suppress
news about the Awami League’s directives and ‘atrocities’
committed against them by the Pakistan Army; (5) only local and
district telephone connections to be put through; (6) all schools to
remain closed; (7) banks in ‘Bangladesh’ not to remit any money
to West Pakistan; (8) black flags to be flown on all buildings, shops
and transport system; (9) general hartal throughout the country
to be withdrawn and (10) Sangram Parishad (Council of Action)
to be organised at mohalla, union and district level.
__ These instructions were later sent out as directives (thirty five
in all) from time to time by the Awami League which were
implemented by nearly all Bengalis in letter and spirit. He als?
ee ( 1) immediate cessation of a military build up in Bast
akistan; (2) Immediate stoppage of firing on civilians by the
army; (3) non interference by the military authorities in running
the government in East Pakistan and (4) maintenance of law and