ae Tragedy of Errors
further enlargement of the enemy’s bridge head. On 25 November
12 Punjab, a fresh battalion from Pabna (16 Division), was given
to 107 Brigade to reinforce the Afra position.
Even after five days of intense fighting Jibannagar in the
extreme north of the brigade position and right on the border was
still out of reach of the enemy. A threat to the village developed on
926 November. The same night a company of 38 FF was ordered to
move from Hasanada to Jibannagar. It was, however, too late to
take up a proper defensive position. The Indians had already
started shelling the area and later that night the enemy succeeded
in capturing Jibannagar. The company of 38 FF fell back east of
Khalispur where it joined 50 Punjab which had come from 16
Division to reinforce 9 Division. This new force was commanded
by the colonel staff of the division.
Hayat claims that he again asked his GOC to allow him to
withdraw 15 FF from the less threatened sector in the south to
Jessore as the city was lying vacant and the enemy was likely to
break through the defences north-west of the town but he was not
allowed to do so. Ansari is reported to have told Hayat "you have
effectively contained the enemy. Let us wait and see”.
Hayat quoted a signal which was received by his brigade, on
the eve of an all out war, from headquarters Eastern Command
which said "no withdrawal from present positions(.) brigade
commander can only withdrew screens (.) GOC can withdraw
only one company (.) fight on present positions till 75% casualties
have been suffered"2®,
Indian Attack on Helsa - 27 November 1971
21 Punjab minus two Companies, 12 Punjab and a Company
22 Frontier Force was assigned the responsibility to defend area
‘Muhammad Pur - Helsa approximately 10 kilometres from
Jessore on a subsidiary axis. This was the shortest approach t
Jessore which would have helped the enemy to by-pass the main
defences along axes Chuagacha - Jessore and Jingar Gacha -
Jessore.
Based on the information provided by the Mukti Bahini 7
Jammu and Kashmir Battalion (Indian Army) attacked the
extreme right shoulder of 21 Punjab position. This area Wa5 held
by approximately a platoon plus. Indians probably thought it was