234 Tragedy of Errors
Regiments, a total strength of 11,200 men. Safiullah who, by
is - 1971. had promoted himself to the rank of a brigadie
Se a <a brigade. Both of his staff officers Werg
sort His Indian army. His brigade major ae Major Gulati a
fficer from the Indian artillery and the deputy quartey
= veneral (DQ) was major D.R.. Nijrawan. It is interesting t,
note that the Indians were openly Janes ther “a to
operate within East Pakistan even before November 2122,
The most colourful, arrogant and defiant amongst the
resistance leaders was Abdul Kader Siddiqui. He raised his own
force and name it Kader Bahini. It operated independently around
Mymensingh close to Dacca. He crossed into India in June, 197]
and contacted the Indian authorities who assisted him jp
organising, equipping and training his force to act as informers,
saboteurs and fifth columnists for the Indian army in their
planned invasion of East Pakistan.
Kader Siddiqui the self styled ‘tiger’ of Tangail was a 28 year
old student from that city and controlled the area between Tangail
and Dacca. He claimed to have 5,000 men under arms, later he
increased it to about 20,000**. He was a ‘devotee’ of Sheikh Mujib
and is reported to have crossed into India from Bangladesh after
Mujib’s assassination in 1974 with 2,000 rebels in order to revive
pro-India Myjibism™4. The Indian government is reported to have
agreed to meet his demand because his group was expected to
prevent the harbouring of Mizo rebels in independent
Bangladesh?5, |
Gona Bahini consisted of the pro-communists elements. The
Bengali air force rebels formed the Beeman Bahini and Toofan
Bahini.
A naval wing of the Mukti Bahini was also put in place. They
were trained in underwater operations and by August, 1971 three
hundred rebels were sent to Cochin for under water training.
sakiother 300 frogmen were trained at Plassey in the river
Bhagirathi (West Bengal). They sank ships, destroyed coasters
See Makati, tate over barges, boats and launches. The
strength of the Mukti Bahini and its sister organisations
continued to rise. By the end of June the rebels were estimated to
number 30,000. By November the fi ; d when
the all out war started i ae eee 8: TOOGE anew
it had reached around 100,000.