40
Tragedy of Errors
responsible for defence and foreign affairs only; (3) currengy
should be controlled by regional reserve banks; (4) federatj,
units to provide money to the Centre on a pre-determings
procedure; (5) federating units to maintain their own foreign
exchange accounts and (6) federating units can raise their ow,
military and para military forces.
These 6 points were first enunciated by Sheikh Mujib-yp.
Rahman in a pamphlet "Our right to live"’®. It was first given oyt
by the Sheikh at the Al Pakistan National Conference jy
February 1966, at Lahore®’. Although Rahman Subhan insisteq
that the Awami League formula created a basis for autonomy in
decision making and in the control of resources in actual fact it
amounted to a demand for a confederation between two
autonomous regions. ~
The significance of these issues became greater in the eyes of
the Bengalis after the 1965 war when they realized that they could
be easily isolated from West Pakistan. Mujib’s arrest in 1966 on
charges of anti-state activities and his subsequent open trial in the
Agartala Conspiracy in 1968 made him a stronger advocate of 6-
Points. In addition to the 6 Points there was also the 11 Points of
the Bengali students framed in 1969 which together formed the
basis for demanding regional autonomy for East Pakistan.
The Controversy over the Interpretation of the
Lahore Resolution
The Lahore Resolution (later to be known as the Pakistan
Resolution) moved by Fazlul Haq at the 27th Session of the All
India Muslim League, at Lahore on March 23, 1940 stated "that
geographically contiguous units are demarcated into regions
which should be so constituted, with such territorial adjustments
as may be necessary, that the areas in which the Muslims are in 4
majority, as in the north-west and eastern zones of India, should
be grouped to constitute independent states in which the
aru nee shal be autonomous and sovereign". Fazlul Hat
ne Sr von Bie the Resolution, however, did not in any wa)
og ven int at the formation of two different Muslim
- His words "I earnestly appeal to my Muslim friends
throughout India to remain united and be pr , d on
their own feet" indicated that h : prepared ee jim
country. at he was talking of one Mus!
.
j