172
Tragedy of Errors
strongly resented both by the civilians and the junior officers" .,; ‘
the DG, ISI. Peerzada maintains that he was against the Atri
‘ application of martial law whether it was to be in East or in West
Pakistan.
General Yahya then described very briefly the dilemma he was
facing and the crisis that would erupt if the political leaders gia
not cooperate with each other. He, with a heavy heart, told them
about his intention to postpone the inaugural session of the
national assembly if major political issues were not resolveq
between the Awami League and the People’s Party. Generg]
Farman claims that he told General Yahya not to postpone the
national assembly session. Admiral Ahsan and General Yaquh
were also against the postponement but their voices were lost in
the wilderness.
The President then moved into a smaller room with only
Hamid, Ahsan, Yaqub and Peerzada. He then spelt out his next
step. "My intention is to postpone the national assembly session as
the East Pakistani leaders are not being helpful. I intend to
reverse the direction and re-introduce strict martial law in East
Pakistan alone. I have lost confidence in Mujib. We have been
; weakening the martial law proportionately as the democratic
process moved forward. Now it is going to be a reversal of my
earlier policies. We should knock sense in the head of Mujib and
hold the assembly session only after the Awami League has been
crushed. Let us get the train moving again and this time by force’
concluded the President - for the first time speaking in the tone of
a commander-in-chief to his corps commanders.
Sahibzada Yaqub listened to his boss with quiet disdain then
elucidated in his accustomed grace and style using all the war
course terminology he had mastered over the years and put across
his views clearly, candidly and politely.
‘I cannot comment upon the political wisdom of such a
decision" said the general. "As commander Eastern Command I
shall, however, point out the military consequences of the
postponement of the national assembly session. In the situation
prevailing in East Pakistan every assessment must perforce be
intermingled with politics", peminded Sahibzada Yaqub.
newt els * holding of elections and generating the hopes of a
sha: cciintests government to take over from the military regime
| pirations of the Bengalis in East Pakistan had changed