164 Tragedy of Errors
that before taking any positive steps regarding 6 Points he Woy
consult the West Pakistani leadership. "Amongst whoty y,,
certainly an important leader" remarked Yahya to Bhutto, ‘
President pacified Bhutto further_by_commenting, "he can, :
ignore you". He also told Bhutto that Mujib had agreed to ti
him and that it was essential for the majority parties of the bp
wings to cooperate with each other put much depends on how th
majority party (AL) feels about this.
The meeting ended with.Yahya summing it up by say;
"Bhutto’ you should sort it out with Mujib or else sit in th
opposition benches. It will be a strong opposition indeed". Bhutty,
closing remarks to Peerzada on the quiet were ‘whatever gave yo
all the idea that I am Banderanaike" (meaning I shall not accent
‘+ the role of the opposition).
The Larkana meeting, which has been mentioned by mog
scholars as a sell out to Bhutto was, according to Peerzada, ;
meeting of differences. It ended with a note that Bhutto shoul
meet Mujib and come to some understanding and that the army
was not going to take any sides in shaping the future shape of the
government. Unfortunately neither Ghulam Mustafa Khar nor}
Mumtaz Ali Bhutto, who were also present at Larkana, confirmed
the details of the conversation between the chairman of the PP?
and the president of Pakistan. Khar did not reply to the author's
letter. Mumtaz Bhutto showed total ignorance as according to hin,
though he was pee there he did not participate or overheat
the conversation®?,
Bhutto subsequently went to Dacca on January 27. During his
meeting with Mujib he discussed the 6 Points which were proving
to be the main hurdle. On the first point viz that the character a
the government should be federal and parliamentary there was "™
cic between the two. Bhutto also agreed that the cent?
. ou have minimum exclusive subjects as suggested by Mult
linked he ingisted horde trade and foreign affairs were clos¢ ,
subject. Th mee - at foreign trade should also remain a cont
given up by Muith ™ ue relating to two separate currencies yer
the flight obca = poids constitutional safeguards to abt
fourth, fifth and sixth none ost Pakistan were made. OF
foreign exchange name regarding me Haeal pousy, CP
no disagreement. He had — an East Pakistan militia thet ints
of Sheikh Mujib-ur Raheny pene 5-1/2 out of the 6 Pe |
Un as eatly as January.