314
Tragedy of Errors
Although Nixon and Kissinger were wanting to Prevent th
disintegration of Pakistan but their concern was confined only na
the territory of West Pakistan which was still 8€0-politically of
significance to the United States. The State Departmen; ig
reported to have asked Ambassador Farland to find out from,
General Yahya if he was willing to seek a cease fire in the West, jg
he did so,United States would make a major effort to preserve
Pakistan’é territorial integrity and armed forces”*. Of course this
referred to West Pakistan alone. They had written off the eastern
half well before the war had ended.
When an offer of ceasefire was made by Pakistan’s Eastern
Command, Kissinger called General N. A. M. Raza, who had by
then replaced Mr. Agha Hilaly as the ambassador of Pakistan in
Washington, and asked him not to give an unconditional ceasefire
offer to India but to demand a ceasefire in both sectors. According
to Kissinger if that is not done, India would then try to dismember
West Pakistan as well29. A méssage was also sent on the hot line
to Moscow that India should accept a ceasefire. The Soviet replied
that India had no designs in the West.
Jack Anderson’s contention that a superpower confrontation
could have taken place in the Bay of Bengal because of Nixon’s tilt
towards Pakistan, only betrays his personal animosity against
Nixon and his pro-Indian stance. Neither the Soviet Union nor the
United State’s vital interests were at stake in East Pakistan. Nor
were the assembly of forces and the dispositions during the Indo-
Pakistan war such,that a conflict between the two superpowers
could have taken place. When the US naval flotilla crossed the
straits of Malacca a ceasefire was already being negotiated. It was
only a question of time when the obvious results would be known.
A nuclear holocaust at this stage, as envisaged by Anderson, was
,ho where on the cards. It is a pity that internationally known
columnists cannot tear themselves away from personal rivalries
and pre-conceived ideas.
After the war was over , William Rogers, who had been
opposing Nixon’s so-called tilt towards Pakistan, did realise that
the use of force to solve a political problem in the neighbourhood
was not justified. He is reported to have said on January 5, 1972
If every political problem that is created in the world justifies the
use of force then there is no end to war'29, |
|