454 Tragedy of Errors
onvention of 1949 on the protection of wounded and Sick
Seats of war. The resolution was adopted by 183 votes to none
against, with two abstentions (Poland, USSR).
Analysis
The time to take the issue to the Security Council was on 99
November when it had become quite clear that India had violated
the integrity of Pakistan on a large scale by sending its troops deep
inside Pakistan territory. It was no longer a situation where the
Indian artillery was supporting the Mukti Bahini in carrying out
forays just across the border. The Indian regular army, whose
units had been identified, were not only occupying several salients
but were advancing menacingly towards population centres.
Independent correspondents could have verified Indian
aggression against Pakistan. The electronic media could have
vividly portrayed the fact as it existed on the ground, giving the
United States and China an opportunity to demand the
withdrawal of Indian forces from East Pakistan as early as 22
November. The Soviet Union, of-course, would have vetoed any
such resolution as they did on 5 December but it would have given
more time to friendly countries to increase the pressure on India.
Taking up the matter at the Security Council after 3 December
was not correctly timed as soon thereafter ‘resistance began to
crumble in East Pakistan. Members of the Security Council who
had been supporting Pakistan’s belated efforts to arrive at a
peaceful political settlement became lukewarm as the military
situation in East Pakistan began to turn in India’s favour.
Pakistan also lost an Opportunity to extricate its troops from
East Pakistan honourably when it did not accept the Russian
resolution of 5 December. The Soviet resolution, as mentioned
earlier, called for a political settlement and an end to all acts of
Violence by the Pakistan armed forces in East Pakistan. A
ceasefire in situ could perhaps have been worked out as the Soviet
Union was the only country at that stage which could have
stopped India continuing its advance into East Pakistan. Of
course, the only political solution acceptable to India and the
Awami League would have been total independence. There was 0
way that could be stopped. It could have been achieved, however;
without the humiliation of having 93,000 prisoners in Indian
camps for three years.