| a
Role of Other Countries 809
Congress, the people and th a i ; j
earned against. Pakistan an in tar age in the United Hy
states which was not following the demo le dean ih Was
pakista which was committin auc path, and it was
jhe Pakistan army wi itlng atrocities and forcing a
vy burden on India because of the millions of refugees which *!
1 ai ng to their country. The Washington Post of Octob oe
ma column which said, "Pakistan is almost entirely responsible
gor the threat to peace bécause it is exporting an internal political
voblems in the form of refugees into India and that Pakistan
ust be induced to halt the persecution of it’s own people”. No
mention Was made of India exploiting the political development in
, neighbouring country, nor could they see the arming, training
and launching of guerrillas across an international border with
impunity. The virile propaganda against Pakistan by the Indian, |
jadership was swallowed by Western columnists hook, line and |”
sinker.
The United States continued to put pressure on Yahya to give a
civilian and more humane look to his government. He was advised
toreplace the military governor in East Pakistan by a civilian. Dr.
Abdul Mutalib Malik, who had been a member of Yahya’s cabinet,
was appointed, but he remained a titular head of a province
engaged in a civil war. A promise was also obtained from Yahya
that he would not execute Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman who had
been sentenced to death by Brigadier Rahimuddin Khan, the
president of the special court trying the Awami League chief. "11
Senators and 58 members of the House of Representatives wanted
President Nixon to ask General Yahya to show compassion and
not to execute Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman. On August 11, Rogers
‘onveyed their concern to ambassador Agha Hilaly. Farland also
had ‘counselled Yahya not to kill Mujib and Yahya is reported to"
‘ae ea US envoy "you have convinced me he will not be
€cuted"!6.
1 ot told Indira when she met him in eae o a
lade Succeeded in persuading Yahya to talk to the Pen -
lth ot? again. On his advice Yahya had also given amneey ©
heated who had violated the laws of the land. But none
actions could satisfy the chief executive of India.
| we White House was getting concerned —_—
ijn eet of the conflict when it came to ae - ~ skiatatt
| tegular army units had begun crossing the
L i