Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) a
to Bhutto he placed his emphasis on economic issues and on an
independent foreign policy*®. By not putting up even one PPP
candidate in East Pakistan, Bhutto had even before the elections
accepted that he had no voice in the eastern wing nor was he
interested in establishing one. He, like Mujib, had already »
bifurcated the country in his mind. His only remaining objective
was not to allow Mujib to rule the roost in West Pakistan as well.
Mujib on the other hand did come to West Pakistan to canvass
for the four candidates of the Awami League from West Pakistan
(All of them lost the election). The Sheikh’s speech at Lahore on
July 5, was disturbed. Mujib is stated to have lost his temper and
said "you want to break up Pakistan. 95 percent Bengalis are with
me. We could do the same in East Pakistan"*’ - and they did.
While in Lahore he met Lieutenant General Azam Khan (retired),
one time governor of East Pakistan and one who had won the
hearts of the East Pakistanis for the good work he had done for
them while he was there. He tried to convince Azam Khan to join
the Awami League but failed in his attempt™.
The National Awami Party (Wali Group) did hold a working
committee meeting at Dacca on June 13, but it discussed the party
manifesto in view of the abolition of One Unit and faded away
from the political scene in East Pakistan*®. Khan Abdul Qayyoom
Khan criticised Mujib’s 6 Points during the election campaign and
occasionally said that "the Hindus formed the backbone of the ,
Awami League and that the Awami League was founded on the
hatred against West Pakistan. He was not too far wrong but what
he did not try to understand was the real reason for this growing
bitterness and frustration in the Bengali mind against their co-
citizens in the West.
The East Pakistan Muslim League stood for a strong Centre
but they were totally out of tune with the vast majority of the
Bengalis. The Muslim League had lost its appeal in East Pakistan
after it was totally defeated in 1954. Bengali nationalism had
pushed it in the background. The infighting between Monem
Khan and Sabur Khan and their subservient role in the Ayub Era,
had made them very unpopular in East Pakistan. None of the
factions of the Muslim League had any influence worth its name
in East Pakistan.