35
Geographical Characteristics
not the ones who benefitted. Social conditions deteriorated after
1947. The ideal for which they had Supported the Muslim League
had evaporated. Since business concerns and government offices
remained out of their hands they became an easy prey to false
promises by a crop of new leaders, Factions in the Muslim League
developed as prominent Personalities like Fazly] Haq, Bhashani,
Suharwardy, Mahmood Ali, Shibli, Mujib-ur-Rahman, Khondkar
Mushtag left the party that created Pakistan.
There was disappointment amongst the Muslim League
leaders in East Bengal when Maulana Akram, an old Muslim
Leaguer from Bengal, was not made the president of the Muslim
League and the presidentship was given instead to Choudhry
Khaliq-uz-Zaman from the United Provinces.
Stalwarts of the Muslim League namely Khwaja Nazimuddin,
Khwaja Khairuddin, Monem Khan, Sabur Khan and Nur-ul-
Amin were no longer considered as representing Bengali interests.
Muslim League was taken to be a party belonging to the upper
classes and Urdu speaking landlords from Hasan Manzil. The
Bengal famine of 1953 further discredited the old Muslim guards
of East Bengal, for their ineptitude to be able to feed their own
people.
After independence there was a phenomenal growth of the
lower and middle class in East Bengal. Their attitude and
orientation was totally different to the old Muslim League leaders
most of whom came from the upper strata of society. Since no
elections were held within the East Bengal Muslim League party,
the new aspirants to leadership did not get an opportunity to
| project their ideas.
The major reason, however, for the decline of the Muslim
League in East Bengal was their indifference to the language issue
Which was an extremely emotional matter for the Bengalis. It is
not difficult to understand why the Bengalis soon after attaining
their common objective of Pakistan continued to fight for their
Perceived rights in spite of their former allegiance to the Muslim
League. They were not willing to continue supporting a political
Party with whom they had combined to struggle against the
British and the Hindus, if their. aspirations were not being
fulfilled.