400
Tragedy of Errors
adhocery to produce a proper defensive plan in a totally different
setting. It was all the more difficult as the political objective
overruled military considerations.
His task was to deny Sylhet and Bhairab Bazar at all costs, To
accomplish this mission he deployed the whole of his two and half
brigades in a forward posture with all the five battalions placeq
side by side along the border. He could not afford to have any
depth in his division, although the shortest route to Dacca lay
through his formation.
Lieutenant General Sagat Singh commanding IV Corps, on the
other hand, was placed very comfortably. His was the strongest of
the three corps detailed to annex East Pakistan. It had three
infantry divisions (8, 23 and 57), one armoured brigade, three
divisional artilleries, medium guns of the corps artillery, adequate
helicopters to lift two companies at a time across the Meghna, air
to-greund sorties at will, all against four depleted infantry
brigades (two of 14 Division and two of 39 Division).
In addition to this formidable array of men and weaponry
Sagat Singh had the advantage of a Trojan House which would
subvert the fortress from within and open its doors from inside for
his troops to rush in.
27 Brigade (BRAHMANBARIA Sub Sector)
27 Brigade, consisting only of two battalions, was commanded
by Brigadier Saadullah. His task was to defend the area from
Madhabpur to the Salda Nadi just north of Comilla. On his left
was 313 Brigade and to the right 39 (Adhoc) Division. 12 Frontier
Force Regiment was covering the area from Akhaura to
Gangasagar while his second battalion, 33 Baloch, was looking
after the southern sector of the divisional defensive area. He had
the support of seven light tanks and a battery of guns including
two mortars. A recee and support platoon provided his screen to
cover a frontage of approximately 64 kilometres.
The Brigade headquarters was at Brahmanbaria about 16
kilometres north-west of the left forward battalion along the
railway line leading to the only road, rail bridge over the mighty
Meghna. There was no road between the brigade headquarters
and 12 FF.
Due to extended frontages 31 Field Regiment had to split ate
batteries between the two battalions. Concentrated fire of eve?