India’s Role in the break up of Pakistan 279
jul Qader, CSP, vice president administrati
ra Fazlur-Rahman CSP; Lieutenant Cotgaied Meee Mr
Hussain of the Pakistan Navy; and Sergeant Zahur-ul-H om
aq of the
PAF.
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman was already in jai
‘an Jail. whe
persons were ie cones In doubt the involvement of tenn
in the Agartala conspiracy. Even General Akber is re d
id Mujib was not involved. Hie =. . “ported to
have said Muj Nvolved. His name was included
Monem Khan", but still } ed by
Governor , S © was accused of the
ledgeable circles, h ‘came uae
charge. Knowledg: ~ ,. “itcles, however, were convinced that
Mujib, while remaining in the background, was directing the
separatist movement. After the creation of Bangladesh, Mujib
acknowledged that his dream had come true29.
According to reliable sources he had been receiving Weapons
and ammunition from India Over a period of time which he used to
keep hidden®®, He himself denied any connection with the
separatist, and maintained that he had been and would remain
loyal to Pakistan. G.W. Choudhry quotes Mujib as saying "How
could I think of destroying Pakistan being a disciple of Hussein
Shaheed Suharwardy"3!? (The fact that he had the photograph of
his mentor and not that of the Quaid-e-Azam in his house shows
the relative importance of the two in Mujib’s mind).
Although Indian writers accept that a conspiracy was hatched
at Agartala in 1967 according to which a part of East Bengal was
'o he ‘liberated’ with Indian army’s clandestine mopport aus ou
independent government of Bangladesh was to be set up**, the
“ase Was not handled properly by authorities in Pakistan.
The Agartala Conspiracy case was badly processed. ‘Though
there is no doubt that certain individuals, including some army
Personnel had been meeting Indian officials and were a
plans to seize some territory with their assistance, the case s tne
have been quietly disposed off and the ppt
wulshment. By holding an open trial and invo ving en
Mujib-ur-Rahman, who, by then had become a popular “e him
East P ki ot ing him the government ma —
akistan{ and then, releasing bn : to further/
ahero, The East Pakistan press used this as an issue her,
ali Pakistan. The Agartala
lenate the Bengalis from West made him a
COhspiracy and Mujib’s eventual release