At the UN 453
ow had lost his cool. He ac
aed the UN “a fraud and a farce a Council of dilatory tactics
of Britain and France, tore up pig nounced the neutral attitud
:; : ‘ : Own not we
resolution as 1S generally believeg)12 and €s, (not the Polish
Security Council meeting saying "l wil ne walked out of the
_ jgnominious surrender of part of fy meee a party to the
York on 16 December for — where b ty ™. Bhutto left New
he would be arrested on arrival ip Pakista, Waited to see whether
minister of what was left of his country "or be made the prime
In his absence two more dr
the Security Council on 15 Desalttions Were submitted to
resolution called for a cessation of hostilities ae Anglo-French
;a comprehensive politica] settlement The gue conclusion of
Pakistan to release all political prisoners The o mh: wanted
amendment to their earlie; resolution which tiielided € as
for the withdrawal of Indian forces from East Pakis ne me
hours of the ceasefire (UN Document $/ 10453/REVD i i
day (16 December) Mr Swaran Singh informed the Comelitiane
ceasefire had come into force in East Pakistan and that the
government of India had ordered a unilateral ceasefire by the
Indian forces on the western front. The Soviet Union welcomed
the announcement and hoped that power would be transferred to
the elected representatives immediately.
. Mahmood Suleman Maghribi, permanent representative of
Libya sent a letter to the Secretary General of the UN on 16
December Saying that while Pakistan acknowledged its mistakes
In East Pakistan, these mistakes and a flow of refugees to India
Could not constitute a justification for a pre-meditated full scale
invasion by the forces of a neighbouring state into Pakistan. This
Practice if allowed to succeed with impunity would constitute an
Pen invitation to every state to interfere in the internal affairs of
others (UN Document $/10460).
When President Yahya accepted the Indian offer of a ceasefire
I Security Council suspended its meeting dn v
ember. It, however, met again on 21 Decem  %
A “prehensive resolution No. 307 (1971) was put forwar alia
it eentina, Burundi, Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone and ae
Called for strict observance of the ceasefire and thie ar :
of all armed forces as soon as practicable to their respective
letritor; concerned to observe the
1€s. It also called on all those