382 Tragedy of Errors
Ten out of 12 tanks were lost. It was a heavy blow to the only
armoured squadron in 107 Brigade area. Hamid, however, was
not to give up so easily. He continued to stay in Gharibpur while
the guns and mortars kept the enemy away. The enemy’s strength
was much more than initially asssessed specially in the case of
armour. General Ansari, therefore, decided to withdraw 6 and 2]
Punjab to the Afra nullah a few kilometres to the rear and
immediately in front of the Jessore cantonment. The enemy —
moved back to Gharibpur on 22 November.
' The same day the PAF went into action. Four F 86s attacked
the enemy in Gharibpur area. Indian Gnats intercepted the planes
and in the dogfight two Pakistani aircraft were lost. The Pilots
bailed out. They landed in their own country and would normally
have lived to fly another day. But the locals handed them over to
the Indians instead.
On 23 November a company of 38 FF defending Chuagcha was
attacked and overrun the next day. Remnants of the company, in
danger of being surrounded, were withdrawn to Afra. Some also
went to Jingergacha.
A conference was held at the divisional headquarters in
Jessore. Both Brigadier Hayat and the colonel staff of the division
Colonel K.K. Afridi recommended a readjustment of the positions
as the Indians had established themselves in strength across the
river and were now re-organising to attack Jessore with full force.
Hayat also asked the GOC to give him the full complements of
6 Punjab (the divisional reserve) so that he could organise a
proper defensive position along Afra. Hayat claims that he also
asked General Ansari to permit him to withdraw one battalion to
Jessore proper as the Indians are likely to put in a major attack
soon and he would not be ale to fall back to Jessore while fighting.
According to the brigade commander the GOC did not accede to
his request as he (GOC) felt that by withdrawing a battalion age
the front line a dangerous gap would be left and the possibility
the establishment of Bangladesh on East Pakistan soil woul
increase, By pulling back troops he also felt that the morale of his
men would be affected2’,
Brigadier Hayat re-organised the brigade position aloné -
Afra embankment a few miles west of Jessore. he placed 6 Se
on his right flank and re-adjusted 22 FF so as to prevent