444 Tragedy of Errors
provided it was only for humanitarian purposes’, Shahi was,
however, directed that all efforts were to be directed to prevent
the United Nations from taking cognisance of India’s propaganda
about a genocide in East Pakistan?.
At another ECOSOC meeting in Geneva on 3 July the —
situation in East Pakistan was again brought up. Agha Shahi
admitted at this meeting that the refugees are undoubtedly q
burden on India and recommended that the UN should assess the
intensity of the problem. Mr John Kelly left for Dacca on 19 July
as the representative of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). He, was however, not permitted to go and
see the refugees on the Indian side of the border. Hussein Ali a
defectee from the Pakistan foreign service and by then the head of
the Bangladesh mission in Calcutta viewed the UN efforts to
ameliorate the conditions of the refugees with utmost contempt
and said the safety of UN officials could not be guaranteed?. India
also rejected the UN proposals for stationing of UN observers to
which Pakistan had agreed.
When the news of Indian troops having crossed the border in
East Pakistan on 22 November was received at the United
Nations. Some friendly countries including Turkey advised Agha
Shahi to ask the government of Pakistan to take up the issue of
Indian aggression at the United Nations. A cable was sent by Agha
Shahi to the ministry of foreign affairs telling them about the
sympathy wave that Pakistan was now receiving because of the
blatant attack by India. The reply from Islamabad was "you will
not go to the Security Council unless specifically directed". Even
the vice premier-designate Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto was of the same
view. He is reported to have said "Let us not be in a hurry to go to
the Security Council"4,
The-government was perhaps wanting to avoid a discussion in
a world body on the situation in East Pakistan as India would
exploit the So- called genocide issue and play up the burden of
refugees which would draw greater sympathy for the secessionists
rather than for Pakistan. What was Bhutto to gain from not
wanting Pakistan to take the matter of India’s naked aggression t0
the Security Council is not very clear. Did he want the break up of
the country so that he could become the prime minister of what
would be left of it? Did he want to humiliate the army so that they
did not remain a force which could challenge his overlordship?