Military Action 255
and the leyalst. (Lieutenants Quddoos, Salaam and Alauddin, all
Bengali officers of 23 Field Regiment, dig
é ; » Cid not defect and stayed
with the unit). Bogra was eventually Cleared by the end of April
put not before hundreds of lives were lost including ¢; ili , he
were caught in the cross fire23 6 civilians who
Further north at Thakurgaon the E . .
mutinied and killed their West Pakistani cumitindiay eee
Bengali elements of 29 Cavalry at Ran ur, h ics
weapons without resistance. me owever gave up their
4 East Bengal Regiment
4 East Bengal Regiment at Brahamanbaria (Comilla)
commanded by Lt. Col. Khizar Hayat from West Pakistan could
not be disarmed. ‘It’s second-in-command, Major Khalid
Musharraf, placed his West Pakistani officers including his
commanding officer under arrest and moved his battalion across
to Agartala, in India, intact"24.
8 East Bengal Regiment
8 East Bengal Regiment, commanded by Lt. Col; Abdur
Rasheed Janjua, of number 8 platoon, 9th PMA course, was in
Chittagong. He sent his second-in-command, Major Zia-ur-
Rahman to the port to oversee the unloading of a ship from West
Pakistan, Zia, however, did not go to the port and soon returned
back. It was still dark when Zia woke up his CO and took him into
custody. Janjua was soon, thereafter, shot dead by his own
batman,
Major Zia-ur-Rahman was the first Bengali officer to declare
the independence of Bangladesh. A day after the Pakistan army
“ommenced their operation to disarm the Bengali units Zia ie
an announcement in the early hours of March 26, on radio
Chittagong in which he declared himself as the eat
Bangladesh and said that he was fighting against the Pakis *
army. At 2.30 p.m. on March 27, he made a gag
from the Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra —_ oebliched ct
Bengal), a clandestine radio station which he had e
Kalurghat near Cox’s Bazaar. ini
He announced the independence of Bangladesh oh he
Sheikh Muithony ade himself the provis
Mujib-ur-Rahman and m cnaeation army: He
“ommander-in-chief of the Bangladesh libera