Causes for the Milita
ry Debacle (Eastern Theatre) 467
A formation or unit ceases to b
force is lost due to enemy actig € effective if One third of j
N. It is norm all of its
break off contact to be replenisheq and reinf, Y Permitted then to
day. But Niazi had given Strict instry nlorced to fight another
commanders that they are not to witha; Ctions to his divisional
their forward position. Jessore was bash wf even a company from
107 Brigade was not allowed to fall back . Over cheaply because
have given them Permission after the ane It Was too late to
kilometres away from Jessore cantonmen Fe Position, only §
: Repeated requests by his formation comma i am been breached.
withdrawal or to allow then to fal] back to Daces, to permit limited
—_ cca Wer
14 and 87 Division in the east should h ae
withdraw intact west of the Brahamput ave been asked to
after 3 December. Since that was not tae er closer to Dacca
_ hot move towards Dacca and took the Seinnanyiy ct Rana, could
_ Sylhet instead as his route of withdrawal was cut ee Veiga te
| Role of Higher Headquarters
GHQ does not appear to hav€ retained any control over th
| ; °
Pore battle in East Pakistan. They seemed to have written it
| tor € day the war started or were depending entirely on friendly
o intervening on their behalf in the ensuing Indo-Pakistan
hae Eastern Command was indeed an independent theatre.
| Pat Operations were to be left to the local commander. East
be stan was cut off from West Pakistan. N 0 reinforcements could
i. sent. No physical support could be given but yet it was very
ne part of Pakistan. It could not just be thrown away to the
. Nien? - Directives could still have been given during the battle to
421 to pull in his reins, to concentrate his troops in and around
Dacea whil °
lle the going was good.
one? battle in East Pakistan was not being closely followed in
Ws Q. Just before launching the offensive on December 3, in the
his Niazi should have been given definite orders to concentrate
arg “ops on to designated fortresses and strong points specially
thar Dacca. After December 3, it should have become ae
die = Indians would no longer pull their punches and wou
C “k East Pakistan with full force.
0nana and Control stan
~ , lective civil
leader me democratic traditions enabled eae who were
“ip to give a political direction to its a