296
Tragedy of Errors
While the Soviets continued to talk about finding a politica)
solution of the East Pakistan Crisis, they supported their strongest
ally in Asia to dismember a recaleitrant Muslim neighbour. India
~ was no-doubt the midwife which, brought Bangladesh into being .
‘but the operation was made easy by the policies of her major~
. partners in this ignominious deal.
After signing the Indo-Soviet Treaty, Mrs. Gandhi sent a letter
to Nixon She made no mention of the treaty but blamed USA for
increasing the tension in the subcontinent by supplying arms to
Pakistan from 1954 to 1965. "Signing of the Treaty was a carefully
considered Indian strategy that had been in preparation for over a
year" wrote Kissinger®®. During her visit to Moscow in late
September, she and Kosygin placed the entire blame on Yahya.
India’s Policy
Whenever there is turmoil, agitation and a breakdown of law
_and order on a massive scale,a powerful neighbour tends to fish in
‘troubled waters. so it was’\ with India. Indira handled the East
Pakistan Crisis with extreme finesse. The first objective was to cut
off East Pakistan from it’s home base. This she achieved by
engineering the Ganga; incident and subsequently the banning of
overflights in February, 1971. |
b The second objective was to isolate Pakistan from it’s western
allies. When Yahya postponed the national assembly session y
Indira used her diplomatic skill to win over the international
community to her side. In her characteristic outspoken and
outrageous manner she exploited the fact that temo not
| allowed to flourish’ once again in Pakista ‘and that Pakistan was
being run by a military junta who wer nal peparel to hand over
power to their elected representative! A theme that went down
very well in western democracies.
To the Muslim countries;) which did not have elected
governments, she used the so-€alled genocide card. She used her
electronic and newsprint media to give exaggerated stories of mas°
killing of men, women and children in East, Pakistan by the
‘ Pakistan army. Many Muslim leaders batiored fl propaganda 80
cleverly put across by the Indians. She was able to convince them
that the people of East Pakistan were no longer willing to be part
of Pakistan.