362
Tragedy of Errors
then to move into Pakistan territory in hot pursuit. One such
incident which drew international attention was the Bogra
engagement of 21 November between Indian and Pakistani forces,
"The political directive, which tacitly accepted probing attacks
across the border, laid down that no Indian soldiers should
become prisoners during their forays into Pakistani territory, as in
that case surprise would have been lost and an international
pressure would be built up to prevent India from launching a full
scale offensive", acknowledged the army commander. Actually that
would have provided evidence of a military involvement by India
as early as October.
Indian forces entered East Pakistani territory with full force
alongwith the Mukti Bahini on the night of 20/21 November. The
attacks were no longer limited to border raids or provision of
artillery support to the rebels. Proper brigade size operations were
now launched against the Pakistani border posts. The Mukti
Bahini were directed to by-pass the defences and establish
blocking positions in the rear to cut off all routes of withdrawal. In
ordinary circumstances it would not have been easy for the enemy
to infiltrate forces deep into the rear and continue operating from
there. Paramilitary forces and local citizens could deal with such
isolated intruders but in the case of East Pakistan, by the year
1971, the Mukti Bahini were getting the support not only of
Indian troops but even of the local population.
Military situation in November
When the main Indian attack against East Pakistan began the
military situation was most unfavourable to the defenders. The
political mission of not allowing Mukti Bahini to establish a
| Bangladesh government on East Pakistan territory remained
| valid. All the troops were strung along the border in penny
packets. Most of them were deployed in the internal security role
which forced dispersement as against concentration to meet 4
major attack. The officers and men had been carrying out counter-
insurgency operations without relief for the last eight months and
were by now getting tired of continually fighting. There were
serious imbalances in the newly arrived and newly raised adhoc
formations. Some were only about two thirds of their strength.
The divisions were without their standard component of artillery
regiments. Not only were medium guns not sent to East Pakistan,