196 Tragedy of Errors
as the President would have no legal authority. According to hin
the correct sequence would be: (1) calling of the national assem}y,
’ session; (2) the assembly asks the CMLA to lift the martial lay
and (3) transfer of power to the elected representatives,
The President wanted Cornelius to see the reality op th
ground and reminded him that Awami League would not atte, i
the session unless we can produce some acceptable answers 4,
Mujib’s other two points. Cornelius replied saying "we shall 5,
what we can do’.
On March 17, the two teams met. By now Mr M.M. Ahmaj
and Sartaj Aziz had joined the government’s team. The Awan
League team consisted of Tajuddin Ahmad, Dr Kamal Husgeiy
and Nazrul Islam. The meeting began with Cornelius giving oy
his proposal of the sequence of events for the smooth transfer of
power. Tajuddin did not agree to the suggestions and merely said
that “our leader has already spoken to the President’ ,thereby
putting a seal to their earlier demands. The main hurdle seemed
to be the lifting of martial law before the national assembly
session. Justice Corneleius insisted that there would be a
constitutional vacuum if that was done. Doctor Kamal Hussein, a
constitutional lawyer of repute and the legal advisor to the Awami
League team, did recognise the implication of such an action but
felt that a way out could be found to avoid a legal lacuna. He felt
that an independent opinion may help in cutting the Gordian
, knot. "Shall we get an opinion from Mr A.K. Brohi, the wel
known legal expert on constitutional issues"? asked Kamal
Hussein. Justice Cornelieus agreed to the suggestion. Brohi is
reported to have said "yes it can be possible by issuing an interim
arrangement order"!47,
Another attempt was made to work out an acceptable
arrangement. The government’s team produced a draft martis!
law order (MLO) according to which a council of ministers ft"
sli the elected representatives could be set up to aid th
governor in administering the province. The martial Jaw
regulation would provide for suspension of the martial law.
The process of finding a solution to the political impasse lookel
good when all but one) West Pakistani leaders reached Dace”
March 19. They included Mumtaz Daultana (CML); Sart
yraukat Hayat Khan (CML); Mufti Mahmood (JUD; Khan Ab,
an (NAP); Sahibzada Abdul Qayyoom (Muslim Leagu®"