228 Tragedy of Errors |
; rn at Sunarganj, Assa
Se seabar Sah. Tis Wether Khan Bahadur Mafiz-urRahime
on an honorary recruiting officer during von er II. Osmany
was a bright student having obtained a first SNMOOB! thy (ii,
matriculation examination from the ime University, He,
however, started falling back in his studies while at the Aligarh
Muslim University from where he obtained his Bachelors degres
in 1938. But he left Aligarh in 1939 | =— ns Masters
i hy. While at the University he becal ember of the
Indian Territorial Force. He joined the British Indian Army jn
1940 and served in the Indian Army Service Corps during Woy\q
War II. Later he was transferred to the Infantry. After some years
with the ninth and fifth battalions of the 14th Punjab Regiment
he took over command of 1 East Bengal Regiment in 1952. Latey.
he was posted as commandant of the East Bengal Regimenta]
Centre at Chittagong.
He was a bright and ambitious officer who rose to the rank of a
- full Colonel in the Pakistan army and was appointed to the
important and sensitive post of the deputy director of military
operations at General Headquarters from where he retired in
1966. He was being looked upto by the Bengali officers who saw in
him a supporter of their rights. Since birds of a feather flock
together his bachelor’s apartment at the Rawalpindi Club was
often filled with Bengali officers with whom he freely mixed. He
had become their father figure.
It was, therefore, a genuine feeling of disappointment mixed
with frustration when he was not promoted to the rank of a
brigadier and was moved over to a less sensitive post. He became
disgruntled and bitter against those whom he believed had not
given him a fair deal. Osmany was the right man to organise a
rebellion against the Pakistan army which he thought had been
unjust to him. He was a die-hard Bengali but according to many
not pro-India. That is why perhaps Lieutenant General Jagiit
Singh Aurora, army commander Indian Eastern Command,
thought him to be a “difficult person to get along with". He found
Osmany to be ‘arrogant and proud"? and was not impressed by his
overgrown moustaches which had earned him the title of ‘muchoo
Osmany’ amongst his colleagues in West Pakistan. Eve!
Manekshaw had a certain dislike for Osmany. "They could not
stand each other" confided Aurora.