Causes for the Break Up of Pakistan 478
gast Pakistan crisis, 1n spite of the US Congress and the US media
ing totally pro-India. The secret visit of D issi
peing sg octor Henry Kissinger
from Islamabad to Peking a July, 1971, which was a fore-runner |
of Nixon's trip to the Chinese capital, turned USSR furthee |
against Pakistan. Ms retaliation to Pakistan’s mediatory role |
Podgorny willingly signed the Indo-Soviet Treaty in August, 1971 |
"This gave the green signal to Mrs Gandhi to go aheas with her |
plans of a military invasion of East Pakistan aS a possible threat |
from across the Himalayas had been neutralised. ~/< |
|
| Pakistan government’s instructions to its permanent |
representative at the United Nations not to take up the issue of
India’s military intervention in East Pakistan in November, 1971 |
i lost the opportunity for the world community to declare India as |
the aggressor. Ironically, due to the failure of Islamabad to strike
when the iron was hot, It was Pakistan that was blamed for
starting the war. ;
| Economic Disparity
‘ Much has been written) already in this book about the
perceived, and in many cases genuine feeling of economic
deprivation of the people of East Pakistan, against the economic |
planners at the Centre. Although one-sided economic indicators, ;
and statistics were used by unscrupulous politicians to prove the ”
fact of the exploitation of the East Pakistanis,they did have a case
for one-country-two -economic systems due~to the wings being
located in two separate regions. ae
Not examining this issue sincerely gave more than, adequate
ammunition to the Awami Leaguers to blow the Unity of Pakistan
into bits.
? The Social Attitude
The demeaning attitude of the West Pakistanis towards their
Bengali brethren cannot be glossed over. The misconcep Afevan 4
they were lesser Muslims because culturally they nil Es 4
led to wrong conclusions that they needed purl Se saitions r
unfortunate that the colour of the skin, dress, autany me
and cultural values were equated with loyalty to one’s country.
€ Domestic Scene affected by
; i ecte
_ Thougha country’s foreign policy cannot my worrect internal
its domestic follies a forceful presentation ©
7