Role of Other Countries saat
appealed }6 Nixon to use his Personal] initiative at this critical
| juncture.
Pakistan and the United States had gj ed
"fain 159 n which Washington hag aeoment
| e to Pakistan's aid if it was attacked,
com The US Congress took
the view that the US was to Intervene only if Pakistan was
threatened by a communist State. Dr. Kissinger, however
contends that in separate letters issued from the White House to
the government Of Pakistan it was indicated that the United
States ‘would defend Pakistan in the rase of aggression even from
India”. But the Karachi Agreement was given no importance.
Even superpowers wriggle out of commitments when it comes to
~ the protection and promotion of their own national interest in
changed circumstances. Article ] of the Agreement of cooperation
between United States and Pakistan signed at Ankara on March 5,
1959 states. "The Government of United States will take such
appropriate measures including the use of armed forces .... in
order to assist the Government of Pakistan at its request"2!_ (no
condition was attached to this article, although it was in the
context of CENTO),
After receiving Yahya’s appeal Nixon sent letters to Mrs.
Gandhi and Prime Minister Alexai Kosygin in which he advised
them "not to widen the conflict but to co-operate in finding a
political solution". He also ‘warned’ Yahya not to attack from the
West. US ambassador to Moscow Jacob Beam visited the Soviet
ministry twice in November to urge the Russians to have the
fighting stopped. US Senate majority leader Mike Mansfield
wanted the United Nations to come into the picture "This is the
time, now, today, not tomorrow for the Security Council to act"
Said Mansfield, But Pakistan had not taken up the matter at the
Security Council.
Nixon showed his displeasure towards India for it’s direct
military intervention ,by a token suspension of the supply of some
War material to India. Shri Swaran Singh, India’s external affairs
minister, informed the lower House of the Indian Parliament that
Wie to the deteriorating situation in South Asia and acetone
Military engagements between India and Pakistan ithe of a
States had of December 1, 1971 susp Aone bed h a cancelled
“munition, No new licences would be —_—* a
those already issued which were worth $2 million”,