4
188
Tragedy of Errors
between Mujib and him would have disentangled the Gorg;
knot. which both of them had themselves tied with ir
determination and firmness. ur
These were crocodile tears. Trying to put wool jn Othe,
people’s eyes. If it was a matter of a few days postponement why
did ke not advise the President to announce the fresh date for
summoning the national assembly session as was being requests
, by the authorities in Dacca. If the leaders of the two major Parties
had not come to an agreement outside the assembly in the three
months between the announcement of the election results ang the
calling of the assembly session ) how could the complicated
constitutional issues be solved in the next few days.
It is more likely that Yahya, his close military advisers anq
Bhutto did not expect such a violent reaction. They probably
thought that the threat of "the whole exercise being called off
would bring the Awami League to their senses. Little did they
know that it would only harden their determination to get their
pound of flesh and even more, if it came to an open conflict. The
postponement gave Mujib the solid support he needed to virtually
run a parallel government in East Pakistan. After March 3, his’
was the only authority whose directives were implemented
without hesitation in complete violation of the writ of the
established government. What angered Mujib more was that,
though being the leader of the majority party, he was not
consulted regarding the postponement!®”,
By now the credibility of the martial law authorities had been
lost. Tempers rose, slogans against West Pakistan rented the
Dacca skies as Mujib breathed fire at the Ramna race course
' ground on March 7, in front of the biggest public gathering East
Pakistan had ever seen. According to intelligence agencies 60,000
attended. Bangladesh flags were hoisted. No Pakistani flags we!
seen. People armed with lathis (wooden sticks) and iron rods
shouted in unison "We want the blood of Punjabis. Bengalis,
Biharis, Hindus, Pathans, Sindhi, Balochi Bhai Bhai" (brother:
ujib was at his best. He was totally in charge. No one 1n Bast
Pakistan not even the martial law authorities could oppose him on
that day.
“Amar Janbhomi Maati" (Land of my birth), opening stanzas of
a revolutionary song picked up from Calcutta’s New Theatre A
production company, blared out from the loudspeakers while t
people waited for their leader to come. to the stage.