Regional Inequality - Remedial Measures "
they considered to be their rightful share in iti ,
The political steps.taken to give the Bengalis assy heme
of the country’s administration, in keeping with the fact that th 2
y constituted the majority of the population, were not, however. as
inadequate as it was made out to be. = ,
The Basic Principles Report of 1950 which was the first
attempt made at formulating a constitution for the country
recommended a parliamentary system of government with a
bicameral legislature. The lower house was to comprise of
representatives from both the wings based on the basis of
population. This would have ensured a larger number of members
from East Bengal. In the upper house equal representation was to
be given to all the federating units irrespective of their size, This is
the practice taken from the mother of parliaments. So is the case
in the Rajya Sabha in India where each state has been allotted
equal number of seats. Uttar Pradesh, with the largest population
has the same representation in the Rajya Sabha as Rajastan with
a very small population.
In the first constituent assembly out of a total of 74 members”
44 were Bengalis. Again in 1954, the new constituent assembly ,
accorded a greater number of seats to East Bengal. There were 44”
members from the eastern wing out of a total of 79 seats!. This
should have more than satisfied the demand of the East Bengalis.
As regards the two most important. posts of the governor-
general and the prime minister of the country, after the death of
the founder of the nation and that of Liaqat Ali Khan, both the |
appointments were held by Bengalis. Khwaja Nazimuddin ~
followed the Quaid-e-Azam, as the head of state and Muhammad ;
Ali Bogra became the chief executive after Liagat Ali Khan. If
Nazimuddin was not considered to be a blue-blooded Bengali
because he came from the Urdu speaking family of the Nawabs of
Dacca, West Pakistanis should hardly be blamed. The fact that.he
eventually proved to be weak and indecisive, though thoroughly
. honest and sincere, was again not a deliberate attempt to keep the
Bengalis down. In 1948 there was no other Bengali leader who
could be elevated to the highest post in the land. Both Maulvi _,
Fazlul Haq and Hussein Shaheed Suharwardy stood discrete VA
because of their dilly dallying on the ideas of a United Bengal.
Other Bengali politicians had still not come on the centre stage.
Suharwardy did, however, become the prime minister of Pakistan
In the late fifties.