Causes of Alienation =
irrespective of which province they belonged to) the more the
West Pakistani entrepreneur shied away from East Pakistan. "It
was not, therefore, economic disparity that produced the conflict | 4,
but the conflict that produced the issue of disparity" (a wise | a
comment by W. Wilcox)’*; (16) transfer of resources from East
Pakistan to West Pakistan; (17) economic growth was not
dovetailed with political institutions; (18) a larger number of
Indian refugees from East Punjab and the other Muslim minority
provinces came to West Pakistan than to East Bengal. (Six and a
half million compared to 0.7 million)?9. Most of the displaced
persons specially the educated lot moved into towns in Punjab and
Sindh. This ‘forcible’ urbanisation in West Pakistan compared to
very little in East Bengal immediately after Partition also affected
the different rates of economic growth in the two wings.
Industrialists who came from Africa and India did initially go to
both wings but they were more accepted in the western than in
the eastern wing. They, therefore, had their main office in West
Pakistan which resulted in a transfer of their earnings from the
eastern wing to the western and finally (19) floods and cyclones +
which caused serious damage to standing crops were more .
common in East Pakistan.
Economic disparity further increased in 1969-1971 due to
agitations, lawlessness, strikes, looting, burning, disruption of
communications, damage caused to ports, sinking of river crafts,
bringing of politics to streets and factories in East Pakistan, These
three years caused a further set back in trying to remove the
economic disparity between the two wings. In addition it added to
a rise in prices which the politicians capitalised on.
The author, while travelling, with Maulana Abdul Hameed
Khan Bhashani, the Bengali leader of the Awami National Party,
in June, 1969 asked him about his slogan "Deekho Deekho Agun
Jalo" (burn everything you can see). When reminded that he was
destroying the wealth of his own province. He replied "we are not
destroying crops which is the life line of the peasants, but of what
use are the shining lights of big cities or the shops full of goods
Which the poor cannot buy". His attitude was that of a devoted.
communist. Sharing of poverty is better than accumulation of
| wealth in a few hands. But he added to the existing economic
disparity between the two wings by destroying property in his
OWn province,