204
Tragedy of Errors
had made elaborate preparations for discussing the 6-Poing
formula, including various alternatives, the other Side diq fie
appear to have “done it’s homework"”’. hey aad that this Wag
nizo evident during the Round Table Conference held in Feb, aty
1969 under Field Marshal Ayub when the Awami Leag,,
presented their 6 Points.
Subhan went on to say that neither Yahya nor Bhutto Wete
willing to discuss the matter seriously. He claimed that during the
discussions with Kamal Asfar, Abdul Hafeez Peerzada ang
Mahmud Ali Kasuri of the PPP he came to the conclusion tha
‘these guys were not serious’!®?, j He, however, admitted that the
government and Awami League negotiating teams did arrive at
mutually agreed formula on March 22. The Awami League
according to Subhan and confirmed by Colonel Hasan, hag
accepted the amended draft and were now waiting for the joint
proclamation. But when the came to know that M. M. Ahmad
and Justice Cornelius had been asked to fly back to Karachi they
felt that the negotiations were a "side show" and the "Niyat"
(intention) to hand over power was not there. "They were only
trying to buy time” he said. When asked about the last minute
change of the word federation of Pakistan to confederation of
Pakistan Rahman Subhan tried to gloss over it by saying "The
formula Was not changed. One did not have to go to war on the
basis of one word",
Bhutto claims that Mujib told Ghulam Mustafa Khar, a
prominent PPP leader, then in Dacca, on March 25, to tell Bhutto
to be the prime minister of West Pakistan and leave East Pakistan
to him and his people!, Tajuddin, declared the same day that the
Awami League had gone as far as it could go and had nothing
further to talk about. Yahya then made up his mind to execute
what Ite already had decided i.e. use the military instrument to
impose the will of the central government. He went to General
Tikka’s headquarter at Kurmitola and gave him the green signal
for operation SEARCH LIGHT which had been planned as early
as March 17, a .
At 3 p.m. Yahya told Peerzada "we are leaving tonight. | want
you to draft a speech to be delivered at Karachi panning th?
Awami League". Seven hours later, in the darkness of the night
Sene ral Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, president of Pakista®,"’
es martial law administrator and commander-in-chief of the
Pakistan ,army. left. Tejgaon aixport-ynceremoniously, never