163
Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End)
Pakistan he spelt out the options available to deal with a lopsided
election result. These according to Bhutto were: (1) Mujib goes it
alone with some elements from the smaller parties in West
Pakistan; (2) Mujib joins hands with him (Bhutto) and they both
together form the government; (3) Mujib and Bhutto with the
support of the army run the country. Bhutto called the last option
‘the three legged stool position’.
General Yahya reacted sharply to this anomaly. He told Bhutto /
rather curtly. "It is not going to be three legged... I am out of it. -~
From here on it is my hope, that you people take it on. The army
will not have any role except that of the maintenance of law and
order". Yahya went on to acknowledge that the army will remain
subservient to civil control. However, I am still the President. If
any help is required I shall provide it" added the general.
Zulfigar Ali Bhutto then came forward with a direct proposal
which he had been hinting at since the morning. "Please tell Mujib
that the West Pakistani leadership is in my (Bhutto’s) hand and it
will be good for the country if he (Mujib), for the sake of the :
nation, took Bhutto in the governmentand that if he does not do
so we (army) will use military force" said Bhutto. Peerzada
recalled that Yahya was taken aback. He (Yahya) retorted "Zulfi,
Zulfi mind your words - The army is not going to threaten anyone,
hor is it going to plead any one’s case. It is for you to talk to Mujib
on all such matters and for Mujib to take anyone he likes".
Bhutto, recoiled "I did not mean that", lowering his tone he
continued "would it not be better if Pakistan was to have a co-
alition government", Yahya made no comments. General Peerzada
picked up the conversation from then on and explained to Bhutto
that his position was not the same as that of Mujib. "The Awami
League has swept the board in entire East Pakistan whereas you
have secured only a simple majority in two of the four provinces in
West Pakistan" said Peerzada to Bhutto. The PPP chief conceded
this fact but went on to say "That may be so but we are talking in
regional terms, general”.
The President sensing a confrontation between the PSO and
Bhutto intervened and told Bhutto. ‘I will advise you to meet
Mujib"? He also assured ZAB that in his (President’s) meeting
With the Awami League leader he too would impress upon him