422 Tragedy of Errors
at that time were signalers, service corps and maintenance
personnel, nursing orderlies, rear parties, mujahids, razakars, ang
members of West Pakistan police. Very few of them were from the
fighting or supporting arms.
Evacuation
On 15 December Niazi had sent a signal to Manekshaw
accepting a conditional cease fire in East Pakistan. Major Liagat
Asrar Bukhari, commanding 4 Army Aviation Squadron in Rag
Pakistan told the General on that day that he was prepared to fly
out his team in the hours of darkness to Burma if permitted to do
so. Air Commodore Inamul Haq felt that in view of total air
superiority enjoyed by the IAF that would not be possible. Rear
Admiral Sharif opined that Liaqat should be allowed to give it 4
try as several helicopters would be prevented from falling into
enemy hands. General Niazi agreed and ordered Liagqat to take
Major General Rahim with him as he was wounded and that he
had to send some important documents through him to
Islamabad. He also informed Liagat that some nurses would also
be sent with him.
Liagat worked out his time and space and decided to fly out
from Dacca at 3 am on 16 December so that he could be across the
border and in Burmese territory before dawn. There were in all
eight helicopters. Four Mi8s (medium size helicopters) and four
Aluettes (four seaters). Liagat waited for the nurses till 3 a.m. but
was forced to leave without them as taking off after three O'clock
would have meant flying in the day-time over Bangladesh
territory which he had to avoid. Liagat flew very low to avoid
being detected. Throughout the flight no lights were switched and
no communications with any one was carried out.
Three and half hours later as the day was breaking Liagat and
| his flight landed safely at Akhyab (Burma). From there, after
| some preliminary question and answers by the Burmese
| authorities and with the assistance of the Pakistan embassy !"
Rangoon, the helicopters flew to Bangkok from where they weré
| shipped to Karachi®3, An evacuation accomplished because of the
| daring of an army aviation team leader. Approximately 139 an
| mI te alongwith the army aviation squadron crew ip
ght back safely to Pakistan and out of reach of Indian han0s-
|