Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 189
Mujib began his speech by reminding his votay;
had already shed blood in Dacca, Khulna and Chittagong = ciel,
beloved motherland. "Aj Bengali mubt; chai" (today the Bengalis
want freedom) roared the Bangabandhy (metaphorically father of
the Bengalis) into the microphone. He warned the milita
authorities that the entire Bengali nation had voted for him ant
that they would now grasp their political, economic and cultural
_ freedom by force.
He recounted the history of the so-called Bengali freedom
movement which, according to him, had been written in blood.
"Amar cheledar goli kore mara hai” (my sons have been killed by
bullets) said Mujib, referring to Ayub’s martial law. "Then came
Yahya, who after holding the elections did not keep his words",
continued the Sheikh. The voice firm, never wavering. Self
confident and self assured Mujib blamed Bhutto for not agreeing
to sit down on the negotiating table. He then turned his tirade
against the army. "Amar desher ghoreeb mancher upar ostro chali
achey". (The army which was equipped to fight the external
enemy and which was bought from our own money was turned
against our own people). Mujib then referred to General Yahya’s
address to the nation in which he had blamed Mujib for the
postponement of the assembly session. He termed the allegation
as false and rubbish. He denounced the military leadership for
favouring a minority leader and not willing to hand over power.
He raised the ante by saying that the Awami League would not
attend the national assembly till four additional demands were
met. These were: (1) martial law to be immediately lifted; (2)
power to be transferred to the majority party; (3) the army to
return to the barracks and (4) a judicial enquiry be held into the
firing by the army in which some innocent people were killed on
the night between March 1 and 2.
_ He appealed to Bengali nationalism by saying “all those whv
live on this land Hindus and Muslims are one people. We have
shed blood and we will continue to shed more blood to make our
People free",
He ended his 17 minutes speech with the words "Amader ot
ag Shadimutar songram" (our struggle is a freedom 4 a : :
na careful nat ose the word independent: No Me
tie in clear terms that he was deman re - He had been
© of Bangladesh. But,the meaning was clear.
www.balochlibrary.com