Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) a
conceded what is the heed of the Centre" saiq Ayub®. Ayub began
to consider the alternatives available to him. His h aaiths
deteriorating further and he was losing control Z Pees
gs of the political
situation in the country. The choices open to him were: (1) j
partial martial law and try to maintain law and citer in th »dttes
(2) impose martial law throughout the country and io the
role of the chief martial law administrator (CMLA); ay hand, .
_ to mee 2 abbar. Khan, speaker of the national ns on
accordance with the constitution ;
power to the army. °F @ resign and hand ial
. Imposing martial law in the cities only would not have helped
in solving the political crisis. The problem was not a local one as it
was in Lahore in 1953 when martial law was clamped down on
that city alone. National issues were at stake which required a
new set of leaders at the Centre.
The second alternative was also not feasible as Ayub was no
longer a member of the armed forces and could not declare
himself CMLA. A title usually reserved for soldiers in uniform
f [(Though ‘Bhutto, did make himself CMLA in 1971 against all
norms). He would, therefore, in such a case, be a president only in
name with all powers rested in the C-in-C army who sooner or
later would ask the President to step aside as he himself had done
in the case of President Sikander Mirza in 1958,
The third choice, of handing over to the speaker of the national
assembly, would have been constitutionally correct and accepted
by the people, more so in East Pakistan as Jabbar was a Bengali.
However, precisely because of this he would not have had any
cooperation from the West Pakistani politicians, particularly from
Bhutto and his Pakistan People’s Party (PPP). Ayub was afraid
that the country would not be secure in the hands of Jabbar.
General Yahya is believed to have told Ayub "why don’t you
hand over to Jabbar" Ayub according to Ali Yahy . nmi is
reported to have replied "I do not trust the bastard". aie ae
quite conscious of Bhutto’s uncontrolled ambitions ae 3 a “9
to generate street power which he could raise to om -_ y
insecure Bengali head of state. Bhutto had no love los —
; ; atient for not
He was very envious of him and was a on of Ayub’s
Setting an opportunity to rise to the top be
continued rule.