96
Tragedy of Errors
All the chief ministers of East Pakistan from 1947 to 1958 wep,
indigenous and not imported from West Pakistan. Khwaj,
Nazimuddin was the chief minister from August 14, 1947 yj)
September 11, 1948. He was followed by Nurul Amin, Maulvi A
K. Fazlul Hag and Ata-ur-Rahman, and then came Ayub’s martig]
law of 1958.
The 1956 Constitution, which was the first constitution
adopted by the country gave parity between the two wings. Thus
reducing the representation of the Bengalis at the Centre some
what but still ensuring that the West Pakistanis are not in a
position to dominate over them. Even in the case of parity the
East Bengalis were in a position of advantage as they were more
homogeneous in their political outlook whereas the people in West
/ Pakistan were divided between several political parties some
diametrically opposed to each other. The_political spectrum in|
West Pakistan ranged from the extreme left to the extreme right. ,
The Sindhis, Punjabis, Pathans, and Balochis had their own
interests to protect and quite a few political parties could be won
over by the Bengalis on issues that affected the interests of both.
The same could not be said of East Bengal.
Two other demands of East Bengal were met. Although the
system of separate electorates was preferred and adopted in West
Pakistan the Bengalis were allowed to chose their representatives
on the basis of joint electorates, as many of them depended on the
support of the Hindu Bengalis to get a majority. The younger
generation of Bengalis should have recalled that their elders had
fought for seperate dleciangtes which was conceded to them by E.
S. Montague,-the then secretary of state for India, and Lord
Chelmsford, the viceroy of India in 1919. Forty years later the
Muslims of East Bengal changed their outlook for political!
expediency.
> The third demand was of giving greater autonomy to East
Bengal which was conceded to by giving more subjects to the
Penis ebabeesty, the only Bengali leader who had a national
on tee talking about the 1962 constitution said that 98
autonomy [for East Pakistan] has been achieved”
ine ee mealies when Field Marshal Ayub formed his
Pakistan. G se 4 members each from West and from East
- General Yahya Khan appointed an equal number of