343
Indo-Pakistan War - 197] Eastern Theatre
By the time Niazi came on the scene the Pakistan army had re-
' established the writ of the central government in most of the
province. The troops, along with the civil armed forces, (by now
manned purely by the West Pakistanis) were manning most of the
outposts along the international border. By the middle of May,
1971 all appeared quiet on the Eastern front.
This lull before the impending storm had created a false sense
of security. Niazi, based his operational plan for the defence of
East Pakistan more on bravado than on a cool assessment of the
military situation. Operational Instructions Number 3 of 15 July,
1971 contemplated a forward posture with strong points and
fortresses which were made logistically self sufficient to fight a
battle lasting for atleast thirty days if by-passed. Twenty five
fortresses and nine strong points were designated. All, however,
could not be adequately manned due to shortage of troops. Dacca
was the nerve centre, but no troops were left to defend it.
A fresh plan for the defence of East Pakistan, was sent in
August, 1971, to GHQ by Eastern Command. In addition to the
development of major towns as fortresses and strong points with a
firm commitment to defend Dacca at all costs. The plan included
offensive actions against Tripura in the east. Siliguri in the north,
Krishannagar in the West. The plan was duly approved by GHQ
which went even further and directed Eastern Command to plan
on posing a threat to Calcutta and the capture of Farrakha
barrage. Targets for the Special Service Groups in Indian territory
Were to be selected. |
It is normal for a defender to plan local offensive actions to
improve their defensive position and deny launching pads for the
*nemy immediately in front of their defended areas. But major
offensive operations much beyond the range of own guns and
Without air support when troops are insufficient to fulfil their
primary task is sheer folly. One can only feel frustrated on the |
lack of realism on the part of the military leadership at GHQ at |
that time, With the rear areas insecure and the home base
“ompletely cut off; the air force and the navy particularly non-
€xistent in East Pakistan; with the third dimension totally absent,
‘0 have thought of making such ambitious plans could only come
from highly inflated egos. |
|