PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Pakistan had been described by many western and Indian
writers as a geographical nonsensity and a country disfigured at
birth. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the well known Muslim
nationalist leader and the president of the All India Congress,
predicted that Pakistan, in its present shape, would not last more
than a-quarter of a century. His prediction came true. But not
because of the unique shape of the country, not even because of
the differences in language and culture of the two wings but
because of the follies of its people and because of the selfishness,
insincerity and short sightedness of its leaders. The most
important of all because of the ignominious role played by India 1
during the East Pakistan Crisis,
Come December each year, the nation is reminded of the
break-up of the country and the humiliation suffered by its armed
forces at the hands of its bitterest adversary. Unfortunately none
of the actors, dead or alive, who strutted about on the stage during
those crucial days, accepted that they faltered in advocating or
implementing the policies which led to the tragedy of the
disintegration of Pakistan.
The political leaders blame the army junta. The army generals '
blame the politicians, Independent political analysts blame both.
Indian writers harp on the tune of the exploitation of East Bengal
by the West Pakistani leadership. Pakistani authors highlight the
statements of a large number of influential Indians, including
Indira Gandhi, that the dismemberment of Pakistan would be in
India’s national interest and that India should not miss the
‘opportunity of a life time’ provided to them in 1971.
It is an irony of fate that the very people who were in the
)) Vanguard of the Pakistan movement, whose area was the only
Muslim majority province of undivided India which had a Muslim
League ministry and whose illustrious son had not only moved
but, allegedly, drafted the Lahore Resolution, fought a bitter
Struggle, thirty years later, to destroy a country which -they
themselves had helped to build.