nae Tragedy of Errors
call for a virtual take oy
ur-Rahman, had giver rovince by his supporters which, jy th
included almost all politicians, the age oP ureauerats and"
large number of the members of t : =H ule ements jp the
armed forces besides the entire Bengali civil population,
Although all the personalities interviewed at Dacoy
categorically denied that the ae rl t ‘i League
massacred the non-Bengalis even Detore e military crackdown
by the Pakistan army, heaven et, there was re evidence t,
prove that they went on a rampage as S as the announcement
postponing the national assembly session was made on March 1
The scene immediately prior to the proposed military action was
of complete disorder and total disregard of governmental
authority.
General Yahya had by then lost complete faith in his military
commanders in the Eastern theatre. "A first class army in Eas
' Pakistan is completely demoralised because of two old women’
remarked the President to General Tikka Khan. Implying that if g
firm action had been taken earlier things would not have gone out
of hand. General Tikka, known for his blind obedience to orders,
would, he was certain, be able to put the train back on the rails by
sheer use of force.
There were only two alternatives at that stage. Order the army
to restore the authority of the government or hand over powers to
the majority party.
. The military junta was split on the question of suppressing the
insurgency by a military action. Those in East Pakistan were not
in favour of it as they had been witnessing the growing popularity
of the Awami League in that province. They knew that even after
eliminating the die-hard secessionist the movement in favour of
the 6-Points formula would not die down. They were concerned
about the mass killings on both sides which were bound to follow
hes the army was given a free hand to deal with all thos?
e’ements which had bottled them up and were humiliating the™
at every corner,
tiie os in Mi Pakistan particularly the well known hawks
Dad, (Adj “te A. O. Mitha, (Quarter Master General), Khu
ie _ “i General), Iftikhar Janjua (Master Gene!
Coun 7 . or alam Umar, (Chief of the National Secu
cil) were advocating a strong military action’. The