= Tragedy of Errors
Abdul Qayyoom, a Bengali by birth and a Pakistani by choice ,.
the author, while recalling his sentiments on seeing the ne
Kaaba (House of Allah) for the first time. He said that he was Oly
~ reminded of the verses of Allama Iqbal in praise of the Al] Mighy
at that instance but it was a stanza from Tagore’s Gitanjalj Whig
came to his mind. "Prabhoo (Hindu name for Allah), please =
me just a little more strength to be able to reach you so that | sin
put this mala (garland), which I have brought for you, around
your neck before its flowers wither away'®" recited Qayyoom, no
because he did not know Urdu well enough. He was well verseq j,
several languages including Arabic but it was Tagore’s beautify)
expression of a man’s devotion to the Supreme Being that struc,
him most. The admiration of Tagore’s poetry by the people of Eagt
Bengal can be judged from the fact that his famous poem Amar
Sonar Bangla (My golden Bengal) depicting the beauty of the flora
and fauna of Bengal is the national anthem of Muslim Bangladesh
today.
No amount of Pakistani patriotism could move them away
from their reverence to the writings of Rabinder Nath Tagore. An
eminent Bengali writer is reported to have said "how can we turn
‘! away from our cultural Kaaba".
A gradual change, however, did begin to take place in Muslim
society towards the beginning of the fourth decade of the current
century. Stories of Rama and Sita weré replaced by Yusuf and
Zuleikha in many Muslim households but only amongst the well
educated. Qazi Nazrul Islam (1893-1976) gave an Islamic tinge 0
the Bengali literature but he did not write much.
If it was desired to re-orient the East Bengali culture the
answer did not lie in using repressive measures. “Muslim
intellectuals could have been encouraged and supported
financially to produce literary books of equal quality and with §
greater Islamic tinge than those produced in Western Bengal and
greedily devoured by the Muslims of East Bengal. Jadu_Nath
— wl A sence and authentic rae: me ‘
rnla in Bengt gl a more accurate picture_of the Mus
conte the el in East Bengal were prone t0 -
>) average Bengali Muslim, contrary to what is gene!”