“ Tragedy of Errors
He ended his assessment by recommending that the CML
should; (1) continue to seek a political solution; (2) should Make
political leaders, specially in West Pakistan, realise the
consequences of the postponement of the national assembly
session; (3) place the blame on their shoulders and not on th,
army and (4) create pressure on them to get together.
General Yahya and the rest heard Sahibzada Yaqub’s sombre
reflections in pin drop silence. All that Yahya could say "now let ys
have dinner. Will see you again tomorrow at 10 ’clock".
Yaqub and Ahsan came back to the East Pakistan House. They
were both in connected rooms and heard each other tossing in
bed. Neither of them could sleep that night. Yaqub says he had
tears in his eyes and through them he recalled all what he had
said a few hours before to the President of Pakistan. He got up
and, in the stillness of the night, penned down all that he could
remember. He wrote down the whole of the conversation while
his memory was fresh and sent his handwritten note to Peerzada,
but not before showing it to Ahsan who, Sahibzada Yaqub says,
"agreed with every word".
Yahya asked Yaqub and Ahsan to see Bhutto on their way to
East Pakistan and persuade him to attend the inaugural session.
Ahsan, Yaqub and Peerzada went to Karachi and met Bhutto on
February 24, at Admiral Muzaffar’s house who was then the
commander-in-chief of the Pakistan Navy. The spokesman was
Yaqub. He told Bhutto "We do not see any reason for you to
boycott the national assembly session. We have been sent to ask
you to attend the session. Bhutto, jarrogant and proud as he
always was, replied "Instead of telling me tell Mujib to come to
_West Pakistan". Yaqub to pacify him said "We will speak to him
also" Bhutto then toned his voice down and commented “I cannot
ay I will call a meeting of my people and the decision will
epend on them . There was muted laughter all around as the
meaning was quite clear!!,
Bhutto went out of the room and said I ‘will ring up Abdul
Hafeez Peerzada, his confidant and came back to sa Tha panty is /
adamant that they will " y
y not attend". That was that! General
Peerzada went back to Rawalpindi and dutifully reported the
proceedings to General Yahya. utifully reporte
When
Ahsan se Re der re after reaching Dar
of the date of the wiationaljassembly