138
Tragedy of Errors
constituent assembly could only be accepted for the Presidenp,
authentication if atleast two third of the members of parliamen,
approved it. In the absence of this clarification in the LFO th,
simple majority clause would have applied giving East Pakistan
smooth sailing of a constitution based on their 6-Points formula
G.W. Chowdhry, the civilian member of Yahya’s cabinet, claims
that "the clause of 60 per cent votes from the total members of the
“legislature for passing a constitution was dropped by General
Yahya",
The framers of the LFO were, however, sitting smugly as they
had included in this document that no one has the right to offer a
solution which would adversely affect the solidarity of the people
of Pakistan. This according to the LFO ‘none would tolerate’.
They felt quite satisfied by including in it the words ‘The
provinces shall be so united in a federation that the independence,
territorial integrity and: the national solidarity of Pakistan are
ensured and that the unity of the federation is not in any way
impaired’. harm
But at no time was Mujib warned of violating the LFO. In fact
the President did not consider anything wrong with the 6 Points.
CMLA Headquarters even confirmed that "preaching of 6 Points”
was not against Martial law Regulation 60°25, Perhaps General
Yahya and his close aides felt that the 6-Points formula was
merely an election slogan to win votes and that the Awami League
would modify them when it comes to framing the constitution.
The reality of the situation during the electioneering campaign
in 1970 was that Mujib-ur-Rahman, the rabble rouser_that he
was, had succeeded in galvanising the vast majority of the
Bengalis towards attaining their goal of maximum autonomy
bordering on separation. Unfortunately no government at the
Centre, military or civil, could have prevented Mujib and his
followers from preaching his 6 Points which by then had become
the demand of the vast majority of the Bengalis.
Although Yahya kept repeating that he would not tolerate.a?y
scheme which would mean the break up of the country he had n°
| power left to enforce his statements. His military commanders in
[, Hast Pakistan were not inclined nor had they the military muscle
‘jo face the people of East Pakistan in 1970.