180
Tragedy of Errors
iving of 120 days time limit to frame the constjs,,,
sia ei ta more *avisable!"?, Khan Abdul Wali Kha
the National Awami Party blamed Bhutto for “throwing a Span,
in the works by announcing that he would not attend the Semi,
thus playing a major role in the dismemberment 4
country”!!!, Malik Ghulam dilani president of the Punjab Pekin,
Front, called “the postponement an unfortunate decisio,),
Maulana Ghulam Ghaus Hazarvi was against ‘
postponement!!*, Hashim Khan Gilzai, of the Nationa] Away
party (Wali Khan Group), felt that "the decision was deplory
and undemocratic!" Muhammad Khurshid, president Pani,
Awami League demanded “immediate announcement of g g,.
date''®, Mian Muhammad Yasin Khan Wattoo, Malik M. Jag,
Abid Hasan Manto and Major General Nawabzada Sher Ali Ki,
of the Jamaat-e-Islami in a joint statement at Lahore asked fory,
national assembly to be summoned before March 7, 1971, the dy,
fixed by Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman to hold a public Meeting »
Paltan Maidan Dacca where it was anticipated that Mujib wo,
declare independence for Bangladesh.
Justice Z. H, Lari (CML) deplored the postponement!’
Sardar Ataullah Mengal (NAP) did not approve of the decisi
Air Marshal Nur Khan (CML) urged the president to immediate
fix a new date!!’ otherwise the damage done would be too gr:
and difficult. to repair. He felt that Mujib has a right to ruje!lé
Major General Sarfraz Khan, vice president of PDP, opine
that it was a step in the right direction!'® but later he urged
president to hand over power to Mujib!*". Ataur-Rahman-Khaa¢
the Pakistan National League in East Pakistan, which -¥
opposing the Awami League in the election, now felt that &
decision of the president was very shocking and in comple!
disregard of the hopes and aspirations of the people. Profes*
Ghulam Azam of the East Pakistan Jamaat-e-Islami commen
that it was most unfortunate that the normal course of democ
had been obstructed. Shamsul Huda of the East Pakistan Mus”
League angrily retorted "I have been shocked and grieved , wh
asked for his comments. Nur-ul-Amin of the PDP felt this fill
receded the prospects of framing the country’s constitution’
Dawn in its editorial wrote "We are at a cross road. The sf!
of elation and optimism that prevailed after the elecU
yielded place to dismay and) uneasiness"!22, A.Z, Sulet ae
know ous nalist ahd alorle time lehdittan of the Pakistan Ne
i.