450 Tragedy of Errors |
h in that hour of cris;
-< government. Strangely enoug Sis
ra was nO direct line to Islamabad from New York. Agha Shahi
had to get in touch with his government by pencils the message
through Sweden. A sorry state of affairs indeed!
Bhutto arrived in New York on 10 December. While driving
from the airport to the hotel suite he was told about the latest
message from Farman. Bhutto was visibly moved I have been
betrayed" were his comments. Bhutto’s first action at the United
Nations was to delay the meeting of the Security Council till the
contents of the message had been verified.
The ministry of foreign affairs responded on 11 December.
President Yahya had countermanded the proposal sent by the
government of East Pakistan. Agha Shahi was to disown the
message as Eastern Command, according to General Yahya, had
exceeded the parameters within which it had been given
permission to work for a ceasefire. Agha Shahi felt as if he was
hanging in mid-air not knowing exactly what to do.
A breakfast meeting was hurriedly arranged with Mr. George
Bush and Henry Kissinger on 12 December, Kissinger told Bhutto
and Agha Shahi that he had reliable information that India would
transfer their forces from the eastern to the western front and try
and destroy West Pakistan also. He also said that any resolution
put forward now at the Security Council would again be vetoed by
the Soviet Union, as they would not want India to be stopped from
achieving its objective. He hinted that the United States would do
ee ea Gea continuing the war in the West.
; ° weer A.M. Raza, Pakistan’s ambassador in
i z Bt eee that the Pentagon had ordered USS Enterprise to
autre. e Bay of Bengal to put pressure on India to agree to a
The same day (12 December) the US _ permanent
om “ the UN sent a letter to the President of the
security Council (UN Document $/10444) in which it was stated,
inter-alia, that while Pakistan had accepted the UN General
poner ee asking India and Pakistan to institute
other _ . withdraw troops from each others territories, a
re rted ct ae had not yet done so. The US govern
Security Co . ean of the Council to convene a meeting oft
uncil immediately,