Mukti Bahinj 225
Fach brigade of 14 Infantry Division
ment, The supporting arme sf ihe dr had an East Bengal
regime! vision had an ¢]
Rengalis amongst them. About 50% of the troops j e ement of
on March 1, were Bengalis. In addition there ‘eas East Pakistan
Police. The break down being: © Razakars nd
; ions of Kast Bengal Reo;
Six battalions of se *eiment 5,000. regular soldiers |
Bast Pakistan Rifles 16,000 |
Razakars 50,000 |
Police 45,000
SS —H
1,16,000_ '
SS .
The Link Snaps
After March 3, 1971 a defacto Bangladesh had come into |
existence and the loyalty of the Bengali officers and men had been
put to great strain. Ex-army personnel had already formed a para- _-
military force in Support of the Awami League. It is remarkable
that Bengali personnel in uniform did not desert and go over to |
the other side during those critical three weeks in March. They
must surely have been emotionally very disturbed, not knowing |
what the future was going to be. But they still were committed to
the oath they had taken at the Kakul Academy and in the |
regimental centres. All that was needed was a spark to ignite a
chain reaction which would force them to cast aside the loyally to
°ne’s country which, according to Lord Chetwood of the Britis
army, came ‘first always and everytime’. a
The Spark came in the form of a military action a rote
areal Regiments and the Bengali elements in the as sa, Went
te Were required to hand over their Neonpons 6 "een Taaee
“kistanis, Quite expectedly they refused to do h . cele
Ss @ military confrontation they rebelled and 1oug
nto the lap of the enemy, turned protector”. taken to keep
en
so Even before the military crack-down ae vil eutilive posts.
Sai of the more vocal Bengali officers ees! wore animosity and
. this mistrust and suspicion only create prey to the
ade the » i soldiers an easy Pt id
br Test of the Bengali ; ders. Major Khal
‘Paganda being unleashed by the political leaders. in Dacea,
Mushars ng unleashe ay » bf 57-Brigade i
. "Taff, who wag the brigade majon |