2 i
Tragedy of Errors
a university in East Bengal® where the Muslims were in a
majority. The Hindus headed by Babu Ananda Chander Roy,
leading pleader of Dacca, vehemently protested against the
establishment of a university at Dacca. On the other hand Nawab
Khwaja Salimullah’ and Syed Nawab Ali Choudhry realized then
that English education for the Bengali Muslims was necessary,
Maulvi Abul Kasem Fazlul Haq, a prominent leader of the
Muslims of Bengal during the British Raj, drafted the
representation for a separate university in Dacca which was
placed before Lord Hardinge, the then viceroy of India. It was due
mainly to his efforts that on July 1, 1921 an act was enacted
. establishing the Makkah University later to be known as the
“Dacca University’.
The Dacca University had the trappings of a Muslim
educational institution. It had a strong department of Arabic and
Islamic Studies. There was a Pesh-e-Imam (Prayer leader) in each
hall. Azan (the five times-a-day call for prayer) was regularly
given. With such Islamic credentials it is no wonder that the
Dacca University played a very significant role in the Pakistan
“Movement. Supported by the oratory skill of Fazlul Haq, who had
become the president of the Bengal Muslim League in 1914, the
students of the Dacca University became actively involved in
national politics. They gave the Quaid-e-Azam a very warm
reception when he visited the university in 1936. During the 1937
provincial elections the students worked for the Muslim League.
The All India Muslim Students Federation (AIMSF) held its
first session in Calcutta in 1937. This was organized by the All
Bengal Muslim Students Federation supported by Fazlul Haq.
Unfortunately it soon split into different factions and was
disaffiliated with the AIMSF.
Abul Kasem Fazlul Haq
Fazlul Haq, was born at Barisal, in East Bengal, on October 26,
1873 in an educated and well-to-do family. He was a linguist being
ent in Arabic, Persian, Urdu and English besides his own
rari sie Fazlul Haq, who began his political career as 4 j
it ee i ambitious and a maverick. He had no
him into ee ERE Tovallbies or reversing policies if it would bring
Ha ioe teat os category of other well known Indian leaders.
tt uslim League in 1936 and formed his own Krishak