31
Geographical Characteristics
The Muslim Bengali leadership before Partition was divided
between those who were Bengalis first and Muslims afterwards .
and those who adhered to the common Muslim cause more than
their provincial identity, Fazlul Haq and Suharwardy belonged to
the former category while Khwaja Nazimuddin and his family
belonged to the latter. Fazlul Haq, whose roots lay in the rural
masses was an advocate of Bengali nationalism. Suharwardy, was
on the contrary Calcutta-based. He had a national outlook and
progressive ideas but was at the same time a strong supporter of
the Bengali cause. He was more popular amongst the student
community. Nazimuddin came from the landed aristocracy of
Dacca. He derived his Support from the sophisticated elite and
remained cut off from the people in the countryside. His
interpretation of the Lahore Resolution was one Pakistan and the
question of a separate Bengali nationhood never crossed his mind.
After Partition
During the Pakistan Movement, the Bengali Muslims did not
expect Bengal to be partitioned. The division of Bengal came to
them as a shock. It divided their families, it prevented them from
visiting Calcutta which was their cultural ‘capital’. The drawing of
an arbitrary line by Sir Cyril Radcliffe, the British chairman of the
Boundary Commission, to demarcate the boundary between West
and East Bengal created a mental agitation even amongst many
Bengali Muslims.
» "The Bengalis did not feel the full impact of the Partition till
“" 1952" said General Khalil. But when passports were introduced
the Bengalis began to feel deprived of their cultural centre. The
Indians capitalized on this and began their propaganda campaign.
"Why have we (Bengalis) been divided, we speak the same
language, we use the same water of the Ganges. Tagore is our
common Bengali poet" reiterated All Indian Radio transmissions,
day-in and day-out, beamed towards East Bengal. Literature from
Calcutta focussed on the same theme. "No effort was made to
counter this propaganda" acknowledged Khalil.
Suharwardy, was not to be influenced by this kind of
Psychological onslaught. His views after Partition changed. He no
longer believed in the extreme form of Bengali nationalism shown
by some other Bengali leaders. He did, however, quit the Muslim
League, blaming Liagat Ali Khan for not fully working for the
objectives set out by the party that achieved Pakistan.