— Tragedy of Errors
General Tikka wanted to meet Mujib. His chief secretary -
that he could arrange such a meeting on March 9. Mujib On bein
contacted said that he is prepared to meet him but he will have ‘
come to his house as otherwise other Awami League leader,
would take Mujib’s visit to the government house ag ,
capitulation. The general suggested a neutral place like the
provincial assembly building but that too was not acceptable ¢,
Mujib and the meeting did not take place.
On March 9, Maulana Bhashani and Ata-ur-Rahman who had
always opposed Mujib now pledged support to him thus
completing the hold of Awami League over the Bengalis.
On March 10, 1971, Bhutto realising that matters had come ty
a head sent a telegram to Mujib in which he expressed hig
willingness to go to Dacca "The unfortunate crisis that has
developed leads me to believe that we have come to a stage where
the two wings of Pakistan must immediately reach a common
understanding if the unity is to be saved"'*°. But he had not given
up his aim of not sitting in the opposition.
With matters reaching a breaking point the leaders of the
Council Muslim League, Convention Muslim League, Jamaat-e-
Islami, Jamiat-ulema-e-Islam, Jamiat-e-Ulema-e-Pakistan and
other smaller parties met at Lahore on March 13. They backed the
Awami League’s four additional points and urged General Yahya
to go to Dacca and find a political solution to the crisis.
Nawab Akber Khan Bugti a prominent political leader of
Balochistan and head of the Bugti tribe was also in favour of
handing over power to Mujib immediately. "When Mujib can rule
_ the whole country why should he be content with half’ were his
comments. He blamed Bhutto for being only concerned with)
sharing power and for not helping in framing of the new
constitution'4', However, Bhutto stuck to his guns and at Nishta!
Park at Peshawar he demanded that "power should be transferred
to the Awami League in East Pakistan and to the PPP in We
Pakistan '? thus ensuring his piece of cake. According to him the
majority party in East Pakistan and the majority party in West
Pakistan could democratically represent th This was 0°
wholly true. a OUGHY:
One unit having been dissolved. Bhutto could not expec 0
ahi ee a provincia assemblies of the NWFP o
tA "made no mention; 6f, the, type of. gavernme?