310 Tragedy of Errors
border on October 30!7. As the military situation began to worse,
along the Indo-Pakistan frontier, Nixon sent strong cables to Now
Delhi, Moscow and Islamabad cautioning them against an
outbreak of war. The cable to New Delhi, according to Kissinger
was delayed by the US Senate giving time to the Indian Prime
minister to give the final orders for the invasion of a neighbouring
country without any qualms. sc ae advised the Us
President not to ask for the conveying of a Security Council
session as "such a move would", as she put it, "obstruct the path of
the solution we jointly seek". She was correct to some extent as
both India and the United States had the same solution in ming .
ie the separation of East Pakistan from the rest of the country.
Only the route to be adopted was different. Nixon wanted to tread
__ the political path while Mrs. Gandhi was prepared to use her
~ military instrument. The hawkish Indian ‘iron lady’ was
determined to crush Pakistan’s pride under her high heels. In this
she was being supported by the State Department for even on
November 24, when Indian forces had occupied chunks of East
Pakistan territory, Rogers was saying "we have no independent
information either to confirm or to deny Indian complicity in the
~ armed attack"!8,
Silver haired Ambassador Kenneth B. Keating was, however,
keeping himself well informed in New Delhi. He could see the
clouds of war gathering, being closer to the scene, and as early as
November 12, he sent a signal to the State Department saying
that the war was imminent!9.
The movement of six additional Indian divisions into West
Bengal, the development of infrastructure upto the Indo-East
Pakistan border, the equipping, arming and training of the Mukt
Bahini by the Indian army, the bellicose statement of the Indian
leaders, the,frequent shelling by Pakistani villages by the India?
artillery was enough evidence for the State Department to come
the conclusion that the Indian forces had finally crossed the
international border. That is if they were looking for positiv® .
evidence! f
Yahya sent a letter to Nixon on November 22, 197)
immediately after India sent its troops formally into Ess
Pakistan, in which he is purported to have requested Nixo? :
personal intervention. He described the military situation eA \
noose round the government’s forces which is being tightened,”
| TG) |