Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre #8
General Aurora, mischeviously confided that he had not told
Manekshaw of the crossing of the Meghna on 10 December
pecause he was not sure that the forces Singh had sent across
would be able to hold on against a determined attack45. There was |
no attack on them. |
73 Indian Brigade along with guns, heavy weapons and |
vehicles were taken across in country boats at a crossing place |
between Bhairab Bazar and Narsingdi. The PT 76s tried to cross
on their own steam but had eventually to be towed to the bank. |
The crossing of the Meghna, more than three kilometres wide,
would have been an extremely difficult task against opposition.
; PAF aircraft and the regiment of artillery would have had a field :
day drowning most of the advancing motorised columns while on
the river. It, however, became a TEWT (Tutorial Exercise with
Troops) for IV Corps in the-absence of any unfriendly aircraft and
with no tanks or guns to obstruct their movement. Naib Subedar
Fateh Muhammad of 53 Field Regiment commanding a section of
105 mm (Pack) Howitzers, was the only lone gunner who fired
_ directly into the PT 76s while they were in the river, sinking some
| and forcing them to withdraw temporarilly. A journey by train
| during day light hours in enemy territory would normally be
unthinkable but with all the cards stacked in their favour Sagat
_ Singh’s troops were having a joy ride. |
By 14 December two Indian brigades established a bridgehead |
and put up a road block between Bharaib Bazar and Narsingdi to |
prevent 27 Brigade from moving towards Dacca. Bhairab Bazar
was kept under constant aerial bombardment and shelling.
_ Napalm bombs were also used mostly against the guns of 31 Field
| Regiment. There was nothing Majeed or Saadullah could do to
Prevent the enemy’s further advance towards Dacca as all river
craft had been destroyed, and the road blocked. General Niazi s
belated directive to Majeed to do something about the heli-landing
Went unanswered. On 12 December Narsingdi was secured by the
enemy and the road to the East Pakistan capital from the east lay
Open but progress on this front slowed down. East bank of the
lakhaya river was reached on 13 December. Enemy troops
‘tossed the river next day By 15 December/Indian 57 Mountain
| Division had closed in on Dacca from the east.
____ It took 57 Indian Division 10 days to reach the Meghna, a
distance of 32 kilometres from the border. The rate of advance
"