65
Causes of Alienation
Centre. To him unfettered democracy could prove dangerous
because the people were ‘uneducated and the politicians
unscruplous”®. A presidential system of government did not suit
the people of East Bengal. They had been demanding greater
regional autonomy. What they got in 1958 was greater central
control. The constitution commission had been warning the
, government not to introduce a unitary system as according to
them "we would be driving the average East Bengali into the
hands of the extremists in the province"’?, "Us and them" i
appeared after 1958 said Rahman Subhan,?8 when asked as to
when in his opinion the alienation between the two wings began
to take a definite course. According to Emajuddin Ahmad, a
professor at the Dacca University, "The state apparatus after 1958
became over developed. It was neither responsible nor ~
responsive” said Emajuddin. .
The leaders in the eastern wing did not appreciate the
imposition of martial law because it. meant a strong Centre; a
more powerful military/civil government in which they were
severely under represented; it also meant banning of political
parties and political activities which made them totally ineffective.
A number of them were even imprisoned which further angered
them against their West Pakistani ‘over lords’.
President Ayub had an excellent opportunity to solve many of
the political problems which had been haunting the country since
independence. He possessed a towering personality, had the total
Support of the armed forces and was well acquainted with East
Bengal having served there as the general officer commanding of
the local army formation. But he too did not prove equal to the
task. His priorities went wrong. He concentrated on rapid
: industrialisation, thinking that economic development would take
care of political bickerings. aap
The Field Marshal, introduced his own form of democracy. The
1962 Constitution took away the right of the people to chose their
Own representatives directly to the national and provincial /
legislature. They could only elect local bodies who were termed
‘Basic Democrats’. It was these 80,000 basic democrats who
formed the electoral college for the elections to the national and
Provincial assemblies. This basic democracy system, as it came. to
be called, was not acceptable to the politicians particularly those in
East Pakistan. It took away the ‘thunder’ from them for ing