Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) ns
drastically. Those holding key positions were looking forward to
exercising authority. If that was denied to them there would be
frustration and bitterness" were Yaqub’s comments,
Martial law" said Sahibzada Ya "j sat
agencies With shortage of tops Gar ipguetse through iu
Pakistan. The civil administration had changed their loyalties and
were now looking towards the rising sun, If their ambitions were
suppressed there would certainly be trouble even if there were
more forces available to Eastern Command", explained General
Yaqub. He continued to emphasise that in the event of a stricter
martial law the loyalties of the East Bengal Regiments and the
it a ry would be put under severe strain. "One ugly
ent could lead to very seri 4 "war 1 of {
mare it Hat Peninnns ry ous results" warned the head of the
Referring to the reaction from across the border Sahibzada
Yaqub pointed out that the Indians would exploit the situation to
the full having already penetrated into the area. An Indian threat
in such a situation would be disastrous as Eastern Command
would be torn between inward deployment to deal with internal
security and outward defence to meet the external threat. The
general went on to say “with draconian measures and
reinforcements from West Pakistan we might, in the short term,
‘retain a degree of control but not bein a position to do so for long”,
The main point, however, was what was the effect desired? "If
the aim was the integrity of Pakistan) then it could hardly be
achieved by such measures as a strict application of martial law
would mean casualties which in turn would spread hatred and
resentment against the armed forces. Thus we would be achieving
results quite the opposite of the political aim intended. Even if we
succeed in bringing back law and order by force of ammege would
have failed in the ultimate objective", said Yaqub. " r success
would be our failure. The naked sword of martial law against the
60 million people of East Pakistan, who had given their verdict in
favour of a particular political party, would be suicidal. It would
only be taken as an imperial act of revenge against a. colony
opined the force commander.
"The decision, therefore, to reverse the direction would be
"nsound, it would fail and bring about the disintegration of
Pakistan under the most unfavourable circumstances’ was
Commander Eastern Command's closing remarks to his
commander-in-chief.