25
Geographical Characteristics
Islamic subjects were not taught in the schools at Khulna on
the contrary the curricula included aspects of the Hindu faith.
Islamic education, became the responsibility of the parents and
not of the teachers, who in any case where mostly Hindus*®. The
term Bengali meant a Hindu Bengali. Muslim Bengalis were
simply known as Muslims. "Though not actually social outcasts
they were not allowed into Hindu homes even after independence"
said General Khalil. Slowly, however, this treatment had its
negative impact and the Muslims of Bengal began to resent the
overlordship of their Hindu neighbours - which eventually led to
their demand for a separate homeland along with the rest of the
Muslims of India.
_ Historical Perspective
Bengal was conquered by the Mughals in 1202 AD by
Muhammad Bakhtyar Khilji, a subordinate commander of Sultan ,
Qutubuddin Aiybak‘*. It was the first province of the Mughal (
Empire to pass fully into the hands of the British. Since the
British had snatched power from the Muslims they were
apprehensive of any attempt by them to try and regain their lost
kingdom. They, therefore, made a concerted plan to suppress the
‘Muslims and encourage the Hindus in their newly acquired
domain of Bengal.
Partition of Bengal and its Annulment
The dominance of the Hindu landlord, businessmen and
traders increased to such an extent in Bengal that the Muslims
demanded the partition of the province so that they could free
themselves from the Hindu Bhadrulok (landlord). Bengal was
partitioned in 1905. and the districts of Dacca, Rajshahi and
Chittagong (later to become part of Pakistan) were separated from
Western Bengal. "The Hindus considered the partition of Bengal
as an attempt to create a Muslim state in Eastern Bengal"®. Most
of the Hindus, resented the breakaway and forced Lord Curzon,
the then viceroy of India, to annul the partition of Bengal. The two
frontiers were united again by a proclamation made by King
George V at the Delhi Durbar of 1911.
Even after the annulment of the partition of Bengal the
’ Muslims continued to work towards creating better opportunities
for themselves. To compete with the Hindus in the field of
education, the Muslims of Bengal demanded the establishment of