| é
. Political Quagmire (Beginning of the Enq) oo
The army did not interfere ; ;
Although troops were earmarked io 4, “lectioneering process,
booths they kept their distance (no closer the” &* all election
8n 5 miles fy
polling’ booths) as they had been Positioned on} S from
serious disturbance occured57. Unfortunately th ame abe
so yery neutral that even when the pheeen Lea © army remained
tactics, both overtly and behind the Scenes ewe taal Pressure
~-Nietory those in uniform took No steps to ensure fairnes a ars
~ it was too late as any kind of Pressure would my = aps
greater animosity against West Pakistan. attracted
November 1970 Cyclone
At the height of the election campaign, when West Pakistan
(mainly Punjabis,) were being blamed for every ill in East
Pakistan ynature played its role in furthering the acrimony —
between the two wings. on November 12, 1970, less then a month
before the scheduled date of the elections, a devestating cyclone
struck the coastal areas of East Bengal. Howling winds upto 125
miles-per-hour lashed against the hundreds of little islands in the
deltaic region of Patuakali, and Chittagong. Twenty foot waves
crashed against the thatched houses pushing them and their
frightened inmates into the gushing salt waters of the Bay of
Bengal. The tornado, the worst in Bengal’s history, continued on Pon
its devastating path for over six merciless hours and when it
subsided Noakhali and the offshore islands of Bhola, Hatya,
Sandwip and the innumerable chores (small islands) in that area P
were under water. One hundred and twenty islands disappeared
and 2,000 square miles of territory lay battered. Nearly 500,000
men, women and childrefi lay dead, two and a half million were |
rendered homeless, property worth 4.5 billion dollars was :
destroyed,
Such a calamity would have taxed the organisational _
ingenuity and resources of even the most advance oes
Prosperous nation admitted the German newspaper ae aI
Professor Abdul Qayyoom, a Bengali intellectual from Noakhail,
Was also of the same view™®,
The Centre was slow to respond to the calamity at ae
Cccured in East Pakistan. No political leader from West ae ,
Visited the affected areas except for Bhutto sii pA
Welcome visitor. They were busy in their own election