Regional Inequality - Remedial] Measures 99
Chittagong in 1967; this was followed by seven smaller steel mills
in other places and a petroleum refinery; small arms factory came
’ on stream at Faujdar ghat; a total of 84 jute mills came up, out of
which 56 belonged to the local Muslims; 30 match factories, 20
sugar mills and 52 cotton mills in different parts of the country
were established, thirty of them owned and run by East
Pakistanis”; fifteen food processing units, thirty tanneries, and six
oil and gas refineries were added to the increasing industrial -
concerns in East Pakistan. 7
Total number of factories completed during the Third Plan
(July 1965 to December 1969) alone was twenty seven at a total
cost of Rs. 89 crores. These included sugar, fertilizer, jute goods,
steel ignots, hardboard, newsprint and pharmaceutical units. The
East Pakistan Industrial Development Corporation (EPIDC)
completed five projects during 69/70 (July-March) at a total cost
of Rs. 8.68 crores which included two jute mills, two fertilizer
factories and one sugar mill. Net value of fixed assets of EPIDC’s
19 projects in commercial operation was Rs. 96.15 crores. Gross
receipts from these projects during 68/69 was Rs. 41.23 crores and
the revenue expendittre was Rs. 43.13 crores. East Pakistan
Small Industries Corporation (EPSIC) had set up 18 industrial
estates at a total cost of Rs. 3.14 crores. The Corporation had 22
io schemes on hand at an estimated cost of 4.8 crores in
; Approximately 600 small and big factories were built in twenty
our years, averaging two industrial units every month. At
Independence East Bengal’s economy was dependent only on it’s
i produce. By 1970 it had moved towards a semi-
ingest economy. In addition to these factories, a technical
Ravearsh established in Kaptai, Pakistan Council of Industrial
- Kabod nee were put up in Dacca and Rajshahi, Ganges
| Chitta a Hood control project, Teasta Barrage Project, Tippera -
flood contr project, Dacca-Narayanganj project were some of the
rol and irrigation measures taken.
_ . eo me were spent by the Pakistan Eastern Railways
ot com = new railway line in the Narsingdi - Mandiganj section
gauge to aie of the Rupsa - Bagerhat section from a narrow
the improy toadguage railway line; Rs. 11.5 crores were spent in
€ment of Inland Water Transport. All five river ports of