Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 197
aulana Shah Ahmad Noorani (Jamiat-i- r .
Prominent by his absence was Zulfigar Ali Feige i yey
People’s Party).
The two teams met again on March 19. T ;
team rejected the MLO. They put forward es ow aa
which included: (1) lift Law immediately (2) transfer ere
provinces to respective majority parties: (3) no change at the ‘ ..
Centre; (4) 1962 Constitution to be amended to ensure full |
autonomy for East Pakistan; (5) two separate committees be
formed to frame the constitution initially. The national assembly
to discusss the two reports and find a compromise between the
two; (6) governors to be nominated by the president and (7) list of
subjects with the Centre to remain as mentioned in the 6 points. |
‘Foreign aid and trade for West Pakistan, however may remain
with the Centre if that is their wish. Yahya was willing to accept
these proposals by the Awami League chief provided Bhutto
rasied no objections. He (Yahya) had conceded all points except
immediate transfer of power. But he was also aware that neither
his generals nor Mr Bhutto would accept these conditions.
Initially, the Awami League proposals among others included:
(1)\independent armed forces for East Pakistan; (2) separate
currencies for the two wings; (3) negotiations for foreign aid to be
carried out separately; (4) export earnings to be divided equaly; (5)
two state banks and two central board of revenues; and (6)
taxation to be a provincial subject.
Further negotiations betwen the two teams narrowed down
the differences between them on these major issues. After some
discusion it was agreed that two separate currencies and two
Separate State banks would be against the unity of the country. To
ensure that there would be no flight of capital only 5 ee
Percentage of the profits would be allowed to be repatriate ais
West Pakistan. The points about separate currencies and 7 es
/Teserve banks were, therefore, deleted and according to nd the
/ Hasan both Kamal Hussein and Rahman Subhan sign
deletion.
AS regards foreign aid, aftyer some argu aie - eo
League team j ted to have agreed to removing that c :
well am is reported vee apg due share and the funds
$0 ried Kast Pakistan 1s given ‘nt was also dropped and
_2"ocated are not lapsable. This po
Nitials obtai ned.