Causes of Alienation 79
that East Pakistan was saved by China was not appreciated by age
East Bengalis. The New York Times reported a ‘Bengali
intellectual as saying "If we owe our salvation to China what need
do we have for Pakistan”. The war over Kashmir highlighted the
fact that East Pakistan could be exposed to an attack by India on
an issue which did not affect their material well being.
Economy
The most vociferous complaint by the intellectuals and the
politicians of East Pakistan was the so-called economic domination
of their province by West Pakistan. Indian writers like K.
Subramanyam, an internationally known defence and political
analyst of India, and Major General D.K. Palit referred to this
phenomena as ‘internal colonialism’*. East Pakistan was taken to |
be ‘a colony of West Pakistan. Western authors accepted this
“theory lock, stock and_barrel. Bengali economists went to great
pains to highlight the imbalance in the trade between the two
wings, the transfer of capital from the East to the West, the
increasing gap in the per capita income and the slow rate of
economic growth in East Pakistan. .
G.W. Choudhry, a senior Bengali civil servant, who was
associated with decision making at various levels, considered
economic disparity as the "most serious challenge to the unity of |
Pakistan". According to him “East Pakistanis felt that their |
interests were not safe with West Pakistan controlling the
economic resources"®’, Self interested political leaders made full
use of the figures quoted by them to bring out the dire need of
' having two separate economies for the two halves of Pakistan.
Most of the statistics mentioned were indeed correct. However,
differences in the standard of living, and a gap in industrial
development did exist even before Independence between the
provinces of Punjab and East Bengal. It continued to remain and
even widen during the twenty four years of a United Pakistan. It
_ Still exists even after two decades of the emergence of Bangladesh.
The question that needs answering is as to why that was so?
Was it a deliberate act of the central leadership to deprive East
« Pakistan of its due share of economic development? Was it due to
} the Policy of a free market economy? Have other nations been able
to wipe out their economically backward areas and achieve
the utopia of a homogeneous development throughout their
countries?