33
Geographical Characteristics
secretary and Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman became its joint
secretary. Almost all the top leadership of the Awami League in
East Bengal were lawyers or students.
Thirty six resolutions were passed including fresh elections in
the country on the basis of adult franchise: framing of a
constitution; settling of disputes with India; following of an
independent foreign policy and laying down of land ceilings,
¥ Maulana Abdus Sattar Khan Niazi was appointed general
secretary of the Pakistan Awami League in Punjab and in the
North West Frontier Province the president of the party was Pir
of Manki Sharif.
Nawab Mamdot, who had formed the Jinnah Muslim League,
merged his party with the Pakistan Awami League. The Union
gave birth to the All Pakistan Jinnah Awami League which
became a motely crowd of disgruntled politicians with various
shades of political opinion. Later it dropped the names of Pakistan
and Jinnah and in J uly, 1953 it did away with the epithet Muslim »
and became only the Awami League (AL). Out of 55 members — .
almost half of them (27) had opposed the proposal of dropping the ~
word Muslim.
The Awami League was a liberal and secular party. It’s
manifesto included: (1) improvement in the food situation in East
Bengal; (2) nationalization of the jute industry; (3) release of
political prisoners; (4) recognition of Bengali as one of the state
languages; (5) general elections and (6) complete provincial
autonomy,
By 1954 the five political parties in East Bengal, in addition to
the Muslim League, were the Awami League (Bhashani): Krishak
Sramik Party (Fazlul Haq), Ganatantra Dal (Mahmood Ali), the
‘ Nizam-e-Islam Party (Nur-ul-Amin) and the East Bengal
Communist Party. The latter five were united on wanting more
autonomy for East Bengal, Bengali as the national language and
Opposition to mutual defence pacts. They grouped themselves
together to form the United Front (UF) also known as the Jugto
Front. _
The Jugto Front translated their manifesto into 21 concrete
demands known also as 21 Points. Some of the more significant
demands were: Bengali to be the national language; East Bengal
Should get complete autonomy as per the Lahore Resolution;