306—iy Tragedy of Errors
. s on his own pad
General Yahya’s ee on — 9, 1971, siidtitionet n!
government house Hes while in New Delhi just a day eaniio,
Kissinger's peer af bitterness, hostility and hawkishnes,
"Kissinger foun am ‘th an impression that India was likely tg)
and he came away VW" " te General Yahya on his pad, 9
start a war against Pakistan , wre .__ bad, He
further noted"USA has conveyed a strong warning to India |
inst starting hostilities but she may not pay heed thinking tha
Se present hostile attitude of the press and Senate againg
Pakistan offers her a good opportunity".
_) While in Islamabad it was given out that Kissinger had fallen
'*°"in and will be recuperating in the hill station of Nathiagali. In the
early hours of the morning of July 9, when it was still dark, Major
General Ghulam Umar, national security chief, however, drove
Kissinger to the PAF base at Chaklala where some Chinese
navigators had already arrived. While it was still dark the PAF
aircraft roared into the night sky on its way to Peking.
When day broke Kissinger’s double and other look-alike US
staffers were driven to Nathiagali in full view of the international
| press. The return visit of Henry Kissinger from Peking was also
| kept a guarded secret. This paved the way for the eventual Sino-
| US rapprochement. So grateful was president Nixon to Genera
| Yahya that he wrote a two page letter of thanks, in his own
han owiehe ee type-written), acknowledging the vital rol
Net p Liste = Se president. He was also aware of the fact
| subcontinent whieh — eae “en only equally © a
if they were inteatted keep the Soviet Union and India at bay
| ‘ae y the United States, Knowing the militaly
| superiority enjoyed by India the president k vent the
| out break of an all out war between the wo heater evalsi
| South Asia which could end etween the two traditional rv ‘i
| armed forces of Pakistan end up with the total destruction of
communist Russia ine and the elimination of a bullwork aga!”
So deep, h outhwest Asia,
ship in USA that while Ni the division between the top ear
Washington Senior Review Was ‘tilting’ towards Pakista? ie
option papers for the presigereUP (WSRG), which preli,
intervened in an Indo-Pak ent, recommended that if ‘ol
extend military assistance iar .War, the United States and
national integrity, as fay 0 India - Pakistan’s independent’, i
consequence. as they were concerned, was Y