= Tragedy of Errors
Farman knew that it would be difficult to trace the Politica)
leaders as they were being supported by the local population ang
their exact location at the time specified for the arrest would not
be easy to establish. He suggested that a political Meeting bg
called and when all are in, arrests could be made (all is fair in love
and war). The President, who tried to play a fair game, disagreeg
and told Farman “do not arrest the leaders while they are jp ‘
conference with me”.
No written orders were issued. Senior staff officers wer,
dispatched to commanders on the ground giving them the
required go-ahead signal. Farman went to Jessore, Raja went to
Comilla and Colonel Saadullah went to Rangpur and Rajshahi, He
tried to reach Chittagong but did not succeed. A liaison officer was
sent to Sylhet which was out on a limb.
To attain a measure of surprise the departure of the President
from Dacca at 1900 hours on March 25, was kept a secret. The
President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, fearful of his own
citizens in his eastern province, travelled incognito to the air field
in a small private car driven by General Hamid to fly back to
Karachi in his special plane. The Logistic Area Commander sat in
the president’s car on the return journey. With the four-star plate
uncovered and the president’s flag fluttering on the side. The
young brigadier, nervously pretending to be General Yahya, was
escorted with the usual motorcade to the president’s house. But
East Pakistan was brimming with pro-Mujib informers. Wing
Commander Khondkar, second-in-command of the Dacca air base,
saw the general entering into his special plane. He immediately
rang up Mujib and the cat was out of the bag. The Awami League
leadership knew that the worst was about to come. "The birds,
except one, flew away and were safely on Indian territory before
the crackdown came at midnight", said Tikka.
It did not come too soon. If a pre-emptive strike had not been
taken Colonel M. A. G. Osmani’s plan would have come into
action. The EBR and EPR were to rebel and capture Dacca airfield
and the Chittagong sea port. The defecting police and EPR units
Were to control the city while the EBR was to storm the Dae
cantonment on the night of 25/26 March. Key posts along the
Indo-Pakistan frontier were to be occupied to facilitate receipt of
istance from India? Gener ree aci d the
soe - hdla". General Tikka, therefore, advance
Peration to re-establish government authority by 4 hours*.