Mukti Bahinj 229
ny, as a senior retired arm .
oy action, organised the Poa oo had, even before the |
military | al ; eague volunt
military force along with othe; eX-arm eers into a |
Pr 971 it was he who had led the Awam}. personnel, On March |
‘ assed by Mujib’s house. According to nee parade which |
matty had formed a resistance group as easly me Colonel
ne was working hand-in-hand with Sheikh Mujib-ur-R, 1970 as
grateful Bangladesh government issued g commer . hman. A |
memory of their first C-in-C twenty years later. ative stamp in
Organisation
As a result of the military action ay
Bengalis, most of them Hindus had moved hee — a
Indians capitalised on this Vishnu (Hindu God) sent Siiooxtantes
and, in addition to internationalising the issue, began to mn f
train and organise the refugees to assist them in their plan to 1
dismember Pakistan.
These ‘illegal immigrants’ were sorted out into different
categories. Those students and other civilians who were capable of
bearing arms were grouped together and trained to obtain
valuable information for the impending Indian attack. The
civilians, and police formed another group and the Indian border
security forces extended a ready hand to train and transform the
young Bengalis into potential guerrillas®. Members of the East
Pakistan para military forces who had deserted their posts were
trained separately to carry out subversion inside East Pakistan.
The officers and men of the East Bengal Regiment and East
Pakistan Rifles formed the core of the Mukti Fauj, which later
changed it’s name to Mukti Bahini on April 11, 1971. According to
\sjor Saiullah that Was the day when the Bangladesh army came
x. *xistence. It was subsequently organised, eget Fee
‘ ormed into regular battalions and launched into East Pakis |
y the Indian army.
toch naa Shs We eine
(SBR) Two hey were, known as Swa son eee ae Dare
AWom tes br igades, each of 3,000 persons, We ;
*n's Wing of the Mukti Bahini was also created. .
n
en th® end of April the Pakistan army had been able to gain
ol of almost all the border posts. The rebels haa ‘os 7
ectiven the bol el p ; movement of the
*8s and were, in disarray., "The