| At the UN 447
Pakistani people j iri
support the people in their just struggle to resist Indian
aggression. ;
ird draft resoluti
The thir ea - on S/ 10423 dated 5 December, 1971,
was sponsored by Argentina, Belgium, Italy, Japan. Nj
d Somalia. It cal 2 vapan, Nicaragua,
Sierra Leone an es led for an immediate ceasefi
withdrawal of forces, intensification of efforts to bring ait
conditions for the voluntary return of the refugees to their
country.
The Soviets on 6 December, accepted a draft r
, esoluti |
Document S/ 10425) dated 5 December, sponsored by Helm |
Italy, Japan, Sierre Leone and Tunisia. Calling upon the |
governments concerned forthwith, as a first step, for an |
immediate ceasefire. It however, asked for an amendment in the |
resolution to the effect that the government of Pakistan should |
simultaneously take effective action towards a political settlement |
in East Pakistan giving immediate recognition to the will of the
people of East Pakistan as expressed in the election of December,
1970.
A French resolution on 6 December, which called for an
‘immediate ceasefire, reciprocal disengagement; speedy creation of
conditions for the voluntary return of refugees, was withdrawn
because China, USA, and Soviet Union all raised objections to it. |
Since all the resolutions, except the US sponsored Resolution |
of 6 December, were, merely drafts on which some discussions
took place, they were not even put to vote. The US resolution was
voted upon but was vetoed by the Soviet Union. As it was not
unanimously adopted the members of the Security Council agreed
that the problem should be sent to the General oe
Consequently a resolution was moved in the ee sey
Which stated that UN Security Council Resolution 303 ( th
December, 1971 considered the letter dated 4 Pesan = —
United States of America and nine other countries ine : = ne
addressed to the president of the Security ramiccrarens h
'efer . :; t S/Agenda/1606 to the
tefer the question contained in documen rionierss
Genera] i ixth session. The resolutlo
Assembly at its twenty s ‘os out of fifteen
Put to vote on 6 December. Eleven el of the US
Members of the Security Council voted in favot a
re . , Belgium Burandi, Italy, Japan,
Solution. They were Argentina, be gl " "Unite d States. Britain,
Nicaragua, Sierra-Leone, Somalia and the
tance, Poland and USSR abstained.
7"