Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre 369
Brigades succeeded 7 outflanking the defences of 4 FF and were
well behind Tajammul s brigade While he was tenaciously
resisting the enemy’s attack on Hilli,
It was time to do some quick re-grouping to ¢
enveloping move of the enemy, Tajammul pulled out veal
each from 8 Baloch and 13 FF, who were guarding an
ynthreatened sector, and hastily prepared a blocking position at
Bahaduria.'Alongwith the depth company of 4 FF a fairly strong
defensive position was, therefore, created, To give time to prepare
the defences at Bahaduria a screen of two platoons was deployed
ahead of it to delay the enemy’s advance. They did so for one
complete day which is more than is expected from a screen
position.
It took the Indians another two days to Stage an attack against
Bahaduria. At about 4 p.m on 8 December the enemy started
shelling the area. When the artillery fire lifted an enemy
armoured regiment was seen moving forwards. Sepoys Faiz and
Yaqub who were in the forward platoon were crushed under the
tank tracks. Subedar Maskin Shah got out of his trench and
engaged a tank with his 75 millimetre recoilless rifle. He died
seconds later hit by another enemy tank. Subedar Sher Afzal, on
the orders of Major Sabir Kamal, loaded another recoilless rifle
and took a pot shot at an enemy tank 500 yards away. But no
sooner had he exposed himself, a couple of Indian tanks fired
simultaneously at Subedar Sher Afzal killing him instantly. Major
_ Sabir Kamal who was the moving spirit behind these two actions
also gave the Supreme sacrifice demanded of a soldier. No greater
honour can be given to these brave men of the Pakistan army
than the words of their bitterest enemy. Lieutenant General Jagjit
Singh Aurora, Commander Eastern Command, confessed that one
of the bloodiest battles in East Pakistan was fought at Bahaduria
Where according to him 17 Kumaon suffered 55 dead and 27
Wounded!7,
Second Lieutenant Shahid Haroon, with only a year’s wens
had imbibed in himself the spirit of comradeship and unmindfu
of the danger to his own life he went back to the area, nee
overrun by the enemy, and brought back the dead bodies of his
fallen brothers-in-arms for a decent burial. »