22
Tragedy of Errors
Strategic Implications
These formidable water obstacles, unbridged except in very
few places, alongwith a maze of interconnecting water channels
split the defenders into isolated pockets and gave advancing
enemy columns secure flanks. They presented no obstacle when
moving along them but were almost insurmountable to those who
dared to cross over them against opposition.
The 6,000 square kilometres Deltaic region, along the coast
with its numerous creeks and water inlets, with its swamps and
thickets, was impregnable to friends and foes alike. The forests of
the Sunderbans, along the southwest coast, immortalized by the
famous English novelist, John Masters, and those of Mahdopur
near Dacca restricted movement in those areas. The Chittagong
Hill Tracts, in the east rising to heights of 2,000 feet, forested and
mountainous, was ideal for guerrilla actions.
Mention must be made of the area around Dacca, known in
military circles as the Dacca bowl or the Dacca triangle. A flat and
open country about a 100 kilometres wide and 60 kilometres deep.
It lay between three major river systems with the mighty Jamuna
and Ganges in the west, the Dareshwari river in the south and the
Meghna in the east. The only approach to Dacca which did not
need the crossing of a major river was from the north,
Communications .
Communication infrastructure was poor. Roads were narrow,
and few and far between. Most of them frequently ended on river
banks from where the loads had to be transferred on to steamers
and back again on to the single lane asphalt highway. Chittagong
and Khulna were two sea-going ports with Chandpur providing
only an inland water transport (IWT) facility. A railway line did
connect the capital to Rajshahi in the west, Saidpur in the north,
Sylhet in the north-east and the port of Chittagong in the south,
but not without the restriction of unloading and loading on to
ferries as construction of railway bridges across the rivers was
only possible in one or two places. Most of the movement, both
civilian and military, was along rivers and streams by naukas
(country boats) and steamers. With cross country movement
difficult, even during the dry season, all major traffic had to be
confined to the few available metalled roads, interdiction of which
became comparatively easier during war.