. 175
Political Quagmire ‘Beginning of the End)
session being postponed to Mujib he
assembly Lo on the scheduled a only ruthie eee
After the address by the President the assembly can be adjourned
to discuss constitutional matters outside the House as desired by
the PPP. When Peerzada told this to Yahya he saidPeeroo He is
making Ahsan a fool, Mujib has been breaking his pr Suntice 6x
several occasions". Yahya cited the question of 6 Points which
Mujib had said would be negotiable but was now Saying that it is
in the hands of the people. "He Promised three times to come to
Rawalpindi" said the President "but Mujib went back on his word", ~~
Looking toward his PSO he continued "you want me to get into his
trap now. He will not adjourn the assembly till he gets the
constitution passed. It is bette; to change the date and keep the
situation in our hand". Peerzada claims that he Suggested to the
President to give an alternative date when postponing the national
assembly session. Yahya is reported to have replied "I gave a date
once but Bhutto made a hue and cry. Next time we give a date we
must consult both". The matter ended there.
The next day the President was going to Karachi on his way to
attend the national assembly session. That is what everybody
thought. All preparations had been made. Tickets had been
bought, seats had been reserved but before leaving Yahya told his
PSO to prepare drafts of two proclamations. One draft of his
inaugural speech to be delivered on March 3, at the national
assembly session at Dacca and the second one a proclamation
about the postponement.
When questioned by his PSO he said "Peeroo. We have not yet
decided .... I do not want to be caught unawares”. But it should
have become clear that by now Yahya had moved closer to the idea |
of postponement and dealing with the consequences by using |
force. The staff work carried out by the CMLA secretariat for the
President’s departure to Karachi was more of a facade as General
Yahya had already made known his intentions about postponing
the assembly session at the MLAs Conference on February 22.
Infact he was contemplating a military crackdown if the reaction
to the postponement was violent.
While in Karachi the President met Bhutto, Peorzada
remained behind in Raw alpindi preparing to join the President
When he left for Dacca), who did not take long to tilt Yahya
Completely towards his way of thinking.