Role of Other Countries 321
ted time to /
Council and wanted test the wa Y
siunge into international politics. The Him ; efore taking the
slready been blocked by heavy snowfalls alayan passes had
At the military meeting between the oh;
; e
which took place in the war room oe the armed forces
indicated by means of maps, showing the rae authorities
forces around China. They, according to there Cyment of Soviet
were not only heavily outnumbered but “tke r military experts,
sophisticated weapon systems. Their ad > Were outmatched in
enlarge the conflict. "keep it confined to Rae 2 was also not” to
final comment. (The Chinese ambassador in ey ik
ing Presi maba
telling President Yahya not to open the western front) also kept
The Chinese did give some mili |
: mil : ;
MiGs, hydrofoils and gun boats to ieee including
satisfying was that they did give some a what was more
West Pakistan?2. ome assurance of the security of
Mr. Chi-Peng-Fei- acti 54
Aaa Baas oes eine wainese foreign minister, did say that
government and jected to, foreign aggression », the
aes nt and people of China will resolutely support them in!
ere ae struggle to defend their state sovereignty and naititinal| v
epe i : ; ; \
for vcully = ad not mince his words in condemning India
carryin = - erfering in Pakistan's internal affairs and for
Pakistan " subversive activities and military threats against
Mr. Ch y ng to exploit the situation in East Pakistan”.
sree, mig supported his acting foreign minister’s
movement hile accepting the agitation as a secessionist
they Would no stage, however, did the Chinese indicate that
tide of Pas a engaged in a military conflict with India on the
1stan. -
Th al
betwee. Kept on emphasising on the need of setting disputes
foree. States through consultations and not by resorting to
At —_ ;
Chinese banquet given for the Pakistani delegation by the
People ‘oreign minister, he said "The Chinese government and
and len as always, resolutely support the Pakistan government
and y Z ein their just struggle to defend their state sovereignty
reflect the S independence"*’. Banquet speeches do not always
Neto. he agreements which leaders may have made during their
One talks held in camera. But those who accompanied Mr.