Role of Other Countries ame
ing in East Pakistan..... He wa ;
vee = mossible though the entire Amen ‘0 help Pakistan as
nue" enraged owing to ‘é: Public, press and
Congress wes Yop beerated Stories of army
vrutalities — because of the flood of refugees entering India. H
was, however, sending messages to friendly connteles not to
succumb to pressures of public opinion. His delegation at UN had
neon asked to cooperate”®. a
The difference in the attitude between the White H — ,
the State Department was due both to Persdnality duties ot the
top and the varying amount of significance each attached to the
integrity of Pakistan. Secretary of State William Rogers and
Kissinger did not get along with each other. Even before the East
Pakistan crisis they had been at logger heads on several other
issues. President Nixon was never at home with Mrs. Gandhi
whom he considered to be haughty, arrogant and condescending.
According to Kissinger "Nixon’s comments after meeting her were
not always printable”,
While Nixon and Kissinger felt that a ‘helpless’ Pakistan would
become an easy target for India whose collusion with the Soviet
Union would harm US interests in the South Asian region, Rogers
and his colleagues on the 7th floor of Capitol Hill were willing to
condone India for exploiting a situation which, according to them,
was the result of the military junta in Pakistan flouting
democratic values.
It was in November, 1970 that President Nixon requested
President Yahya, during his visit to Washington for the UN
anniversary celebration, to convey to the Chinese leaders his
desire for establishing direct secret contacts at whatever level they
considered appropriate. Nixon wanted direct high level
negotiation between USA and China to resolve issues dividing the
Wo countries. +)
Chou-En-Lai had suggested that President sone Peking
for direct conversation, In order to prepare for such a es
Nixon proposed a secret meeting between Henry Kissinger ~
Premier Chou-En-Lai. General Yahya took a personal interes in
wanging the secret visit of Dr. Kissinger to Peking 5 tke
| Slamabad. The US National Security advisor De wns
| ‘kistani capital on July 8, 1971 from Jakarta and Delhi. =
Made out to b ‘outine port of call. He was, however, fully
Nepated fe e a routine poi ahead. Consequently Kissinger
bought i. the “ettcate scot hi double but also some others
Wh along with him not only his a ae
}~ looked Similar to his important staff mem
ke