India’s Role in the break up of Pakistan on
The Indian Air Force increased ;
theatre. It was put on a higher state nett In the eastern
Maritime and photo reconnaissance by the AR combat readiness,
Bay of Bengal and East Pakistan air space re continued over the
Bengal Regiments which, deserteg after the eel The East
joined by the Indian border Security forces ame action, were
out raids into East Pakistan. Major Praval F), They cairied
‘Indian Army After Independence™ also dint a of the book =
Mukti Bahini operations were continuing even b tor ar badd
of April®. Indian guns from across the borde: e ore the middle
artillery support to these raiderg6!. continued to give
Harassment At Sea
On 2. April, 1971 Indian warships harassed a Pakistani
merchant vessel "Ocean Endurance’ 70 miles west of the Indian
naval base of Dwarka. The vessel had to return to Karachi Three
days after, Safina-e-Arab, another Pakistani ship, which was
heading towards Chittagong was similarly intercepted, A new unit
of ground to air missile began practice firing as far as 123 miles
into the sea,/from the Indian coast, forcing PIA aircraft to even
make a longer detour to East Pakistan. . |
Leo Rose, a political analyst of the South Asian scene, is not
correct when he says that "initially most of the official government |
spokesmen in India assumed a hands-off position after the 25th |
March military crackdown, classifying it as an internal affair that
Was not a matter for Indian intervention". Only five days after |
the military crackdown » the Indian Parliament unanimously
expressed its whole hearted sympathy and support for the
‘Bengalis’, Indira Gandhi is on record as saying "The government
is on top of the situation and would move at its own time and
discretion", This could not be termed as a hands-off policy.
Opposition parties called for direct intervention in East Pakistan
'N Support of the government-in-exile. |
Henry Kissinger, President Nixon's perineal
"eported to him as early as | April that t the high
embarking on a course of action which would ae : e ne
level of tension in the subcontinent and run the Indi ‘Con ress
“erlous international crisis”. Shukla, of the All India ; oe
Committee, felt that Mujib was fighting India’s wa ,