Causes of Alienation 85
Rahman Subhan, economic adviser to
presently head of the Bangladesh Toadies ‘eague and
Economics, continued to maintain that ‘there: waa eve opment
difference in the allocation of resources between ; the eral
and there was ‘visible evidence of disparity". He ecmea ome u
‘widening gap". He reiterated that "he was not concerned *i h
absolute progress but progress relative to each other". When vor
by the author as to what should be the criteria ‘he iden
4 . urce
allocation, numerical strength or absorption capacity he gave the
standard reply that it is the numbers that count?5.
Causes for Slower Economic Growth in East Pakistan
Rashid Amjad, a well known economist, accepts that "almost
all countries in the world find themselves faced with the problem v
of regional in-equalities, as the gains and the momentum of | .
growth tend to get concentrated in certain areas"’6, Infact |
economic inequality is considered essential for economic growth
by most western économists. Even in West Pakistan industrial
areas continued to expand around Karachi and Lahore. It was a
difficult task to encourage the private sector to move away from
these two magnetic poles. .-
Roads, availability of power, nearness to markets, supply of
raw material, closeness to centres of power were various factors
which made such concentrations necessary. Slowly and steadily
more and more industrial cities like Faisalabad, Hyderabad, Wah
and Nowshera came up. Even now large tracts of Balochistan, .
interior Sindh, the entire Makran Coast, the Thal desert all lack
industries. East Pakistan was not the only province, therefore, not
to have benefitted from the so-called industrial development. The
effect was felt more because of the geographical separation.
The main_reasons for the comparatively slow economic growth
in East Pakistan were: (1) incorrect economic policies whereby an
integrated economic approach was adopted without giving =
regard to the geographical division of the country and the tein
socio-economic structure of East Pakistan; (2) lack of adequa !
aS. . call d energy; (3) insufficient
infrastructure mainly communications an rgy a
allocation of funds initially by the Centre. abome x nin the
economic peparity between the two wings was a ear plans
1962 Constitution and mentioned in the a, ~ slo did not
but these were not fully implemented; (4) East
|