166
Tragedy of Errors
was pleased to summon the national assembly of Pakistan to m
on Wednesday, March 3, 1971 at 9 a.m. In the provincial assem},
building at Dacca for the purpose of framing a constitutio, ’
Pakistan". This was a date in-between the dates propogeg ,
Mujib and Bhutto. ’
This delay of 40 days between the announcement of th
election results and the summoning of the national assembly Wis
seen with suspicion in East Pakistan. It was, however, in keeping
with the President’s earlier statement of 3 December, 1970, f,,,
days before the election, in which he had "suggested to the electaj
representatives and in particular the leaders of the politicy
parties that they should usefully employ the period between th,
election and the first session of the national assembly in getting
_together and arriving at a consensus on the main provision of the
” new constitution‘. Towards this aim Yahya tried to strive for ,
Mujib - Bhutto coalition. He had invited Mujib to come t
Rawalpindi on February 9, 1971 and later again on February 1),
1971 but he had declined to do so.
But little did he know that a storm in a tea cup was brewing
and that Bhutto was only looking for an excuse to put pressure on
Yahya and Mujib to listen to his voice as well. Bhutto was in
Peshawar on February 15. He was to address a public rally at
Jinnah stadium. At 9 pm on the same day Bhutto rang w
Peerzada. Colonel Hasan, the legal adviser to the CMLA at
Rawalpindi, picked up the phone>He quietly handed over the
receiver to the PSO He overheard-a very irrate voice at the other
end. "We are elected leader's. The least you could have done was to
have consulted us before announcing the date". Peerzada, in the
strong position that he was, was not a person to be cowed down by
politicians whatever their status amongst the people. "You al
very exited we were not bound to consult you. Since you have
taken it so Seriously I will surely mention this to the president:
ere But before he could put the telephone down he
| jaoonga. we os threatening words "Pata chalega jab mein re
Pakistan s “ party nahin Jaegi. Mein dekhta hoon ki maghr
do not go M a (You will know the consequences —
Pakistan wiley, not go. I will see how anyone from Wé
as eo ra Bhutto had met the president, The fact .
3, Was annownced € national assembly session at Dacca on Mat
unced on February 13, indicates that the PPP lead@ |