148
Tragedy of Errors
in the West. President Yahya on his way back from Peking dij
stop-over for a night in Dacca. He flew over the flood affected are,
in a folker and promised all assistance and help to alleviate th,
suffering. But East Pakistan was a thousand miles away with
hostile country in between. Ferrying of supplies, helicopters, ang
sending of naval vessels was not easy. Only one army division (not
three as mentioned by many western writers) was located in Rag,
Pakistan then. There were only two (Mi 8) helicopters availabj,
and one plant protection PIA helicopter.
The army had been insulted, maligned and confined to the
barracks by the Awami League workers during their anti- West
Pakistan hatred campaign. Even then the soldiers did what ever
they could to locate the bodies and bury the dead. The Bengalis
did not give them any assistance in their own hour of need. "While
West Pakistani citizens collected donations for the cyclone affected
people of East Bengal, not one saree was donationed by the
Bengalis in Dacca" said/Major General Rao Farman Ali Khan, the
principal staff officer, civil affairs, in the government of East
Pakistan.
The rehabilitation commissioner was a Bengali official but he
displayed no great fervour and enthusiasm to get the goods
moving to the right places. Brigadier Iqbal Shafi, commanding a
brigade in Comilla, complained about East Pakistani politicians/
and district officials for not cooperating. According to General
Farman after the cyclone had taken its death toll of half a million
people not one man, woman or child died of hunger or disease.
on medical personnel worked round the clock to ensure that
the required medical aid reached the wounded and the sick®?, On
the contrary the Bengali themselves did little to alleviate the
sufferings of their people. Even Mujib did not go to Bhola, the
island which bore the main onslaught of the cyclone. He kept
sitting at Patuakhali miles away opined the General. Mujib
himself admits to visiting Barisal, Patuakhail and Khulna only:
-The Awami League workers did not go round collecting funds,
country craft, clothes, medicines for the flood affected victims
Mujib was controlling the entire East Pakistan. If he wanted bé
could have organised a massive relief operation indigenously. But
he preferred to stay aloof and blame the government, so that he
/ could capitalise on this tragedy by maligning the Pakistan armed
| forces and the Pakistan government.