eee ae er By Eastern Theatre a
h "o % nis
/ pumbers bale veapone. on = operational effectiveness due to the
jack of i . fth Sie Sd PMment, air support and naval
| strength In the case of the Sakistani troops in East Pakistan,
| Threat Assessment
Eastern nme _ the Indian threat as follows:
A main effort of three infantry divisions pl ;
prigade and two Mukti Bahini brigades ain si nstentty
baria, Comill ected against
Brahman , a, and Chandpur. It also expected tw
secondary efforts, one against Rangpur and Hilli an the oth ;
against Jessore, each by two infantry divisions su =
of ie pported by a
regiment or two of armour. Niazi correctly realised that the
threat to Dacca was most likely from the east as that was the
shortest route, but he deployed his strongest division on his
western front.
Although General Niazi was expecting an attack by the middle
of November he was wrongly convinced that India would not
launch large scale military operations. His operational policy
was, therefore, based on dealing with the Muktis supported by
the Indian army from their side of the border.
It was assumed that the Indian Navy could effectively put a
naval blockade of East Pakistan. India could employ eleven
aircraft squadrons, including a bomber squadron, against one
squadron of 12 inferior aircraft. The PAF had, therefore, no
chance of survival beyond a day or two. With Eastern
Command, consisting only of one full fledged infantry division
and two incomplete divisions, the ratio of forces had now
become 2 : 8 on the ground and 1: 11 in the air. With India
enjoying total command of the outlet to the sea.
Adhocery
_ The only answer Eastern Command could find to bei
inferiority in numbers was to give the false impression to ‘Ake
own troops, not so much to the enemy, by armed tne
formations, Consequently East Pakistan civil armed tc “
(EPCAR ‘ctod entirely of West Pakistan
) which, by now consiste he nucleus of the
Personnel, mostly from the Frontier, formed a mmand of
newly created 36 (Adhoc) Division placed under the co
Moi e ( oc «mer EPCAF commander.
7 a General Jamshed Khan, the oer jacked artillery and
's adhoe formation of only one brigade