37
Geographical Characteristics
the four provinces in West Pakistan into One Unit, the 1956
Constitution did create two distinct identities: East and West
Pakistan which later became the cause of alienation between the
two wings. Suharwardy, who was expecting to be prime minister
after Muhammad Ali Bogra, was visibly disappointed when
Choudhry Muhammad Ali from Punjab was appointed instead.
He issued a statement saying "I accepted the principle of parity in
the hope that such parity will forever get rid of the distrust and” |
suspicion and that the loose talk by certain irresponsible top
politicians that East Pakistan wanted to secede from Pakistan
would cease once for all"29..... but that was not to be.
Choudhry Muhammad Ali, however, soon there-after resigned,
and Suharwardy was, befittingly, made the prime minister. 13
members of his ministry belonged to the Awami League and 29
were from the Republican Party. IB4+297 t_ i
’ A = i
~~» Suharwardy, after becoming the prime minister of Pakistan, »,
~~ held the view that regional autonomy for East Pakistan was no
longer an issue as the interests of the Bengalis had been
safeguarded in the 1956, Constitution. Although the Constitution
still proposed a aa Centre some other issues had been
amicably solved. Bengali’had been accepted as an official language
and both the wings had been given parity thus removing the fear
of "all against one". At that time he was the only leader who could
_- have kept East and West Pakistan together.
In 1957 Bhashani and Suharwardy parted company.
Suharwardy supported parity and military pacts and was pro-
American: Bhashani and other East Pakistani leaders were
opposed to all of these.
Suharwardy’s ministry, however, like those before his, did not
last long. He was forced to resign. This was yet another blow to__’ |
the work of national integration. In the words of Charles Burton
Marshall, adviser to the prime minister of Pakistan during 1955-
57, "The removal of Suharwardy sent out of office the only
available man with aptitude as a politician and giving reasonable ,
promise of national leadership". On October 18, 1957 I. 1+
- Chundrigar became the prime minister. A month later Sir Feroze
/*Khan Noon took over from him. Politics became a play thing for
‘\) the politicians. Governments were made and dismissed. Violence
increased to such an extent that the deputy speaker of the East