430 Tragedy of Errors
The party drove straight to the Ramna race course ground
(where Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman had delivered his speech of
defiance on 7 March). A small contingent of 20 to 25 para troopers
of the Indian army presented a salute as Aurora and Niazi Walked
to the make shift arrangement for the surrender. With Admira]
Krishnan, Air Chief Marshal Davan and Lieutenant Genera
Sagat Singh standing at the back Lieutenant General Ami;
Abdullah Khan Niazi, HJ, SJ, MC signed the instrument of
surrender’. The time was exactly 4.31 p.m. East Pakistan Time
on the sixteenth day of December in the year nineteen hundred
and seventy one. Soon thereafter the sun set for the last time
behind the horizon of East Pakistan to rise next morning in
Bangladesh.
Niazi handed over his revolver and his badges of rank to
Aurora to mark the formal surrender of the Pakistani troops in
Kast Pakistan to the Indian army. He lowered the national pride
further by asking for a copy of the photograph taken of his own
surrender, which he later autographed for General Aurora.
The autographed copy of the photograph alongwith the
surrender document enshrined in a glass case hangs proudly in
the study and in the dining room of General Aurora’s residence at
| 10 Feroze Shah road in New Delhi.
| Aurora had brought with him his wife to witness the
surrender ceremony. The presence of a lady at such an occasion
| was not in keeping with military tradition but who can blame
Aurora for sharing this moment of glory with his life-long
companion. But neither General M.A.G. Osmany, the
commander-in-chief of the ‘Bangladesh’ Army nor Group Captain
Khondkar, chief of staff of the ‘Bangladesh’ High Command was
present around the table, where a new country for which their
people had struggled, was being christened.
Casualties
The total strength of the military and para-military personnel
in East Pakistan immediately prior to the outbreak of the war was
1,833 officers, 50,232 junior commissioned officers (JCOs) and
other ranks. Out of these 354 officers, 192 JCOs and 5,320 other
ranks lost their lives. (The Japanese left behind a model which
few nations can copy. Out of 23,000 Japanese defending Ijma, "
World War II, only 260 were found alive after allied forces carried