ws |
Tragedy of Errors
On March 26, the self appointed President and Chief May "
law Administrator (CMLA) General Agha Muhammad Yahy,
Khan (52) addressed the nation "Fellow Pakistanis” said the na,
President "Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan has called Upon
me to carry out my prime duty of protecting the country frop,
utter destruction" - (ironically it was he who had to preside ove,
the dismemberment of the country). "I have imposed martial lay
throughout the country. My sole aim in imposing martial law is ty
protect life, liberty and property and to put the administration
back on the rails". His tone was confident, his sentences short, his
words were crisp, but they lacked wisdom. As it turned out he |
could not achieve his stated objectives. While he may have been
sincere when he said “I wish to make it absolutely clear, that].
have no ambition other than the creation of conditions conducive
to the establishment of a constitutional government”. by
abrogating the 1962 Constitution and dissolving the national and
provincial assemblies, he set the scene for political forces to run
riot in the country"®.
In the meantime the farce that was being played out in East
Pakistan can best be judged from the fact that Mirza Nur-ul-Huda
was sworn in as governor olla Pakistan replacing governor
Monem Khan on March 24, 1991 and was removed from his office
two days afterwards when martial law was declared on March 26.
The Administration *
The CMLA_ Headquarters was controlled by Lieutenant
General Syed Ghulam Muhammad Mohiuddin Peerzada (51),
who was the principal staff officer (PSO) to the President. He had
worked under General Yahya as the director of military operations
when Yahya was chief of the general staff and later as adjutant
general at General Headquarters when Yahya wa
C-in-C.
General Peerzada had also been the military secretary to Field
not quite like she Felt We erhaps this was the reason why he o
ag Apub incre reer . arshal. (The dislike seemed to be mutué
ashis P&C) s a 0 have advised Yahya not to appoint Peerzade
os his PSO). He was assisted by a Brigadier civil affairs (Brigatt
er Jang) and Brigadier Martial Law (Brigadi him
Khan). aw (Brigadier M. Ra?!