462 Tragedy of Errors
supporting; (4) ensure regular patrolling in the
by ar es a hostile civil population to enable covering
troops to fall back to the fortresses without being ambushed.
Since none of these conditions existed the initial defence
concepts was doomed to failure. It was, as Lt. Gen. Aftab Ahmad
Khan, chairman of the Special De-briefing Committee had Pointed
out, "out of tune with the operational environment”. As soon as it
was clear that the Indians would launch a full scale attack (By the
end of November that was becoming quite evident) the original
plan should have been revised and a more compact defence should
have been organised, specially around Dacca which was the centre
of gravity. Indefensible terrain and non-strategic areas should not
have been strongly defended.
Dacca Denuded
The most serous mistake and a very glaring one indeed,
whatever the circumstances, was denuding the Dacca bowl. Dacca
was the centre of gravity; the political hub; the pivot of the entire
military machine in East Pakistan, the final objective of any
enemy whether within or without. How could any commander
leave the capital undefended? On this point he had been given |
clear instructions. "Dacca was to be defended at all costs" was the ©
operation instruction given by GHQ to Eastern Command. |
‘ Niazi’s contention that he had been promised eight infantry |
battalions which according to him, were to be earmarked for the ©
defence of Dacca does not hold water. "Evidence unfortunately
does not disclose that any firm commitment was made by GHQ" is
what the HCR observed after examining all the witnesses. —
| Brigadier Baqir Siddiqui, the chief of staff of Eastern Command —
_ Who came to Rawalpindi, in November, 1971 to present the final —
| Operation plan, however, maintains that eight additional units |
| hot g promisad by GHQ’. Even if they had said so, since they did
| on ntogically tm - pulled out his troops from me |
when it became certain the pineal them in and around q
at an Indian attack was imminent.
| Incorrect Assessment of Enemy’s Intentions
| Unfortunately, . neither GHQ, nor Commander Easter
| onesie flea impression that New Delhi we
'