Mukti Bahinj 233
Types of other Resistance Forces
it-Pakistan resistance force _ ;
Anit .. (1) The traditi 1 Bets could be divided into three
categories:- ( e traditional British style army unj for
nts of the East Bengal Reg; Y units formed out
of the remna gal Negiments, The
d of Major G . Se Were under
the comman a] eneral MV.A.G. Osmany. Lawr
Lifshultz, a well known American journalist, describes their oa
style as “carpeted tents, flowing whisky and Helin a
". This group was based insid Indi ae BE
batmen € India and felt no alms i
ing the Indian military int Teng 20
accepting the In ty Intervention (2) The second categor
was more nationalist minded. Majors Taher and Zia-u rice
wanted to fight a ‘peoples war’ and liberate Bangladesh b
: 7 : Me Raanainis y an
indigenous uprising without India’s military involvement. They
preferred to have all sector headquarters inside East Pakistan
They did not want to be indebted to India. In this they were
supported by Major Zia-ur-Rahman who wanted minimal
assistance from India: (3) The third group consisted of ‘private’
armies of armed civilians operating from within Bangladesh.
In addition to the Mukti Bahini a number of other resistance
forces were formed by zealous ‘patriots’. The largest of which was
the Mujib Bahini which was an elite force and according to Major
General K.M. Safiullah, Mujib Bahini was "drunk with political
indoctrination’. It consisted of 20,000 devoted ‘Mujibites’ |
committed to carrying out his instructions to the hilt, |
The force was split into the eastern sector (Sheikh Moin and
Sheikh Kamal, both sons of Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman) northern
sector (Rafiq) northwestern sector (Sirajul Islam) and the western
sector (Tofail Ahmad)". The entire force was trained at the Indian
Military Academy, Dehra Dun. The idea of raising such a force
Which the Indians hoped would be pro-India in its ideological
Concepts was the brain child of Major General Oben ‘a veteran
guerrilla expert of the Indian army”!.
_ The other resistance forces were the Z force named esa
Zia-ur-Rahman. K force which took its letter K from a ted -
Musharraff, This was raised by him in June 1971 an aw by
elements of 4, 9 and 10 East Bengal Regiments, com
Gaffar Ainuddin and Jaffer respectively.
; ; e Major
me Safiullah and the first chief © "4 re Fast Bengal
angladesh army). It consisted of 1, 2 an