500
Appendix . y
i kistan/GHQ
-onals exchanged between President of Pa |
sl Gevemner East Pakistan/Commander Eastern Command
17 Oct. 1971
COS Army Signal G1430 dated 17 Oct to Eastern Command.
Crushing rebels with reserves docs have direct bearing on your ops against
India (.) reserves at level including your comd reserves and other available be
used against rebels (.) meanwhile your request for addltps under
consideration.
29 Nov |
C-in-C to Eastern Command.
For Comd from C-in-C (.) I am most impressed by the wonderful job done by
you and all ranks under your command in meeting the challenge posed by the
enemy in East Pak(.) the whole nation is proud of you and vou have their full
support (.) the gallant deeds of our soldiers in thwarting the en evil designs
have earned the gratitude of all countrymen (.) keep up the noble work till the
enemy spirit is crushed and they are completely wiped out from our sacred
soil (.) may Allah be with vou
3 Dec
Eastern Command to GHQ
Since India is likely to launch an offensive against East Pakistan I should re-
deploy my force with due regard to existing op sit ......... I have issued instrs
= ee occupation of fortresses after causing max attrition to the
3 Dec |
Flash signal From C-in-C to Eastern Command.
Jago Jago Hoshiar Amritsar Pathankot struck.
5 Dec
COS Army signal No. 0233 to Eastern Command
The enemy has Stepped up pressure against you and is likely to increase to
max extent (.) He will attempt to capture East Pakis viftly as possible
and shift max forces to West Pakis a antag ie iin n
(.) Losing of s . ++ akistan (.) This must not be allowed to happe
Bo Some territory is insignificant but you must continue t |
may, ma on operational deployment in vital areas aiming at keeping the
very soak cpa ad ee akistan () puety Tepe ot Kaitiene vege |
) ; ck and keep your magnificant work against such hy od
6 Dec
Eastern Command to PAKARMY December 6
resorting t :
“ 8 to fortress/strong Pts basis (.) will fight it out last man last round