Background
Geographical Characteristics
East Pakistan, lying at the eastern extremity of the Indian
subcontinent, differed from its western wing in its geographic
location, physical features, socio-economic conditions and in its
security environment. Separated from the rest of Pakistan by
1,600 kilometres of Indian territory it was more easily vulnerable
to internal and external pressures than the rest of the country.
Abul Kalam Azad opined that Mr. Jinnah did not seem to realize
that geography was against him!. He was not too far wrong.
With an area covering 143,998 square kilometres it was
smaller in size than almost all other provinces of Pakistan. Its
population of 40 million in 1947 was, however, greater than all the
four administrative units in the west combined. This numerical
superiority coupled with the volatile nature of an ever increasingly
frustrated community shifted the dynamics of power to the streets
of East Bengal. .
East Pakistan, except for a very small border with Burma, was
surrounded on all sides by India. In the west lay the Indian state
of West Bengal. In the north was Magalaya and Assam, in the east
Tripura and Mizogram and in the south the Indian dominated Bay
of Bengal. Geography, therefore, very much favored India if and
when it decided to use its military instrument to achieve its
political objective. Pakistan’s eastern wing could easily be cut off
from the other half, in fact from the rest of the world, by India
because of its peculiar geographic location.
The three main river systems, each broad enough to look like a
sea of water, divided the country into four isolated regions. The
western sector lay between the Bay of Bengal and the
Ganges/Padma with Khulna, Jessore and Faridpur being the
main towns. The northern portion was wedged in between the
Jamuna and the Brahmaputra/Meghna. Saidpur and Rangpur in
the north and Bogra further south were the nodal points. East
and south of the Meghna lay the tea gardens of Sylhet and the
- undulating ground around Comilla and Chittagong.