168 Tragedy of Errors
i ke with even greater venom “Anybog
will do so at his own cost". The assembly he said would be
|) Slaughter house®", (Such bellicose statements do not suit Mat,
politicians).
Yahya, in his sober moments, did reflect on the conseque,,
of the PPP not attending the | ae ad was als ay
ility of Bhutto to ask people Te
and crests ew and order problem in West Pakistan. He
therefore, decided to speak to Mujih and to try and persuade hi,
to accept a new date. He told his PSO "Peeroo - ask Sheikh ty
come and see me" Peerzada rang up Mujib from the President,
House and spoke to the Sheikh. In an attempt to play it cool he
used a few words of Bengali. In reply to Mujib’s enquiry "Xj
Hochay" (whats happened). General Peerzada told him please
come to Rawalpindi straight away. The president would like tp
meet you regarding the inaugural session’. "Abhi aaney ko nahin
sakta, party meeting hai". (I cannot come just yet there is a party
meeting) replied Mujib in his broken Urdu. On being told about
the possibility of a change in she fie Awami League chief said" |
cannot accept a change in the date, I cannot come now. I will come
later”.
When Yahya was told of the reaction by Mujib, he made
another attempt to persuade him to come to Rawalpindi. He hada
flash signal sent to Ahsan, saying "ask Mujib and others to come
to Rawalpindi and discuss the issue of fresh dates for the nationd
assembly session". Ahsan contacted Mujib and tried to persuade
him to go to Rawalpindi and meet the president. Mujib was even
vi a stronger wicket than Bhutto. He was as much a believer in
od [Pressure tactics as his rival in West Pakistan. Mujib declined the
invitation. Although the Awami League admired the soft spokel
Admiral because of his gentlemanly behaviour and his impartial
attitude they were not prepared to give in to the tantrums 0
Bhutto, If the chairman of the PPP could not come to East
Pakistan therithe president of the Awami League should not go”
the western wing was their argument. A reply was sent the —
afternoon "Mujib says I cannot come now I will come later," S#
the message from the government house to the president.
A. a a was Visibly angry with both the nel Th are . |
mie non printable . Punjabi abuse). Anothe attempt va
| persuading Mujib to come to Rawalpindi. This time