24
Tragedy of Errors
from Central Asia the Bengalis were quite content pty ene
the original inhabitants of East Bengal.. Althoug Bengal t :
Persians, Turks and Mughals also ventured as far be ce " » the
500 years of Muslim rule injected only the Muslim ~ eee
not change their physical characteristics. Unlike ine fete Ss and
the Pathans the Bengalis were relatively Bnei arker and
thinly built. The difference in physical features gave the
northerners a false sense of racial superiority which was reflecteg
in their attitude and social behavior towards their brethren in the
east. About 87 percent of the population of East Bengal were
Muslims. Around 10 percent were Hindus and the remaining 3
percent was shared between Budhists and Christians.
The Muslims in the eastern wing, unlike the West Pakistanis,
, were not split into castes and sub castes, and were more
» | homogeneous than the rest of their countrymen. They could,
therefore, put up a more united resentment against statements
and policies which they perceived to be damaging to their self
esteem and interest.
There is no doubt that the Bengali Muslims, who constituted
57% of the population in undivided Bengal, were greatly
influenced by the Hindus who had achieved a position of
dominance under the British rule. This was so because after the
unsuccessful war of independence, known generally as the Great
Indian Mutiny (1857), the British distrusted the Muslims of
Bengal. Sir W. W. Hunter, a British civil servant, writing in 1887,
noted that the Bengali Mussulman was thoroughly dejected and
frustrated as "every honourable walk of life was closed to him and
that he was excluded from the share of power and of the
emoluments of government which he hitherto almost monopolized
and saw them passed into the hands of the hated Hindus".
During the 190 years of British rule the Hindus dominated the -
Bengali landscape. Lands, business, education, government |
service all were in their hands. Major General Khalil-ur-Rahman, |
a Bengali officer from Khulna, recalls the environment in.his city |
during his school days. He remembers the Hindu festivals of
Durga Puja, Holi and Devalj being celebrated on the streets. The |
birthday of the Holy Prophet {Peace Be Upon Him) and other
tl one festivals were confined to within the walls of the