Indo-Pakistan War - 1971 Eastern Theatre =
The Dacca triangle or the Dacca bowl as it is often
was about 160 kilometres wide and around hundred Kilometres
deep. Four lines of defences were planned. The outer line of
gefence between 60 to 80 kilometres away from Dacca joi
: ca joined
Mymensingh - Bharab Bazaar - Daudkundi - Chandpur - Faridpur
-Pabna and Tangail. The inner line of defence was at a distance of
30 to 50 kilometres connecting Joydehpur .... Manikganj. The
third line of defence was just outside the city and the fourth line
were fortresses and strong points in the built up area itself. This
plan, of course, could only be implemented if adequate troops
were earmarked and emplaced before the start of hostilities.
Unfortunately that was not possible because of the policy and
decisions not to allow the Mukti Bahini to declare Bangladesh on
East Pakistan soil.
The directive given to Commander Eastern Command was to
defend Dacca at all costs. General Niazi had initially kept 53
Infantry Brigade in the provincial capital as his theatre reserve.
However, when a threat developed in the east and a breakthrough
at Feni was becoming real, Niazi released the only brigade he had
in Dacca for the defence of that border town which if captured
would cut off Chittagong and its hill tracts from the rest of East
Pakistan.
The eight battalions, which General Niazi claims were
promised to him for the defence of Dacca, were not sent. In the
final count there were no fighting elements in Dacca at all when
the Indian’s invaded East Pakistan on 21 November nor where
there any when the all out war started on 3 December. Efforts
Were made to move some units to Dacca. But it was too late. 16
Division could not send their battalions to the capital because of
the enemy’s blocking positions. 14 Division also was peg
despatch a brigade to the provincial metropolis as, when ed
Were asked to do so, it was too late. 39 (Adhoc) Division was le
With only one battalion when it was allowed to fall back to mite
Remnants of 93 Brigade also could not reach the ee en Mukti
Para drop at Tangail and the subversive activities © fltrateinto
Bahini, Only one battalion less two companies —*
‘he town.
n General
. Dacca, therefore, lay completely en to
hy reached the outskirts of the cap’ n in uniform in Dacca
'a2i saying the game is up. The 26,250 me
"