| aeY Tragedy of Krrors
engineer support. It had no armour to talk of and the onl
mobility it could count on was by impounding the few civilian
naukas (civilian boats). Even 93 brigade which was given to it wa
adhoc as it was raised by depleting other formations. It was lace
under command Brigadier Abdul Qader and consisted of only two
battalions against the standard three.
91 (Independent) Brigade was raised in Chittagong in
September. It consisted of only one infantry battalion which had
been taken out of another formation. To give it the semblance of a
brigade two wings of para military forces, a mujahid battalion,
some razakars and a few reservists were added. A commando
battalion less one company was also given to the brigade. This
motley force was commanded by Brigadier Ata Muhammad Malik,
a gunner officer of repute who, till recently, was in the Martial
Law Headquarters in Dacca. In the same month 313 (Adhoc)
Brigade was raised in Sylhet and placed under command
Brigadier M. Saleemullah, who also came over from Martial Law
Headquarters to assume his new responsibilities. 313 Brigade like
other newly raised formations consisted of only one regular ©
battalion reinforced by a host of irregulars. Similarly 39 (Adhoc)
Division was raised on 18 November (only three days prior to the
Indian attack) under Major General M. Rahim Khan by milking
other formations. 314 (Adhoc) Brigade consisting only of a couple
of hundred para military personnel was stationed at Khulna,
giving a false impression of the town being held strongly. 34
Brigade was split into two. Each element of only a battalion or two
strong was designated as a brigade. Brigadier Nawab Ahmad
Ashraf, a gunner officer, was advisor to the governor of
Balochistan when on 27 November he was ordered to go to Kast
Pakistan to organise the defence of Dacca. On arrival there he was
told by General Niazi that there were no troops available for the
defence of the capital. Just to accommodate him 34 Brigade was
split and he took over an adhoc formation at Nator - A pitiable
example of unco-ordinated military planning.
on aper vw eee only added to the number of formalione
aper without in any way increasi i ility 0
Festern Command. y way asing the fighting capability
War of Attrition
serie He ae bach Mukti Bahini had been enlarged, equipped and
ans to become once again a force to be reckoned