250
Tragedy of Errors
By 4 a.m. a deathly silence descended on the once humming
university campus. The official casualty in the military action jn
the university area that night was 66 Bengali extremists’ dead, 31
injured, 4 army jawans lost their lives defending the territory; al
integrity of Pakistan against its own citizens. General Arbab put
the figure as 167 killed. He accepted that it was an over reaction
and over kill by the troops under his command!®,
Prof. Talugador Kumruz Zaman of the Dacca University
| sitting in his non-descript apartment in the University campus
described vividly the events of the night of 25/26 March, 1971 to
the author. According to him he could hear "a lot of firing", His
estimate of casualties ran in several hundreds. On being asked to
name some of the intellectuals who were killed in the action by
the army he recounted those of Mofussil Hyder Choudhry,
professor of Bengali; J. C. Deh, professor of philosophy;
Surajuddin Hussein, professor of music, Jagannath, professor of
English. Independent sources claimed 500 casualties that night,
Major Safiullah called it the bloodiest operation in which
thousands were killed'®. Arbab’s soldiers had been taunted,
insulted, spat at for the last one month. They took their ‘revenge’
in full measure. The militant student leaders had termed the
Pakistan army as ‘alien forces’. They behaved as such on that
fateful night and many nights thereafter creating a permanent
chasm between themselves and their people in East Pakistan.
32 Punjab, the second battalion under Arbab, cleared the
police lines in Dacca. Their attempt to disarm them was only
partly successful as the Bengali policeman succeeded in carrying
away a number of weapons.
Tikka Khan, always an early riser, was up at 4.30 am on March
26. He heard the Azan as he proceeded to the martial law
headquarters at the national assembly building in the second
capital to check the results of the military action. On the way he
a ay tall Bangladesh flags had disappeared and Pakistan flags
ea ape wi lee ath pn os
lites dee vt wine en ad atleast temporarily subsided. =
all Mary action in Dacca and its surrounding 4!
a eae que a not strike him that the result achieved oi
Ane se “. - and that no Bengali had changed his support to
gue. Infact the hatred had increased.