|
118 |
Tragedy of Errors |
Adamjee jute mills and the Pakistan Tobacco Company in Dacea
had been taken over by the labourers. Ayub 'Khutha hai’ (Ayub i,
a dog) was being inscribed everywhere. Air Marshal M. Asgha,
Khan, chief of the newly created Justice Party was demanding
that the government must quit at once®. Zulfigar Ali Bhutto, wag
spitting out venom against Ayub and was shouting for his ouster.
Bhutto was, at the very early age of 32, commerce minister jp
Ayub’s cabinet, Differences between him and the President arose
after the 1965 Indo-Pakistan War. Although Bhutto, who had
accompanied the field marshal to Tashkent, to attend a meeting
with India’s Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri, had himself
drafted the Tashkent Declaration he used that document to blame
‘Ayub for a let down at Tashkent. Bhutto used to compare Ayub
with Mao and d’Gaulle but when he was removed by the
President, he became his bitterest enemy’. A Sindhi never forgets
an insult, is an old Sindhi saying, more so if he is a wadera
(landlord).
President Ayub, as a last ditch measure to save the country
from political chaos, agreed to have the next general elections in
1970 on the basis of one-man-one-vote and accepted that the
future political set up in the country could be based on the federal
parliamentary system. But it was now ‘too little to late’. The
leaders who had assembled for the second session of the Round
Table Conference in Rawalpindi on March 10, 1971 and those who
had stayed out of it wanted much more - his ouster and a
completely new political ball game.
. Ayub began having confabulations with the commanders-in-
chief of the three services about the future political set up in the
country. He realised that he no longer could continue as head of
state and as its chief executive.
After the failure of the Round Table Conference, due mainly to
[op uncompromising attitude of Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman and the
— re by Zulfigar Ali Bhutto, Ayub, though sincere in finding @ /
‘edtvlenias ° , , = olitical impasse, became frustrated with the:
demands of the engl ake of the politicians, specially with the
the break up of Pakiet eague which to him were leading towards
incnneed Bee istan. He is reported to have said “It is beiné,
\preside over the di country be divided into two parts. T cannot
e destruction of my country®. If 6 Points are to be