Political Quagmire (Beginn; aia
eginning of the End)
After the Elections
In countries where democracy has taken root and democratic
traditions have been well established the frenzy and emotional
outbursts by opposing candidates subside after the elections.
Every one gets back to business as usual The defeated politician
does not wait a second longer to congratulate the winner as soon
as it becomes certain that he has secured the majority vote. On
the date specified the newly elected head of government or head of
state 1s sworn in with all the fan fare and jubilation reserved for
such occasions. The outgoing chief leaves the office with grace to
pursue his academic activities.
Unfortunately in most developing States the fight goes on even
after the election results have been announced. The results are a
challenged. Statements are made by both the winning and losing
candidates which heighten tension. Victory celebrations taunting
the losers are arranged. Attempts are made to disrupt the transfer
of power by the newly elected loyal opposition. Frustrated
politicians threaten to use street power to negate the verdict of the
people. Fears are expressed that the victorious party will act
against the interest of the state. Such was the state of affairs after
the December, 1970 elections,
The result of the election put the military junta in a quandary
as neither of the two major parties were national in character. _
Two masters had emerged each a lion in his own den but a mouse ae
when in the others territory; each uncompromising, selfish to the |\
extent of breaking up the country if need be.
The CMLA Headquarters, based on the reports being received
through the various intelligence agencies, was aware of the fact
that the Awami League would turn out to be the largest single
. Majority party in East Pakistan. But they were almost certains that
it would need the support of the smaller parties to fon re -
government. According to General Peerzada a total victory a
Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman was never expected, nor was suc .
Possibility ever considered. With the result that no arene 0
handle such a situation had been carried out at the highest level.
However Peerzada maintained that the election results did not
‘cular reaction by General
cause any terror. There was no particular ave also the
Yahya. He was no doubt, somewhat surprised, as w concerned
Paticipants’?, said Peerzada. But the President was