480 Tragedy of Errors
re-introduce the democratic process, but he did so with a view 4,
obtaining personal ire ore those who assisted him did so with
full knowledge of his intentions".
It clearly blamed both the Awami League and the Pakistan
People’s Party for “bringing about a_ situation for the
postponement of the national assembly session" Which ',
exacerbated the bitterness between the Bengalis and those at the
helm of affairs in West Pakistan. The Commission went on to say
"we cannot also help feeling that the Chairman of the Ppp, also
displayed lack of political foresight by failing to make 4 proper
assessment of the intensity of the reaction likely to be created in
East Pakistan to the pdstponement of the National Assembly
Session. If Sheikh Mujib was uncompromising in his attitude the
leader of the PPP was equally adamant" wrote the Chief Justice in
his alleged report.
"We have not also been impressed by the explanation given by
the PPP and its chairman about the refusal of the Party to join the
v’ Session of the National Assembly called on 3 March" stated the
Commission (para 83, p. 437).
Justice Hamood-ur-Rahman and his colleagues believed ‘If any,
compromise was to be arrived - could only have been arrived at \
on the floor of the House or d ring the committee discussions"
(para 83, p. 437). They went on to say “Sheikh Mujib also
displayed lack of statesmanship in insisting on a collision course
which ultimately led to the dismemberment of the country" (para
80, p. 436).
Justice Hamood-ur-Rahman also felt that the negotiations
which were held at Dacca between 15 March and 25 March wee
only to buy time for a military build up in East Pakistan to crus
the Awami League, and that there was no intention to find a
political formula for handing over power to the elected
~ representatives.
This contention by the Commission was categorically denied by
those who represented the government at the negotiations
between them and the Awami League in Dacca prior to the
military action. They believéthat Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, and be
his close aides were raising the ante as the days passed by placing
conditions which were progressively moving towards breaking
away from Pakistan.