406 Tragedy of Errors
over-running another company of 30 FF which Captain Khusro
had placed around Munshi Bazar a few kilometres in the rear of
Shamshernagar. Khusro died while doing his duty to his country,
After a day’s respite 30 FF came under attack again. On 1
December another company was attacked by a fresh enemy
battalion. The brave soldiers held on to their positions, in spite of
a heavy artillery bombardment. Company commander Ehsan and
his mortar troop’s observer Altaf were in the forward localities
moving about from trench to trench to keep up the morale of their
men. A mortar shell of the enemy cut the life span of these two
brave officers.
After stopping the enemy’s advance on the borders for four
days Rana concentrated his two battalions around Maulvi Bazar
on 3 December. The Indians in spite of their best efforts could not
dislodge them from there till the night of 8/9 December when the
brigade withdrew northwards to the Sherpur ferry, though the
GOC had ordered them to fall back to Bhairab Bazar and link up
with 27 Brigade which was operating south of 313 brigade. War
has it’s own momentum and plans cannot always be implemented
when there is a live enemy to disrupt them. On 11 December 313
Brigade, tired and weakened after thirteen days of continuous
fighting, reached Sylhet and joined 202 Brigade*’. There they
remained in comparative safety till the end of the war.
202 (Adhoc) Brigade (Sylhet Sub-Sector)
Sylhet tucked away in the northeast corner of East Bengal,
known for its terraced tea gardens and pineapple plantations, lies
only a few kilometres from the Indian border. It was the resting
place of the famous Muslim saint Hazrat Shah Jalal.
Brigadier Saleemullah, an artillery officer, who had spent his
early days as an air OP (observation post) pilot, had been sent to
East Pakistan for martial law duties. It was only on 1 October that
he was given the command of a motley ‘crowd’ of soldiers from
various paramilitary forces which was designated as 202 Brigade.
His adhoc formation had only one regular infantry battalion (39
Punjab) to give it some respectability as an infantry brigade.
had ahs Brigade area the enemy, supported by the Mukti Bahinl,
sady captured several border outposts just across a
international frontier in the north as early as October. A guenil®
orce, was under a rebellious major, occupying Tahirpur- Tw