492 ;
4) Fourth - Distortions in economic development exacerbate
y flict. Though no government can ensure a Uniform
initethel cone ions of a state, butthe ]
ace of development in all regions oias e butt € least that Can
“a done,is to let the people utilise to a large extent, the wealth
generated from their respective areas. In other words greater
devolution of power and avoidance of centralisation and more
regional autonomy ,would remove much of the grievances which
self interested politicians capitalise on.
‘/ Fifth - Extensive, indiscriminate, and excessive use ofthe army |
+o suppress a popular movement provides a spark to an already
volatile situation. |
. Sixth - Use of force to solve a political problem or achieve a
political objective. is never durable. It is at best, a temporary
solution. The root cause of an insurgency has to be removed for
peace and tranquility to be sustained.
' Seventh - Internal disharmony provides golden opportunities
to powerful neighbours to achieve their aims and objectives. A
correct reading of the domestic scene and its frank and forthright
presentation by pened agencies to the policy makers,.can
prevent a situation wheré‘titizens of a state begin seeking outside
assistance. k
¢) Eighth - It is naive to except all out Support from allies when
the domestic policy leads to a civil war within the country unless
national interests of a particular ally is being harmed.
Ninth - The Integrity of a nation does not depend on the
! rength and size of the military forces alone. Economic st¥ength
and political stability are as important if not more so, for the”
security of a country. ,
While pointing out some of the lessons that the younger
ae of Pakistanis should draw from the East Pakistan
e meeps mind continues to be haunted with the basic question
| Who was to blamejfor this national tragedy? :
/ _ Was it Mujib wh ‘ai it Ya |
/ a ~0.Was a traitor to his country? Was it Yahya
er r Wee ucks and drakes in order to retnain at the helm
. — ae It Bhutto, Whose lust for power made political |
7 Was se Wan. with ne leaders of the majority party impossible: —
coming eral Yaqub and Admiral Aksar: bi ‘their weakness in
command during the electioneering campaign?. Was it General
risks Khan for his narrow vision of seeking a military solution to
@ complex political problem? Was: it Lieutenant General Amit