India’s Role in the break Up of Pakista 281
stan
India mobilised world publi ii
plea that India’s Spee con toe 'nlon against Pakistan on th
the Bengali refugees. In act fing affected by the pr 5
ee ual fact the a € presence of
over them was a pittance compared to th mount of money spent
on the Afghan refugees in a period of r sum spent by Pakistan
economic burden came to over $ 2 billi 1 long years. Pakistan’s
spend more than $ 300 million in the lon whereas India did not
shown to the Bengali refugees Nes month’s ‘hospitality’
neighbouring ingen provinces. India claime Bengal and the
666.67 million”’. She imposed a surchar ed that she spent $
fares more to highlight the burden on sia of 5% on rail and air
her own people agree to her policy of usi S economy than to make
Pakistan problem. On the other han at force to settle the East
wanted their government to welcom me S parliamentarians
Bengal. Shri Jyotomoy Basu, speaki e t e refugees from: East
May, 1971 asked su, speaking in the Lok Sabha
y; ed the government to direct official on 31
not to stop the evacuees from coming into our comme he border
India’s claims that i ae |
pakistan Eescauize. of the wan ‘o vee to get directly involved in Kast |
belied by the fact th 0 millions of Bengali refugees jis
oanenntratine WA armed Pa the Indian high command began |
early as Feb oe i. oa orces close to the East Pakistan border as
India, ‘Y> when no East Bengal refugee had entered
If refugees was the main issue, India should h ,
United Nations for assistance as was d b aman La
contrary India refu a ; one by Pakistan. On the
wlharnataacun to accept UN observers to assess the
Delhi dia n . ed by India to overcome the refugee problem. New
high comm even permit Prince Sadruddin Agha Khan, the UN
Nivea =e for refugees, to visit the refugee camps. The
the relev nto India showed their unwillingness to cooperate with
Sete, United Nation agencies. India did not accept UN
body mrs eneral, U Thant’s, mediatory role. When the world
Pakistan a arrange the repatriation of the refugees back to East
the refi er the law and order jhad improved, India prevented
told th ae from leaving". Indian foreign secretary T.K. Kaul
Sarees nited States on 16 July that India would not accept UN
nel on its side of the border even to handle refugees".
vii further stated that India would not accept any proposal
Us ch would curb guerrilla activity from its territory’ . It rejected
advice to control the guerrillas operating from India. When the