132
Tragedy of Errors
the appointments of the president were made by Major Geng *
Muhammad Ishaq Khan who was his military secretary, Geng)
Peerzada, though a soft spoken officer with a frail constitution, i
reputed waihawe been very authoritative. He was indeed the key
person in the chain of command. Having served under Gener
Yahya Khan twice before he had gained his complete trust ap;
confidence. It was through him that all files had to move befor
reaching the president, as is the case in all senior headquartey,
following the chief of staff system. Direct access of ministers an
secretaries to General Yahya was rare as the PSO kept a tigh
reign on the governmental machinery. Politicians, cabinet
ministers, senior bureaucrats, military officers quite often had ty
bide their time in the PSO’s office before being ushered in to the
president’s chamber, General Peerzada, there: fore, developed a
close relationship with quite a few of them. Some did not
appreciate his stern attitude.
The cabinet meetings, at least initially, did take place every
week which were chaired by General Yahya. There was also a
regular principal staff officer’s (PSO) conference at GHQ every
week. The former dealt with peripheral matters, the latter more
substantive ones particularly those relating to defence. The major
decisions affecting Pakistan’s security, however, were taken bya
kitchen cabinet consisting of General Yahya and his close aides
Chief of Staff, General Abdul Hamid, Quarter Master Gener2l
Abu Bakar Osman Mitha and National Security Chief, Major
General Ghulam Umar who used to meet after office hou!’
\Fateful decisions about the future of the country were mostly
‘taken by them. Mr, Bhutto occasionally found his way also into
this small group. .
Reaction in East Pakistan
Thyagh there was no immediate adverse reaction to Gene
Yahya’s take over in East Bengal. sj rally
satisfied at Ayub’s departure thes ee —— were a was
not looked at favourably in ‘he PoneinialOn of martial lav tel
grudgingly”! said professor onic Schon wing. It was ag it |
came as a shock to them22 writ Seeman Talugdar. In chat |
After a short period of eiea es General Fazal Mugeem ihe,
_ {new West Pakistani leadershiy aches sesentment agai n
Pakistan from now on, b ship returned. The movement in #4 |
» €came more political in nature. |
|