Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) a
Electioneering Campaign
The election campaign, which ran for over ei
was the longest in the history of the mileautonne Pareto’
a year politicians were given a free hand to whip up emotions
against their rivals and in the case of East Pakistan against the
Contte and the so-called Punjabi exploitation of East Bengal.
_-'Twenty four political parties participated in the elections. Most
of them with little or no public support. None were national in -
character. Almost all were regional in their outlook. The Awami
League did put up four of its candidates in West Pakistan but
none succeeded to get a seat in the national assembly. Bhutto’s
People’s Party did not even attempt to challenge the Awami
League in East Pakistan. The elections were, therefore, totally
regional in its context. Out of the four major political parties, the
Awami league was drumming up its anti-West propaganda and
arousing the Bengalis to rise up for their demand of maximum
regional autonomy which could have been interpreted as a veiled
cry_for total independence. To avoid being dubbed as a purely
regional political party the Awami League did show a token
_ presence in West Pakistan. The fig leaf, however, could not hide
its actual contours.
_. Khondkar Mushtaq, a veteran politician, who had been in and
out of jail several times for opposing the policies of the rulers
\ began his political career before Partition as a member of the
Muslim League. He took an active part in the Pakistan movement
but remained a nationalist at heart. But he too had second
thoughts. "The Lahore Resolution did mention two states"*® said
Khondkar to the author when being interviewed at his modest
second storey flat in a down town residential area of Dhaka.
He dilated quite a while on the question of regional autonomy,
summing it up by saying "after you got the cake you wanted it all y
and that is where we became skeptical". Although he was angry at
the domineering attitude of the West Pakistani leeatorett was
not against Pakistan per se. Infact he went on to say that Pakistan
should be here (in, Bangladesh). "History justifies it, numbers
confirm it and humility demands it’ is how he expressed his
feelings. ae
Khondkar claimed that it was not Mujib but he himself who
founded the Awami Muslim League as the Muslim League had
not been able to satisfy the needs of the eastern wing. Gradually