378 Tragedy of Errors
attack had started. His brigade was ag the horthern
approach to Jhenida. 107 Brigade, un ° € command of
y Brigadier Muhammad Hayat, was covering the most direct route
to Jessore hence he was given nearly all his regular components of
other arms. Brigadier Fazal-i-Hameed raised an adhoc brigade of
East Pakistan civil armed forces and was deployed in an
insignificant sector, that of Khulna and Sunderbang in the
extreme south of the divisional area.
Enemy Orbat
Indian II Corps, under Lieutenant General T.N. (tuby) Raina,
was deployed against 9 Infantry Division with its headquarters at
: Krishannagar, 15 miles from the East Pakistan border. The Corps
was poised for an attack on Kushtia, Jessore and Khulna and had
been given the task to prevent 9 Division from falling back to
Dacca. The Corps consisted of two infantry divisions, 4 Mountain
Division (Major General Mohinder Singh Barar) and 9 Mountain
Division (Major General Dalbir Singh). Each division had a
regiment of PT 76s (amphibious tanks) under command.
Battle of Jessore
The Jessore sector in the south-west corner of East Pakistan
extended from a line joining the towns of Jibannagar,
Kotchandpur and Kaliganj in the north to the dense forests of the
Sunderbans on the shores of the Bay of Bengal in the south. A
frontage of nearly 112 kilometres. To the east flowed the mighty
Ganges. Just across the western border with India lay the
metropolis of Calcutta - a city of teaming millions most of whose
inhabitants slept in the open. A credible threat in that direction
would have caused considerable panic amongst its civilian
population. General Dalbir Singh, confided to Brigadier
Muhammad Hayat, after the war, that if the Pakistani troops had
even advanced three kilometres towards Calcutta the people
would have fled the city.
frontier. It was a sre Wo "soit: fut cost atthe SE Oe
could crocs pes, Aor water obstacle to infantry but PT
xe ross it with ease. The Bhairab and Chintra rivers further
rt pes lat mere aeels lakes and ponds) vee
amet ey ar movement. The sector was served ioe
of roads which, in addition to the railway "*"