Military Action 243
anted outright and ruthless milita : .
Yaqub Khan. "No commander should be afiva Te eae
putcher if that is the demand of the hour" waa Generel is. a
idea for dealing with the prevailing situation. In fact both G al
Khadim Hussein Raja and General Rao Farman Ali felt hai th
principal staff officers (PSO’s) from GHQ, who had Jebtenited ,
Dacca just prior to the proposed military action, had been mats
take over from them if they hesitated to use military force to
restore normalcy. "Mitha, Khuda Dad and Janjua were sent as
others and I may decline to take action" confided General Raja to
the author. He emphasised that before this no PSO had ever
visited East Pakistan.
Operation SEARCH LIGHT
The military authorities in East Pakistan were completely
ignored during the political negotiations which had begun in
Dacca on March 15. When Raja asked Tikka as to how the
negotiations were going on he replied by saying "you know as
much as I do - we both’ read the newspapers". But Tikka, a
practical soldier, wanted to be prepared for the worst. He had seen
the anger and hatred in the eyes of the Bengalis against the army
and the West Pakistanis from the day he set foot on the soil of
East Bengal. He did not want to be caught unawares by a pre-
emptive action by the militant wing of the Awami League.
General Yahya had already given him a hint that force may have
_ tobe used if no positive result is achieved through talks.
He, therefore, as early as March 15, told General Officer
Commanding 14 Division to be prepared if negotiations failed. On
March 16, Tikka called Raja and Farman and directed them to
prepare contingency plans for a military action to restore the
authority of the government. This was not to be an ordinary aid to
Civil power but it was to be an action to suppress a revolt against
an established authority,said Raja while explaining the details of
the military plan to deat” with the situation that would arise if the
Political negotiations failed.
On March 17, Raja and Farman met. They were SS a =
the command and staff college and were Se iciie q Aacle ac
Writing appreciations at the highest level. They divide e f the “)
Into tw . : wrote the assessment 0 e
rah 0 parts. While Farman ‘dinate formation. On
‘ation Raja drafted the tasks of the subordin