160
Tragedy of Errors
Post Election Parleys
The time had now come for parleys to begin between 4,
government and the two major political parties, the AL and ppp
| The first such meeting took place at 10.30 am at the presidenp,
house at Dacca on January 13, 1971 between the Awami Leagy,
and martial law authorities. The Awami League was representeg
by Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, Tajuddin Ahmad, Khondka
Mushtaq, Qamar-uz-Zaman and two others. The President wags
assisted by Vice Admiral S. M. Ahsan, Lieutenant Gen. Sahibzada
Yaqub Khan and Lieutenant General S. G. M. M. Peerzada.
General Yahya conceded the technical ability of the Awami
league to go it alone. He, however, did express a desire for the
Awami League to include the West Pakistani elements in the
future government. “If you want you can make a government
without any other party since you have 162 members out of a total
of 300 national assembly seats, but I hope that you will have a
national government by including some West Pakistanis also in
your cabinet” remarked Yahya to Mujib. He did clarify further
that he was not referring to any particular person in West |
Pakistan who should be taken in.
Mujib, according to Peerzada, appeared to be slightly
concerned after hearing the President’s remarks. He did, however,
confirm to General Yahya that he would take persons from both
the wings in his cabinet™*.
Most of the West Pakistani politicians also accepted the fact
that Awami League was competent to frame the constitution
including Sardar Shaukat Hayat Khan (CML) Maulana Shah
Ahmad Noorani (JUP), Air Marshal Asghar Khan (TIP), G. M.
Syed (Jiye Sindh) and Akber Bugti. Even Bhutto agreed that
legally Awami League could frame a constitution as it was the
majority party but “without a consensus it would be a barre?
exercise"®” said the chairman of the People’s Party. :
As regard the date of the first session of the national assembly
Mujib indicated that it should be held as soon as possible. The
ee aupeat dish it should be soon but since there were “re
corner jhe said that h mei = ep tobe paren! at
date ie He reit ‘ ad sat ama <n seer aie
2 wrest eich Le need for using this period for a a
the points of differen - iicians. for holding discussions to 0
Cae ence, including those of the 6 Points, before t
) onal assembly session at Daeca/