352 Tragedy of Errors
under HQ Eastern Command at Calcutta. When the -tieig to
seize the opportunity being provided by the inept ancling of the
political situation across the border was taken in April, 1971 it
became necessary to build up the existing strength in the Eastern
theatre. Possible turmoil due to the impending elections was useq
to cover the move of additional troops into West Bengal,
Magahlaya, Assam and Tripura. Manekshaw decided to raise a
new corps headquarters and to pull out the forces from the
Chinese border. Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Aurora, Army
Commander, India’s Eastern Command, withdrew his forces
which were to deal with the insurgency in the north east®,
4 Infantry Division from Allahabad was sent to West Bengal in
August, 1971. By September the entire division had concentrated
at Panagarh. On 12 October the ‘Lal Chirya’ Division, as this
division was generally called, moved closer to its future theatre of
operations. Major General Mohinder Singh Barar received his
final orders for the attack as early as September®. 9 Mountain
Division, from Meerut, was converted into an infantry division at
Ranchi and sent to the eastern border alongwith 57 Division
which had been newly raised at Masipur. 6 Infantry Division from
Barielly and 23 Mountain Division from Ranchi joined the three
divisions already in the East bringing the total to seven divisions
and a communication zone equivalent of a division which
surrounded East Pakistan by the end of October.
Airlift capability of lifting two companies at a time based on
helicopters was developed. A regiment of Hovercraft was acquired
. Live across rivers. Each of its three Squadron could lift a
attalion.
_ Lieutenant General Katphalia, in his book ‘Mission with a
Difference’, also admits that preliminary moves for the
deployment of forces for eventual confrontation commenced in
September by the Indian army’, Major General D.K. Palit
mete itis when he Writes "By November forces for the
giadesh operation were build up to three corps®,
Contrary to what most Western writers believe the build up
was not for maintaining law and order during the forthcoming
elections but as part of a deliberate plan to invade East Pakistat
in the coming campaign season.