am Tragedy of Errors
Although the war had officially ended on 16 December, 107
Brigade held on to Khulna till 0800 hours 17 December. Genera]
Aurora admits that the division which was sent down to Khulna
could not capture it till the cease fire because the Pakistanis had
organised a good defensive position with a bog on one side and a
river on the other. "The fighting there could have gone on for a
long time" added the Indian army commander’.
57 Brigade (Jhenida Sub-Sector)
Brigadier Manzoor Ahmad, a soft spoken Kashmiri officer,
whose mild manners and even temperament were more suited for
.a staff appointment than the command of troops in an
unfavourable environment. A former member of the directing
staff at the prestigious Command and Staff College, Quetta he had
more than adequate knowledge for organising a proper defence
position at the brigade and divisional level.
57 Brigade, however, had only two infantry battalions as
against the standard three. He was to cover a frontage of 80
kilometres, fifteen times greater than what he had been teaching.
He not only-faced an enemy threat of one division but he had also
to protect his rear areas, routes of withdrawal and vital
installations from his own people. A major deviation from the staff
college solution had to be made, more so because of the directive
of holding every inch of territory.
Manzoor put everything he had in the shop window. 29 Baloch
was on the right covering the axis to Harding/Paksy bridge the
only vital link to 16 Division across the Ganges. 18 Punjab was
deployed on the left to guard the approach to Jhenida which was
i both, his brigade headquarters and a town which had been
prepared as a fortress for prolonged defence. A company was
detached from 18 Punjab to man an outpost at Darsana right on
the border and at the inter-brigade boundary. It was covering the
shortest approach to Jhenida. 38 FF of 107 Brigade was
immediately on its left.
Manzoor’s flanks were protected by a major river in the north
and 107 Brigade in the south. Madhumati river ran from north-
west to south-east in the eastern half of his Brigade area. The
terrain was not unduly cut up and had a reasonably good
infrastructure of a road and rail network.