498 s b 7 b t >
be intensified in order to bring about, speedily and in
2. Urges that Oe te prestci and principles of the Charter of the Uniteg
eet Becher necessary for the voluntary return of the East Pakistan _
=efapeds to their homes;
-operation of all States with the Secretary-Genera] f
= raat aulintaon, to and relieving the distress of those refugees; .
r
4. Urges that every effort be made to safeguard the lives and well-being of the
civilian population in the area of conflict;
General Assembly d
the Secretary-General to keep the : Y and the
5. ee Council promptly and currently informed on the implementation of
the present resolution;
6. Decides to follow the question closely and to meet again should the situation
so demand;
7. Calls upon the Security Council to take appropriate action in the light of the
present resolution. . |
2003rd plenary meeting,
The Resolution was adopted. 7 December 1971.
In favour 104 Votes; against 11; .
abstention 10.
|
Resolution 307 of 21 December, 1971 |
The Security Council,
Having discussed the grave situation in the subcontinent, which remains a
threat to international peace and security, |
Noting General Assembly resolution 2793 (XXVI) of 7 December, 1971.
Noting the reply of the Government of Pakistan on 9 December, 1971,
Noting the reply of the Government of India on 12 December, 1971,
. lle — the oo of the Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan and |
the Foreign Minister of In ia,
Noting further the statement made at the 161Gth meeting of the med
council by be Foreign ee of India containing a unilateral declaration
cease - fire in the western t eatre.
: . ith ©
mee Tone einer to the cease - fire in the western theatre wit
e rom ecember, i;
Noting that Consequently a cease - fire and cessation of hostilities prevail,
1. Demands that a durable cease - fire and cessation of all hostilities in oo
of conflict be Strictly observed and remain in effect until withdrawa' tories
Place, as Soon as practicable, of all armed forces to their respective =i ad
and to positions which fully respect the cease - fire line in or india
eat hl by the United Nations Military Observer Group |
an stan;
akistan; |