Indo-Pakistan w
ee Way. 197] Eastern Theatre 393
57 Brigade was later reinfor,Ced wij
99 Cavalry for the defence of the Pah = @ Squadron of tanks from
Regiment, which reached the f, Sy bridge and with
iedly sent ormation on 9 50 Punjab
hurriedly sent southwards to Prevent a rend Ovember and was
Opposite 57 Brigade, was — Tough to Jhenida,
addition to the standard three br S 4 Mountain Divisio
. A rigades (7 hn. In
and three field regiments the Indian divie).. 41 and 62 Brigades)
of armour and a 130 millimetre, opie Was given a regiment
reach out to any target in Manzoor’s briead battery which could
redeployment. ade area with minimum
Dharmada Enclave
General Barar was in his conce i
‘ ntr "
preparation for an attack by the “_ ne by 15 November in
21 November. He took another five days te " East Pakistan on
operations. In this he was helped “s ee his area of .
brought back ; on ea te, Mukti Bahini who
rougnt all the information he needed ab
dispositions, location of their strong points about enemy
minefields, safe passage through water obstacles mun as a
tankable terrain. With everything given to Bar oo tho Weta na
with the air Ags : ; ‘arar on the plate and
i e alr observer flying overhead in relative safety it was going
. ~ walk over. The defenders were restricted to fight with their
ands tied behind their backs as their rear areas were insecure
and their security had been jeopardised.
,; To Make things easier General Barar, like other Indian
“erp commanders, was looking for areas inside East
akistan which could be occupied before launching his full scale
p
rh One such area was the Dharmada enclave in the Kushtia
ctor,
p Indian 1 Nagaland Battalion had managed to infiltrate into
ean territory in the Kushtia sector unnoticed some time
wing the first week of November 1971. This enclave probably
e ed as a base to coordinate and support operations of the
ukties into the area. Brigadier Manzoor decided to eject the
*nemy from the enclave.
|
py This action was fought on 9 November 1971 by D a re
? njab, commanded by Captain Muhammad a “A ;
oe of 8 November the company commander er i . a e
atka, eight kiloketres away, was vaguely informed tha —_