Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) 161 .
‘ib agreed to meet the West Paki Kiccuiere:
i pinta "Hum Bhutto ko bhi tile" de including
uttered Mujib in his Bengali accented Urdu to Y : meet Bhutto)
made it quite clear to the President that his mins le But Mujib
majority,and that it could, if it wanted to ad won a clear
constitution without the support of any oth » Produce the new
form the government relying on its own st er party. It could also |
His comments on 6 Points formula w rength in the assembly.
Points achah hai". (In my opinion a Slee ee Khyal men 6
formula). It is, however, not the Bible and it j ormula Is a good
reasonable limits explained Mujib to th 1s negotiable within
| would like to: make clear” - oA tk ene "but one thing |
that is that there should be A totic ck avr sagas ‘chief “and |
other politicians should also be reasonable Beale ae . |
Ds cedbct macailts rs between himself and Bhutto
ee esults. . lave received information that Bhutto
thin! s that just as Iam her eshe too has a similar position in West
vottennt ea Aidt : have no rival in East Pakistan. |
deat hinactn West P = ag Bhutto cannot say the same
in the West Wing wh h istan. There are other political parties
could be includ : Ww os ave a substantial number of seats who
Seared evan ‘ te e future cabinet”. This is what Bhutto
Siding iu ost as then he would have been left high and dry. '
tried :. < € opposition benches was not his cup of tea. Bhutto
stigport fae 0 the Awami League leaders that he had the
eantanme en al my don’t forget I got the highest votes from the
flaws hie? reminded Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto to barrister Amir-ur-
dtivin bi whip of the Awami League when the latter was
g him to the government house in Dacca”.
ig fone confirmed that during their visit to the second capital
between _ were also discussed, though not in great detail,
aie Owing and the Awami League. The martial law
financial tn id point out that since points 3, 4, and 5 involved
examine th an eS the economic and financial advisers should
e implications more carefully.
Ps the political structure of the next government the
bicameral ague were in favour of a unicameral legislature a5 4 /,
The real : one tended to delay matters and was more a
Wiliament-iiee was that the Bengalis feared that in @ “_ ats
between th they might be forced to concede some kind of pa
€ two wings.