235
Mukti Bahini
Tactics
Initially, between March and April, the Mukti Bahini was used
to support the Indian Border Security Forces in keeping the
.. Pakistan army away from the international frontier to enable the
Indian army to gain as much information about the trans-border
terrain as possible.
j In the second phase, from May to July, the Muktis dressed in
civilian clothes were required to penetrate deep inside their own
country and carry out subversive activities. Blowing up of bridges,
blocking roads, ambushing convoys and assassinating isolated
army personnel. (700 trained guerrillas were inducted into
Faridpur district alone by the middle of May)®5, The so-called
miscreants, undistinguishable from the rest, were everywhere in
East Pakistan, present even in government offices. By day they
/were ordinary citizens by night they were guerrillas. An Indian’
writer accepts that many of them were Hindus wearing dhotis
(lion cloth around the waist worn by Hindus)??. Workers
instigated by the Muktis, damaged 38 Jute mills in Khulna and
Mymensingh”*. In the battle of Feni (June 1971) the Mukti Bahini
claimed to have killed 500. A.K. Kamaraz-Zaman reported to his
Indian mentor that 13,000 Pakistani soldiers have been killed
between March 25 and June 12, 197179. Mukti Bahini supported
by regular Indian troops attacked and captured Bariab Bazaar on
the Indo-East Pakistan border on June 20, 1971. A commando
element of two companies led by Lieutenant Colonel Shakurjan
had to be dropped by helicopters across the river to recapture the
area. In this action the Mukti Bahini suffered 500 casualties.
Shakurjan lost one of his men.
} In the third Phase which began in August, 1971 the Mukti
Bahini, supported by Indian artillery fire from across the border,
were directed to attack Pakistani border posts and ‘liberate’
vulnerable enclaves which could later be used as jumping off
points by the Indian army.
A need was felt to provide some political guidance to the so-
called freedom fighters. The Indian government, therefore, formed
a political committee of eight activists on September 9, from
members of the self-styled Bangladesh goverment in exile, to
ensure a greater control over the Mukti Bahini®.