Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) M21
taged a coup d’ etat in July, 1977 and t :
without taking any service chief o; the chain Ali B hutto A
staff committee into confidence. joint chiefs of
Major General Nawabzada Sher Ali
minister of information in General Yala eae wee on
agrees that Ayub was not forced to leave, by the army. It Tons den
been ascertained that there was no movement of troops wear the
house of President Ayub just before he handed over power és
General Yahya, indicating that Ayub was not being asked to hand
over at the point of a gun. Peerzada maintains that there was no
conspiracy against Ayub by the army 8enerals. Since he was the
adjutant general in those days he would have certainly come to
know of any such thoughts within the higher military circles,
Nur Khan, though he was later removed by Yahya, made no
mention of a conspiracy theory in his interview to Brigadier AR.
Siddiqui of the Defence Journal which was taken much after :
Yahya’s death!2,
~Gohar Ayub, the eldest son of the Field Marshal, in his reply to
the author’s query about whether his father had voluntarily
handed over power to Yahya or was forced to do so, however,
indirectly hinted that the latter was the case. He pointed out in
his letter that Field Marshal Ayub was directed to appear before
the Hamood-ur-Rahman Commission and the report of the
Commission in this connection is correct!3, (Justice Hamood ur
Rahman opined that General Yahya had usurped power).
Admiral A.R. Khan, the defence minister, and General Abdul
Hamid, Chief of Staff, are reported to have suggested,to Yahya
"accept but do not grab" but there is reason to believe that some
) other army generals, close to the C-in-C, were encouraging him to
- force Ayub to hand over power to the army.
On March 20, a PSOs conference was held in GHQ where the
Political situation was discussed. All agreed that Ayub had to go as
the agitation could only be controlled when Ayub was removed
and it was ensured that he did not offer himself as a candidate in
the next elections. There were differences, however, on how to
effect the change in the top leadership. Major General ee,
Wasiuddin who was then the master general of ‘sone ar he
Suggested that Ayub should hand over power to the speaker
: ~ 2 d_Akber, director
national assembly. Major General Muhamma (ISI), was
8eneral of the Inter Services Intelligence Directorate ’