India's Role in the break Up of Pakistan 289
| or the massacre of a million
em or the Iranian Revolution ee by the Pol Pot
pildren during the ouster of the Shahinshah - sumed its own
¢ rtainly a stature in the academic world, but " ubramanyam has
mabjective in his analysis when it den 1° 2m0t help being
ysubjectve ts ; n It “comes to Indo-Paki
ralations. A hatred for those who broke up his Bhar ; a6
ingrained in his heart. He misses no oppo Gane is stil]
d pulls _no punch ; ity, minces no
words and puts NO punches when it comes t
istani leadership. Hi man? © attacking the
Pakistan! Pp Ss term ‘man S_struggle for freedom’ |
should a ota Afghanistan, “Kashmir Punjab “Assam, if
estine and Sout rica. He shoul : ic a
Paneladesh alone. d not have confined it to,
‘The opportunity to intervene directly came when the Awami
League leadership sought refuge in West Bengal to escape;being : -
arrested by the law enforcing agencies of the government of .
Pakistan. It is at that time that military action against Pakistan to
support the Mukti Bahini took shape" acknowledged the
reknowned journalist, Kuldip Nayyar,” one time editor of the
prestigious Indian paper, The Statesman.
Active Measures
Indira encouraged and allowed the establishment of a
government of Bangladesh in exile in Calcutta, as early as April,
1971. The locality, where its officers were established, was given
the name of Mujibnagar (8, Theatre Road, Calcutta) - Indian
constitutional experts drafted the so-called declaration of )
Independence which was announced by the Awami League
leaders, in hiding, on 17 April, 1971.
India prevented a meeting between the foreign minister of the
Bangladesh government in exile and General Yahya. It wanted all
contacts to be handled through New Delhi”. India’s defiant
| attitude, her isolated nature and her acerbic temper prevented her ~~
from accepting any compromises. She knew her mind and was
determined to follow through with her plans come what may.
In response to the Indian prime minister's appeal for raising
funds to help Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman, Chief Minister of Bihar
Mr. Krapura Thakur announced a donation of Rs. 25 lakhs “for
‘upply of arms and ammunition to Bangladesh""*. Subramanyam,
Published an article in the National Herald on 5 April, 1971
*ntitled "East Pakistan Crisis" persuading India to attack East