Indo-Pakistan War - 197) Eastern Theatre 395
The objective of 4 Mountain Division wa :
the Madumati river just across the town of Marae te vaste
headquarters of General Ansari’s g Division. It was to reach
Maduakhali by D plus 1 (ie. by 2 December), In spite of an
overwhelming superiority in men and weapons Barar’s troops
were still entangled with the clearance of border out :
: ; posts on that
date. A far cry from a rapid advance to their objective,
Battle for Jhenida
_Barar’s initial plan of attack was to break through to Jhenida
with a frontal assault towards Kaliganj. In Phase II he planned to
overrun Jhenida from the south while simultaneously cutting of
18 Punjab’s route of withdrawal to Jhenida. From then onwards
he intended to fan out in the direction of Kushtia and Magura in
the hope of surrounding the entire brigade before it could cross
the Ganges and the Madhumati rivers. While he succeeded in
reaching his objectives finally, he could not entirely encircle the
defenders as desired.
62 Brigade of 4 (Indian) Mountain Division assaulted the
company of 18 Punjab at Darsana on 28 November and succeeded
in breaking through its defences. The next night the village of
Uthalai a few kilometres to the east of Darsana was attacked. It
was held by another company of 18 Punjab. The protective
minefield around Uthalai forced the squadron of armour
supporting the assaulting troops, to halt temporarily. After a few
Indian tanks were shot up their attack on Uthalai failed and they
Were compelled to withdraw. 62 Brigade, renewed, their attach on
80 November and this time succeeded in overrunning both
Uthalai and Andulbaria - further east.
While the Indians were advancing towards Kaliganj 18 sil 7
'e-occupied the Darsana position on 2 December. Lee oe
had to commit 42 Brigade supported by a squadron ot bce .
dislodge the new occupants of the border post. ~maran ad 4
kilometre from the border finally passed into Indian ‘thdrew to
December after six days of fighting. 18 Punjab too of tanks
Chuadanga the same night where it was joined by a troop
from 29 Cavalry,
62 Brigade had attacked along the inter-brigade store
between 57 and 107 Brigade. 38 FF of 107 Brigade also, therefore,
. talion got split, some
Bot €ngaged in the battle for Jnenida. The bat