292 Tragedy of Errors
It is true that India wanted to soften the ground first, and make
it appear that India came to the assistance of a provision aj
government and that they were rescuers rather than aggressors
But all this was in keeping with a deliberate plan to dismember
Pakistan. Khushwant Singh, the celebrated editor-in-chief of the
Illustrated Weekly of India, opined that Mrs. Gandhi planned and
orchestrated the invasion of East Pakistan®!.
Brigadier Jagdev Singh, who joined the IVth Indian Corps at
Tezpur (Assam) on 1 September, 1971, writes that the task of the
corps engineers was to develop the infrastructure for launching a
major offensive from Tripura into East Pakistan. The plan,
according to, him, visualised an attack by three divisions with
Sylhet as the objective. Offensive plans, are no doubt made by
neighbouring countries, as part of operational planning against
potential hostile countries! but to develop the infrastructure to
achieve an objective indicates the determination to implement the
intended objective. Jagdev reveals that IV Corps had been directed
as early as September to be ready to launch the offensive into East
Pakistan by the middle of November, 1971**. It would be more
correct to assume that the plan to invade Hast Pakistan was made
soon after the military action which made the Mukti Bahini
ineffective. /
Swaran Singh, the Indian Foreign Minister is reported to have
said "If no political solution, acceptable to the Awami League, was
forthcoming, India will be compelled to take action on its own™.
Thakur Prashad of the Hindu Militant Organisation, Jan Sangh,
was more vocal. "We should not rest content till Pakistan is
destroyed and merged with Bahrat", said the fiery leader™*.
Mr. Morarji Desai former Prime Minister of India told Qriana
»Fallaci, the well known Italian journalist, that Mrs. Gandhi
‘| dispatched to East Pakistan thousands and thousands of Indian
soldiers disguised as Mukti Bahini,and that 5,000 Indian soldiers
died in the process (before the main battle began). Fallaci writes
that when the Indian commander-in-chief asked Mrs. Gandh
whether Indian soldiers should be sent back to the barracks or
allowed to BRACE phe gave the orders to attack Pakistan”.
UL. K. Jha, India’s ambassador to the United States, told Hen)
Kissinger, that India would act by the end of the year if it’s pane
were not met. India acknowledged that Indian troops had cross