340 Tragedy of Errors
; .. advance. Normal communicatio
against East Baldatan 9 ita were actually disrupted. It es
mae nee an all out war by invading Pakistan on 2]
Somsiket China’s support was confined to moral and politica
support only.
Only two assumptions proved ta: be wrele: Thdlia's mili elton
was directed against East Pakistan and not against the West as
conceived. Indian armed forces were initially to contain an attack
by Pakistan in the West if launched. It ‘was only after the
capitulation of East Pakistan that Mrs Indira Gandhi began to
think of eliminating the thorn in her side once and for all. A
warning from the United States prevented her from launching
another military adventure in the West. The second assumption
which did not prove correct was the period of the conflict. The war
was over in twenty six days as against an assumption that
Pakistan should be prepared for a war of three months.
In the summer of 1970, the armed forces war course (afwe)
students of the Command and Staff College, visited East Pakistan.
General Officer Commanding 14 Division, (the only formation in
East Pakistan at that time), Major General Khadim Hussain Raja,
in an hour and a half’s talk to them on the defence of East
Pakistan made some valid observations. He pointed out that while
the quantum of troops in East Pakistan had increased since 1965
the frontages were still vast, ratio of troops to space was still very
meagre, there was lack of adequate armour, artillery and engineer
support. The enemy would enjoy total air and naval superiority.
ital tb we jig ware na
a be less important than afflicting attritio”
mainly on strong cinta Se SOURS neon
vafillerldene We aNGalte ie Hise ae add ohne planning |
ultimate annihilation. He did re lie é ~~ shea om ' To
him, as to many others, "Da scien Biteonk | or — ould
mean the end of all resista ch lpg nga cage wer
io ‘be walisfied by allan nce. General Raja, however; a th
fortress and the Mymen ine " nly some resources for th® ot iD
favour of a pre-emptive i a sector as a whole. He was © ing
forward to have hi mar by advocated a strategy of cree?
nome ing at the bargaining counter’.