268 Tragedy of Errors
Martial law was-not strictly imposed as intended. Infact in
~ civil war environment a iw ree or aa
r resumin the adminis! € lon
etait dies were also not achieved - heaton could not eS
sealed, conditions for selecting a civilian Se : p was only partially
obtained and a new political aa E ee oe are soueting the
non-radical elements of the elected represen ee iia to be
only a show piece.
The decision to use force to quell the spontaneous uprising
against the so called Punjabi army was widely commented upon
by both western and vernacular writers alike. Those in the CMLA
headquarters in Rawalpindi defended the military action. To them
| it was absolutely necessary to restore the writ of the government.
There is no denying the fact that by March 25, politica)
negotiations had come to an impasse , and that a _paralle]
government, infact the only defacto government, that of Mujib
and his supporters was in place. A situation which could not have
been allowed to cofitinue. There was only one way out.
However, before taking such a drastic step which would
certainly have had far reaching repercussions, both within the
country and without, a careful assessment and appreciation of the
situation was necessary. The pros and cons of using force should
have been thoroughly discussed and clear cut instructions about
the quantum of force to be usedyshould have been spelt out. No
evaluation was carried out of the consequences of the military \v
action on the reaction of all Bengali elements in the armed forces
and in the civil departments. Neither was any thought gi
the attitude of those sitti ah Berer ©
oe ng on the fence who were most likely to
turn against the armed forces and the central ;
Islamabad. The deserti government In
a esertion of the Bengalis lock, stock and barrel |
and their going across to India was, incorrectl} <a
not considered as an , y, not visualised or |
‘ a major draw back. The res by friendl
countries was also not properly analysed ponse by friendly
to India and how easily they would ca wie ¢ panera
the Bengalis, was not taken into aici es en Ales mentee
I do nof a ee Wi ‘i <
that after the military = including Mr. Bhutto, who maintain
government based on elected Tihs aMminesry arid-formation of a
have kept Pakistan united. M As still in East Paki§tan,would ¢
Yahya to bite. She was not rs. Indira Gandhi, had got General
going to let him off the hook. Mrs. -