94 Tragedy of Errors
Pakistan but that alone could not have berg tne standard of
living of the Bengalis at par with the Punjabis. Itt ahi the only
criteria, then East Bengal before Partition wou not have
remained a slum while Calcutta near-by rolled i aes Wealth
obtained from the golden fibre. United Germany 18 facing a Similar
problem of bringing its eastern half at par with the erstwhile West
Germans. The ‘Ossies’, as the East Germans are called, do not
) have the capacity to absorb the money which Bonn is prepared to
\ spend on them.
Allocation of financial resources 1s only a small input into the
total requirement. Without communication infrastructure, power
generation, skilled labour, managerial expertise, technical, and
scientific education, entrepeneurship and a willingness to take
‘risks, rapid economic progress 1s not possible. With a non-
| favourable investment climate even foreign aid is not easily
forthcoming. All of these cannot be implanted overnight. It takes
time to catch up with a more developed region if it be in the same
_ country more so when it is geographically divided.
The questions which need answering are, however, what steps |
did the leadership in Pakistan take to redress the grievances of its
eastern wing? How far did they succeed and why did they fail in
achieving a measure of national integration between the Bengali
a and the rest? fem, a
\ Language Issue Resolved
. After having queered the pitch, steps were taken to pacify the
— of the Bengalis on the language issue. Bengali was
ton y accepted as the second language of Pakistan in 1956 when
; was — in the 1956 Constitution. The Bengali script
= “i on BUC. notes, postage stamps, official documents
in some public places as well. Bengali members of the
constituent assembly and the central legislature were allowed to
address the House in Bengali. Efforts were al ;
Marshal Ayub to introduce a comn i lig — by Fiel
It was an uphill task which ; non script for Bengali and Urdu.
beginning. Gover n was a non-starter from the vely
nment officials posted in-E
west were encouraged to learn B . ast Pakistan from the
frontier corps i n Bengali but unlike officers in the
; ‘ps 1t was not made compul
~¢ertain proficiency in Bengali withi pulsory for them to acquire 4
Political R In a specified period of time.
4 epresentation Remedied
Ss mentioned earlier a 3
. ma . .
Bengalis from the West Pakistan i nse for the alienation of the
as their inability to get what