478 Tragedy of Errors
government did,was eulogised. There were no checks and balances
no opposition to present the other side of the picture. No one g5-1
bold as to stick his neck out and criticise the government. h
, Reliance on Allies
It was unwise to have relied on the assistance of the Uniteg
States and China in the event of an all out war with India. Having
brought about a civil war in East Pakistan due to onés own errors
it was naive on the part of General Yahya and his advisers to”
"expect others to pull out his chestnuts from the fire.
Due to the follies of the political leadership,a stage had come
where even Pakistan’s friends had begun to realise that the
country would not remain united for long, and i) made no special
effort to ensure its territorial integrity. / “Y
Hamood-ur-Rahman Commission Report (HCR)
The public in Pakistan has been clamouring for the publication
of the Hamood-ur-Rahman Commission Report , but no
government whether it was civil or military, non-representative or
elected ccould pick up courage to make its findings public,
Obviowdly the recommendations in it, if implemented, would have
been harmful to them or to the mage of their political party.
Every now and then ,there-is-a demand’ from a section of the
public for its publication, but just as in the’case of numerous other
similar naeiseymach successive government has not found it in
their interest to divulge the contents of this much-talked-of
document. Very few have had the privilege of having seen the
HCR. No government or agency acknowledges that the report-is in
their possession. But Photocopies of unauthenticated versions are
in circulation. These have been Picked up by several writers and
quoted in their writings articularly by those who wish to malign
their opponents, es
Soon after taking over as the President and the Chief Martial
Law Administrator Mr Bhutto set about ensuring that no one
from the army would try to blame Gin) for his alleged role in the
dismemberment of the country. He, therefore, constituted @
commission of . pay 3 8 July, 1972 to “enquire into the
circumstances ‘which ed to the ignominious surrender of the
Pakistan Armed Forces, in East Pakistan on 16 December, 197!