Causes of Alienation oe
not such a complex problem that it could not be done in the area
where it was being manufactured.
Trading with India had been alwa S a thorny ;
bitter relations between the two count Fe ate the ot
emotional and an economic problem. Having separated from India
and believing that its powerfyl neighbour remained bent on
harming Pakistan, any attempt to increase commercial contacts
was not favourably accepted by the central leadership. West
Pakistanis, in particular, have always been afraid of a cultural and
economic invasion from India. Both the government and the
private sector were afraid of an open trade with India as the
nascent industries in Pakistan needed protection. Indian goods
/were generally cheaper than the corresponding ones produced in
Pakistan. Even an intellectual and a liberal minded Zulfigar Ali
Bhutto could not give up his anti-India stance and continued to
see grave dangers in economic Cooperation with India. To him a
move in this direction could result in joint ventures, joint
participation in hydro-electric schemes, collaboration in
agriculture and industry. As a bitter opponent of appeasement to
India this was totally unacceptable to him®,
East Pakistanis on the other hand did not have the same bitter
feelings against India as the Kashmir problem did not affect them
directly. They were not so emotionally involved as to foergo the
€conomic benefits which could be derived by trading with India.
East Bengal wanted to open up trade with its neighbour and saw
no sense in importing coal from China at Rs. 172 per ton whereas *
it could be bought from India at Rs. 53 per ton. Similarly cement
ftom West Pakistan was costing Rs. 16 per bag when it was
available at Rs. 8 per bag from Assam”,
For a long time the Bengalis were fed with the venom of West
pakistan gaining all the benefits from the jute grown in East
akistan, They were told that jute and tea produced. 70 percent of
the foreign exchange earnings but the Bengalis received only =
itis hard earned money’!. It was also proved that since the jute
ower of East Pakistan was paid in Pakistani rupees he a
being deprived of half the price as the dollar was ee values
According to them the main beneficiary was the ae
oh merchant’ who got Rs. 8.61 for every dollar wo !
ch was exported,