Geographical Characteristics
was not only a hinderance but a curse to the politics of Bengal......
He has met his Waterloo'®" (After the death of the Qudid and
fifteen years later Fazlul Haq was made the governor of East
Pakistan). | , |
A Bengali politician, who throughout appeared in a Sherwani
and a blood red Turkish cap, as against the local Bengali attire,
broke away from All India Muslim politics to those of Bengal
alone. Little did he realize that it would be he who would suffer by
leaving the Muslim League and not the popularity of the League
amongst the Muslims of Bengal. The young Bengali Muslims |
turned against the Lion of Bengal when he defied the Quaid.
Fazlul Haq’s ministry in the meantime, ran into difficulty
when Hussein Shaheed Suharwardy and Khwaja Nazimuddin,
both Muslim Leaguers resigned as Fazlul Haq had refused to obey
the directives of the Quaid. Because of this Haq had to forge a new
ministry which he did with the support of the Congress. This
ministry, however, lasted only 16 months and it fell in 1943 after
the Bengal famine.
In the 1946 elections out of 200 Muslim seats in Bengal the
Muslim League won 194 seats and Fazlul Haq’s Krishak Proja_ .
Party could capture only 6 seats. This was due to thesemerging
realization that in an undivided India the Hindus would dominate
all spheres of economic, political and administrative activity which
would deprive the Muslims of their rightful share.
Hussain Shaheed Suharwardy
The resounding success of the Muslim League in the Bengal
provincial assembly elections was also due to the support the
League received from Suharwardy, an opponent of Fazlul Haq.
and a renowned Bengali leader from West Bengal.
Hussain Shaheed Suharwardy, was born at Midnapur, West
Bengal, in 1892. He was the younger son of Justice Sir Zahid ;
Suharwardy. Unlike Fazlul Haq he was not a rabble rouser. He ~
was flamboyant, rich and extravagant. The death of his wife and
_, $0n, soon after marriage, left him a lonely man who drowned his
'’ sorrows in “drinking, dancing and partying"!®. Highly intelligent
and fluent in English, it was only at the age of 38 that he began to
learn to speak Bengali. But like Fazlul Haq he dreamt of a Bengal
for the Bengalis. Although he was aware that under the Hindus