202 Tragedy of Errors
League it would mean a confederation which was not Within hig
right.
Pakistan’s national day falls on March 23, each year when the
historic Pakistan resolution was moved by a prominent Benga;
citizen demanding a right for the Muslims of India to have thei,
own homeland. Exactly thirty one years later the same Bengali
were demanding a separate homeland fr OPA themselves, this time
to get rid of Punjabi domination. Not religion but SOClO-econom;,
and political factors were this time the reason for the Secon4
divide, The Bangladesh Kendra Chatra Sangram Parisha
(Central Students Action Committee) announced that March 23
would be observed as Protiorodh Dibash (Resistance Day),
All government and private building flew the Bangladesh flag
Instead of the crescent and star the golden sun in the centre of a
rich green field fluttered atop every shop and housetop, Taxis,
rickshaws and hand carts sported tiny flags indicating their
support for an independent Bangladesh. The Bangabondhu took
the salute as Col. M. A. G. Osmani (retired) led his marching —
column (later to become the core of the Mukti Bahini) in front of /
the makeshift dias. Retired Maj. Gen. Majid stood by the side of
Mujib, proudly proclaiming to the world that Bangladesh had
come into being. The martial law authorities apparently looked
the other away at this ‘unilateral declaration of Independence’. -
(People in Saidpur in North Bengal, where there was a large
concentration of Beharis, however, had the courage to defy the
Awami League by openly displaying the Pakistani flag. No amount
of personal danger could sway them away from their loyalty to
their country of adoption).
There was no way to stop this display of anti-Pakistan feelings
except to use military force. The question that must have kept
many of those in authority awake for nights on end.must have
been: Do the citizens of a country have a right to ask for secession’
If they do, what is the duty of the government? suppress it with all
the force at their command or become a party to the break up of
one s own country? Political scientists have not found an answe!
' tp this waxed and complicated problem. .
2 The Sikhs of Punjab have been asking for a separate homeland
from New Delhi since’ 1984. They sacrificed more than 15,000
a Tens of thousands were in detention without tit:
é indian Security forces had unlimited powers and orders
shoot to kill. Amnesty International in thei képort(fok |the ye"