244 Tragedy of Errors
h 19, the plan for a military action against dissident, a
coccabivnista en presented to General Tikka and Genera] Abd
Hamid, the COS. It was accepted in toto recalls Genera] Raja
General Hamid wanted to ensure complete security of the pla).
and told Raja that the contents were not to be disclosed except o,
a strictly need-to-know basis. Sector commanders only, therefore
were taken into confidence. ~~
Commander 57 Brigade, Brigadier Jahanzeb Arbab, visited 9
East Bengal Regiment at Joydebpur on March 19. On the way
back his route was obstructed by a loaded railway wagon which
had been placed on the railway crossing by the locals. Jahanzeb, a
Pathan from Peshawar, known for his assertiveness in the army,
ordered the commanding officer to have the obstacle removed "|
want this barricade removed in 20 minutes. In case of any
opposition use maximum force" thundered the brigadier. "No body
can stop us we can move in any direction, whenever and wherever
we want" added Jahanzeb with an air of arrogance.
The crowd did not budge. Shots rang out and there was an
exchange of fire. Troops of 2 East Bengal carried out the
instructions of their superiors but fired their 63 rounds
reluctantly and mostly in the air. Only 2 civilians were killed. Five
Bengali soldiers who were not willing to shoot on their own people
deserted with their arms and ammunition. This incident further
added to the tension between the army and the Bengalis.
The decision for suppressing the insurgency in East Pakistan
by military force, if it becomes necessary, was made on March 22,
1971 at a meeting between the President, the governor and the
martial law administrator at Dacca. No party leader opposed the
use of force to re-instate the government’s authority. On March
23, Pakistan’s National Day, Dacca wore a grim look. Instead of
the Pakistani parcham (flag) black flags fluttered on every house
and vehicle. On the afternoon of March 23, when Dacca had give?
its unanimous vote against a United Pakistan,the armed forces
chiefs also conveyed their recommendation of/a military action
ha ay the emergency plan to restore law and order
/
wae it was not till March 24, that the final decision
wami League and its supporters was taken.
avenues for seeking a political solution, short ‘no Pakista?
, of making