470 Tragedy of Errors
By the time the real fighting started in November the troops
had been engaged in fighting an elusive enemy for over eight
months. They had by then become tired and exhausted. Their
morale was further adversely affected when they began to realise
that the local population had turned against them. Every day that
; passed brought no relief or reinforcements. A feeling of isolation
and strategic encirclement began to creep in when contact with
other units and formations began to be lost due to the activities of
the guerrillas. "General Niazi had lost the will to fight on
December 7"!6 noted Justice Hamood-ur-Rahman.
An army, hated and despised by its own people, cannot be
expected to retain its morale nor its discipline for long. That was
the situation into which the army had been placed because of the
follies of its leadership in 1971. Indian propaganda and the
international electronic and print media carried exaggerated
;stories of the success by the Mukti Bahini as part of an
orchestrated psychological campaign against the troops in East
Pakistan, which also had an impact on the fighting spirit of the
soldiers.
Lack of air support
In modern warfare air power plays almost a decisive role. The
side that can achieve even local air superiority can cause so great a
damage to ground forces, logistic installations and command
headquarters that further military operations become untenable.
The air situation in East Pakistan was even worse. Just three days
after the western front was opened the Indian air force succeeded
in making the lone PAF squadron in-effective. The only airfield
available was made non-operational and when the remaining PAF
: pilots were flown out during the war the skies over East Pakistan
were totally dominated by the IAF. It fully exploited the third
dimension of warfare, which hastened the fall of Dacca.
Naval Blockade
With the banning of overflights over Indian territory by Mrs.
Gandhi after the ‘Ganga’ incident at <a only way to re
supply East Pakistan was by a circuitous route via Sri Lanka by |
sea. As the D Day drew near the Indian navy imposed 4 naval |
blockade of East Pakistan thus cutting off the only remaining link —
with the eastern wing. |
|