ays Tragedy of Errors
the steamy surface of East Pakistan. The expectations of the ~
Bengalis had been aroused. They were looking forward tg
handling real power for the first time. Suddenly Yahya pulled the
carpet from under their feet letting loose a flood of resentment ,.
which he could not control. Having allowed the Bengali emotions
to rise to a pitch, Yahya made the migtake-ofthe-century by not
handing over power to the majority party which had the support
of almost the entire population of East Pakistan. After starting a
democratic.process he should not have changed his stand in mid-
stream. Whatever may have been the repercussions by the
People’s Party in West Pakistan, what should have been crystal
clear wasy that the will to stay united would be broken if the
political right of the Bengalis to form a government at the Centre
As taken away from them.
\"? The most significant cause for the break up of Pakistan was,
therefore, the postponement of the national assembly session”
without giving a fresh date. The Sheikh’s uncompromising
) attitude set the/ship of staté on a collision course. The refiisal of
' | the chairman of the People’s Party to join the national assembly
; session on 3 teh pashiot it further into more troubled waters,
: leaving president ahya the impossible task of saving it from
| being wrecked.
One can only come to the conclusion that Mr BHutto, either
failed to make the correct assessment of the reaction by the
Awami League to the Postponement of the Session., or else
deliberately upset the democratic process for personal gains.
por ati Yahya was in a very difficult position, as
neith wh the two main actors were cooperating, Bt he who.
c=» “ae Crown must accept the credit andallthebldme. “~~
») Foreign Policy
# scum ed pouey has been dictated i ocurty
oe Presence of a powerful and unfriendly neighbour —
forced the Pakistani leadership in the 50s to join the anti- —
Sate no dot srentiongy ama alliance vith the Une
into the lap of the Soviet Unig ret orees, but it pushed et
door against Pakistan. =e = paper
‘ |
General Yahya’s success in arranging a rapprochement
ad byrlineonee States and China ran. set appreciated by
on who did help Pakistan, ‘marginally, during the