416 Tragedy of Errors
Qadir, could never for-see that it will be through his brigade
that the final blow would be struck and the fate of entire Eastern
Command would be sealed if he let the enemy slip by or, as it
happened, fly over.
Major General Gurbaksh Singh Gill, was commanding 101
Communication Zone with his headquarters at Gauhati. He had
the normal compliments of an infantry division. Three brigades
and the full support of other arms. Although he was not given a
major role in the invasion plans it was destined that his successor
Major General G. S. Nagra should get the credit for reaching
nearest to Dacca first.
101 Communication Zone opened their account on 18
November, three days before the Indian army brazenly invaded
East Pakistan. A battalion of Indian infantry attacked Kamalpur. |
Captain Siddiqui moved his mortars further forward to reach out
to the enemy. Unfortunately he ran into an ambush and most of
his mortars were destroyed. No move forward by the Indians was
made for a week.
On 27 November 31 Baloch put in a counter attack and
reoccupied Kamalpur. Captain Quddus kept a watchful eye on his
front. General Gill did not seem to be in a hurry or was he trying
to avoid casualties for his troops did not proceed any further. On 4
December 31 Baloch launched another counter attack. major
Ayub was leading the assault when he was struck down by enemy
fire. It was the thirteenth day of the war and the battle was still
confined to the clearing of border observation posts (BOPs).
Buxiganj outpost was evacuated on 4/5 December and a
on mires n was occupied at Jaggar Ghar - Karn - Sherpur.
wsaurhet its sais valle at bay for another three days 31 Baloch
Indian commander t races at Jamalpur on 7 December. an
launch on attack aon ree more days to assemble his forces to
J. , gainst a fairly well entrenched battalion at
amalpur.
The dhsck, failek, wot attacked Jamalpur on 9/10 December
afternoon of 10 Davciaber ene peycaclogiea! wartare. 0 I
Sultan. The letter w a liv wed settee to Lieutenant Colonie
letter is reproduced = eee by a civilian messenger. —
"The Indo-Pakistan W eee General Shaukat Riza’s boo
ar of 1971", which is gratefully
_ acknowledged.