_
| 428 Tragedy of Errors
munication regarding the ceasefire
Manekshaw, a be ban et 2.30 pmon 1 5 December from
(not surrender) hen at New Delhi. By 11.30 pm Manekshaw
the American em rar der to his advanci
ked Niazi to surrender to his advancing
“aa 8 Ee eer ‘ion a located. He assured Niazi that al]
a who surrender shall be treated with dignity and respect
that soldiers are entitled to and that he would abide by the
provisions of the Geneva Convention.
He also warned Niazi that if he (Niazi) did not comply with
what he (Manekshaw) had stated he would leave him with no
other alternative but to resume his offensive with the utmost
vigour at 9 a. m. Indian Standard Time, 16 December.
Manekshaw’s signal addressed directly to General Niazi was
received at 11.30 p.m on 15 December. Niazi sent a copy of the
signal to GHQ. Previous to this signal Manekshaw had been
broadcasting messages to General Niazi to surrender. He had also
addressed some of them to General Farman on 8 and 9 December
assuming him to be the commander Eastern Command as he had
sent the signal to the UN. He was guaranteeing the safety and
security of all those who would surrender. It was the usual age-old
psychological warfare technique by the aggressor.
While Niazi was contemplating as to what should be his next
step the Indian para battalion which had been dropped at Tangail
moved rapidly towards Dacca using an approach which was not
being held. As the sun rose over Dacca on 16 December the Indian
soldiers were at the gates of the capital. General Officer
- Commanding 101 Communication zone Major General Gandarv
Nagra was with them. At 8 a. m a brief and curt message
addressed to General Niazi recei .
was received from General Nagra. The
ton Bt was delivered by General Nagra’s ADC who came on a
ee ;
hatistion tr ait tee accompanied by some soldiers of the para
y cear Abdullah, I am at Mirpur bridge. The
game < up. you have done well to bring an end to the fighting. !
sugge
8gest you give yourself up. Send somebody to receive me”.
Admiral Sharif, Farman J
? ’ am iddiaui
present when the message for omen vas so oa
read it. There was a hush all around pete b
askine Nav; . und. Farman broke the silence by
g Niazi what is
response. Farman a Jour resistance potential? There was 0¢
gain asked him how long can you fight? agal”.