Political Quagmire (Beginning of the End) M49
Maulana Abdul Hameed Khan Bhashani, the chief of the East
Pakistan National Awami Party, (pro-Péking), was initially
strongly opposed to Sheikh Mujib. He was against elections and
wanted the assured supply of food before anything else. He was
later willing to contest against the Awami League provided the
President would free his detained workers. This was not accepted
and Bhashani gradually changed his stance and moved away from
his demand of provincial autonomy He later declared that the
Lahore Resolution envisaged two states and, therefore, the
eastern wing should become an independent state®3,
Khwaja Khairuddin, Abdul Qasim, Ata-ul-Haq and Shafi-ul-
Azam of the Council Muslim League did criticise the six points of
Mujib and praised the Legal Framework Order but they were all
discredited East Pakistani politicians who, neither had the energy,
nor the funds, nor the political acumen to sway the crowds away
from the demand of total autonomy which was being openly
preached by Mujib and his supporters.
The other political party which claimed to be a national party,
but had only a feable voice in East Pakistan, was the Pakistan
Democratic Party (PDP). Nurul Amin, a Bengali politician, but
discredited in East Pakistan, was its president with Abdus Salam
as the president of its eastern wing. Mahmood Ali, who migrated
to West Pakistan after the creation of Bangladesh, was its vice
president. None of them had any significant say in the politics in
East Pakistan. The PDP public meetings were often disturbed by
the Awami League workers who shouted anti-party slogans, broke
chairs and took away the microphones:**. The followers of the
PDP were not large enough to resist and quietly acquiesced.
Mahmood Ali recalls that he was ’gheraoed’ (surrounded) by a
large number of Awami League workers in Dacca who were
forcing him to sign a piece of paper withdrawing his anti-Mujib
statements which he had made earlier. He was also compelled to
come to the microphone and read that out for the information of
the public. Mahmood Ali did utilise the platform so provided to air
his own political views as well”.
He also mentioned about their unfair election tactics of
Spreading false information. Twenty-four hours before the election
day the Awami League workers in the Sonaganj constituency of
Sylhet district spread a rumour that Mahmood Ali had withdrawn