175 

Mid & South-eastern Sector 
233. 
Last Minute Changes in Area of Responsibility. After Major General Rahim 
took over as GOC of this division, he made certain regrouping within the division itself by 
moving units from one place to another which had an adverse effect and materially 
affected the formation operational readiness. Some of the readjustment at a time when 
war was imminent, displayed lack of foresight and as events proved the shifting of                   
15 Baloch from Comilla and 30 Baloch from Laksham proved disastrous. The newly-
inducted units in these areas were neither familiar with the defences nor had any 
opportunity to be acquainted with the area.511  
234. 
Incorrect Assessment by the GHQ  
a. 
The deployment of the 53 Brigade at Feni on 19 November, was justified 
by Major General Rahim and the Eastern Command on the ground that 
this was done under the instructions of GHQ. No written instructions to 
this effect could, however, be produced. The only order available is on 
what came two days later on 22 November and reads as follows: 
From Chief of Staff for Commander, Eastern Command. Apparent 
enemy is aiming at capture of Chittagong from land and sea. Vital 
defend all approaches to Chittagong at all cost. To this end, reinforce 
defences of Chittagong area by pulling out troops from less important 
sectors as necessary.512   
b. 
It should have been apparent to the commander, who was not new to the 
East Pakistan, that it would be hazardous in the extreme to attempt to 
secure the road and rail communications to Chittagong through the Feni 
Chicken-neck in view of the fact that these lines of communications were, 
as already pointed out, running so close to the border as to be with in the 
range even of enemy small arms. The location of troops at Feni was faulty 
planning. It would have been more profitable to keep this brigade at 
Laksham, a carefully prepared fortress, to defend the road junction at 
Mudafarganj and to bring up some troops from Chittagong to the Feni 
River to protect the approach to Chittagong from that end.513 
235. 
Sudden Collapse of Centre. The sudden collapse of 23 Punjab and 25 FF put 
the whole divisional defence plan into jeopardy and created a serious situation.            

511 The Report of Hamoodur Rehman Commission, 446.  
512 Ibid.  
513 Ibid., 446-447.