14 

and political levels. China played its part in the UN Security Council where she 
supported Pakistani perspective in a strong manner. 
29. 
United Kingdom. During the initial months of the conflict, UK remained neutral. 
However, after Operation SEARCHLIGHT, it started to openly support India. On 23 
June, it stopped all economic aid to Pakistan.31 It also allowed setting up of a High 
Commission by “Bangladesh Government in exile” in London from September 1971.32  
30. 
Muslim Countries. Pakistan could traditionally bank on the support from Muslim 
countries. India in order to guard against any reaction from these countries “developed a 
set of tactics… This was directed at dividing Pakistan‟s support within the Islamic bloc 
by playing upon the serious divisions inherent in this grouping of nations and thus 
minimizing the support, other than verbal, extended to the government of Pakistan.”33 As 
a result, while the Islamic states were virtually unanimous in their support to Pakistan… 
The degree of substantive military and financial assistance extended to Pakistan by 
them was much less.”34   
Operational Environment  
31. 
Moral Aspects 
a. 
Leadership and Decision Making. Pakistan and its‟ armed forces were 
lead by General Yahya Khan. As head of state and Commander-in-Chief, 
he had gathered around him a select group of army officers, who were 
handling most of the affairs.35 For quite sometime, civilians were also kept 
at bay: bureaucracy was made to operate through two brigadiers, which 
denied Yahya their valuable advice on matters of national security. 
Although himself an intelligent man, “The decision making (by Yahya) was 
marked by a paucity of paperwork, analysis, and thought and as 
colleagues observed the decisions were impulsive and sometimes 
contradictory.36 During this time institutions meant to provide higher 
direction of war namely the Defence Committee of the Cabinet, National 
Security Council and Joint Services Secretariat lay dormant, which 
introduced shortcuts in the decision making process. 

31 Aziz, World Powers and the 1971 Breakup of Pakistan, 162.  
32 Ibid., 165.  
33 Sisson & Rose, War and Secession, 204.  
34 Ibid., 205.  
35 Ayoob &  Subrahmanyam, The Liberation War, 95. 
36 Nawaz, Crossed Swords, 251.