2 

5. 
The December 1970 elections further politicised the troubles of East Pakistanis. 
As a result, Awami League, led by Mujibur Rehman, swept polls in East Pakistan 
winning absolute majority in National Assembly. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto of Pakistan Peoples 
Party emerged as a runner up. These election results indicated with devastating clarity 
the polarization of popular feelings between East and West Pakistan. Faced with this 
unexpected outcome, the leaders of military regime and Bhutto sought for other means 
to maintain their pre-eminence in Pakistani politics. He tried to stall the convening of the 
National Assembly, an act that added fuel to the fire.   
6. 
Mujib, unable to get his fair share in power, took an extreme position. He 
declined any invitation to visit Islamabad for talks. The political situation got worsened. 
Yahya – Mujib talks in Dacca broke down on 23 March when the Awami League 
proposed Pakistan should be made a confederation. On 25 March, the military started a 
crack down in East Pakistan to restore ever deteriorating law and order situation. 
Though the military within a month reasonably restored law and order situation but their 
actions and heavy handedness further alienated the masses in East Pakistan. The 
condition worsened beyond control.  
7. 
After Yahya Khan‟s military crackdown in East Pakistan, the Indian government 
with revisionist designs moved into a higher gear. India saw in the crisis an opportunity 
of the century to cut Pakistan into two. Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) operatives 
smuggled out Tajuddin Ahmed, an Awami League leader, to a border village in India to 
proclaim independence of Bangladesh and installed him as head of the Provisional 
Bangladesh Government in Mujibnagar, a house in Calcutta rented by RAW. On 31 
March, the Indian parliament adopted a resolution assuring the East Pakistani 
insurgents that their struggle and sacrifices will receive the wholehearted support of the 
people of India. The Indians first secretly, and later openly, began building up a rebel 
force called the Mukti Bahini.  
8. 
Where the Pakistanis believed that the Indians would restrict their assistance to 
moral and material support, the Indian government ordered plans for a campaign to take 
over East Pakistan. It however, deferred the implementation in light of their Army Chief 
General Manekshaw‟s view that the army needed six to seven months to prepare for 
war. The Indians planned their offensive in November when the weather in Himalayas 
would make Chinese intervention more difficult.