155 

CONCLUSION 
197. 
When the battle of Dacca started, all divisions of the Eastern Command had 
already been seriously unbalanced and had lost cohesion:- 
a. 
9 (P) Division had been split in three with the major portion of 107 Brigade 
fighting its war toward Khulna. 57 Brigade designated fortress had fallen 
to Indian 4 Division and it had crossed over the Ganga into 16 Division. 
Major General Ansari, with a weak adhoc force (Colonel Afridi‟s force), 
was anxiously awaiting future developments at Faridpur.  
b. 
Whereas, the 16 Pakistani Division had been cut in two with no hope of a 
linkup. The divisional commander had been separated from his main 
headquarters as a result of the roadblocks established by 20 Mountain 
Division at Pirganj. He was heli-lifted into Bogra on the night of 9/10 
December.  
c. 
As regards the 14 Division, the divisional headquarters and remnants took 
shelter in Bhairab Bazar behind the Meghna and awaited reinforcement 
by the fleeing troops from across the river at Ashuganj and from their 
brigades at Maulvi Bazar and Sylhet. This division took no further part in 
the operations and stayed as mere spectator in Bhairab Bazar.  
d. 
The 39 – A Division under Major General Rahim had ceased to exist, 4 
Corps had captured Chandpur and Daudkandi and the GOC was 
evacuated to Dacca. Most of his forces were taking shelter in the strongly 
prepared defences in Maynamati while a considerable portion of his 
troops was wandering about in the Laksham - Chandpur area, where they 
surrendered in small parties in the next few days.  
e. 
36 – A Division was still holding on positions south of Tangail. Though, its 
troops were battle exhausted and fatigued.  
198. 
In next 3 – 4 days the Indians closed in toward Dacca from north and east. The 
defences around Dacca were without troops. The feeling of impending defeat and 
insecurity pervaded Dacca. The UN had arranged an airlift to evacuate foreign nationals 
on 8 December and requested India to guarantee safe air evacuation from Dacca. The 
same day Indian increased their propaganda; Manekshaw beamed a special message 
to the Pakistani forces to surrender, telling them their condition was utterly hopeless.  
199. 
Thousands of leaflets were dropped over Pakistani garrisons, asking them to 
surrender. On 9 December, Governor Malik sent his second message to Yahya Khan to