20 

integrity and national independence in war. The border was divided into the following six 
sectors: Dhaka, Chittagong, Sylhet, Dinajpur, Rajshahi, and Jessore. Each sector was 
composed of six wings of 450 men each. Most of the men were Bengalis while their 
officers came both from East and West Pakistan. Mymensingh had an independent 
wing. The total strength of the East Pakistan Rifles at the time of the military action by 
the Pakistan Army was 16,000. There were at that time only 4 Bengali officers in the 
EPR. 
44. 
The total strength of the Bengali elements in the armed forces and para-military 
forces in East Pakistan in March, 1971 was about 21,000. 
The Link Snaps 

45. 
After March 3, 1971 a defacto Bangladesh had come into existence and the 
loyalty of the Bengali officers and men had been put to great strain. Ex-servicemen had 
already formed a para-military force in support of the Awami League. It is remarkable 
that Bengali personnel in uniform did not desert and go over to the other side during 
those critical three weeks in March. They must surely have been emotionally very 
disturbed, not knowing what the future was going to be. But they still were committed to 
the oath they had taken at the Pakistan Military Academy and in the regimental centres. 
All that was needed was a spark to ignite a chain reaction which would force them to 
cast aside the loyalty to one‟s country. 
46. 
The spark came in the form of a military action when the East Bengal Regiments 
and the Bengali elements in the East Pakistan Rifles were required to hand over their 
weapons to the West Pakistanis. Quite expectedly they refused to do so, and when 
were faced with a military confrontation they rebelled and fought their way into the lap of 
the enemy, turned protector.  
47. 
On the contrary, many Bengalis who were serving in East Pakistan in the mixed 
units, where Bengalis were present along with West Pakistani troops did not revolt. 
According to Kamal Matinuddin, “It was only when the Pakistan Army killed Bengali 
intellectuals and servicemen that they revolted”.  
Formation of the Mukti Bahini 
48. 
A colourful account of the creation of Bangladesh and the formation of the Mukti 
Bahini was given by Mr. Nur-ul-Qader, former deputy commissioner of Pabna, a small 
town in the north-west of East Pakistan. According to him, when the Pakistan Army     
re-established control over Pabna which had been „liberated‟ by the „freedom fighters‟ 
after March 25, he went to the border village of Chuadanga. He was later joined by