172 

225. 
Failure to Check Indian Advance South of Brahmaputra (L). Area ahead of 
River Brahmaputra (L) should have been considered as a security zone with main 
defences south of the river. This would have allowed the 36-A Division to correctly 
identify the enemy main and secondary efforts. River as a formidable obstacle could 
have also provided extra strength to the weakly constituted division.   
226. 
Decision to Abandon Jamalpur & Maymensingh. Had 93-A Brigade not 
abandoned Jamalpur and Maymensingh and held Tangail Bridge in strength, the Indians 
would not have heli-landed their troops. The wisdom of the decision to withdraw these 
troops from strong defensive positions apart, the move was an extremely hazardous one 
as the line of communication had, in the meantime, become extremely vulnerable due to 
intensification of Mukti Bahini activities.504  
227. 
Indecision to Attack Para Troops 
a. 
When the Indian helicopters dropped their forces, most of our 93-A 
Brigade was well south of Tangail. The commanders‟ indecision to 
aggressively tackle this new menace which was most vulnerable during 
their landing phase cost 36-A Division capture of its troops.  
b. 
The successful landing also badly affected the morale of own troops. 93-A 
Brigade should have kept some troops as reserve during it‟s withdrawal to 
achieve a clean break from enemy and to cater for such contingency. 
North-eastern Sector  
228. 
Withdrawal of 313 Brigade to Sylhet 
a. 
Complete front of the 27 Brigade had collapsed by night 4/5 December. 
The GOC, at this stage, ordered the brigade to withdraw to Brahmanbaria. 
The appreciation of the divisional commander, who was personally in 
control of the battle, was that the enemy with its three brigades would 
launch brigade attacks from the east and north on Brahmanbaria and 
would send the third brigade straight to Ashuganj from Sarail and thus cut 
his division out from the rear. 27 Brigade had only two battalions and a 
company with him to defend Brahmanbaria. This force was not considered 
to be sufficient to prevent encirclement, which would have given the 
enemy the control of the river (Meghna) and of Bhairab Bridge which were 
the only axes into Dacca Triangle area from the east. Realizing this 
danger, the GOC asked for permission to withdraw the 313 Brigade from 

504 The Report of Hamoodur Rehman Commission, 440.