104 

NORTH-EASTERN SECTOR315 
The Area of Operation316/ Maps – 12 & 13  
163. 
General 
a. 
North-eastern Sector stretched from Sylhet in the north to excluding 
Comilla in the south – a frontage of more than 320 kilometres. It was 
sandwiched between River Meghna/ Surma in the west and the 
international border in the east (Map - 11).  
b. 
This sector was bounded in the north and east by hills of varying heights. 
As a result, the grain of the country in the northern portion was from east 
to west. Rest, the terrain in most of the sector was low-lying plain covered 
with numerous perennial lakes.  
c. 
Sylhet and border areas in the southeastern part near Dharmanagar and 
Kailashahar had tea gardens. The rainfall in the area was very heavy with 
annual average of approximately 550 centimetres.   
d. 
The main road communication ran from north to south, that is Shillong – 
Jaintiapur – Sylhet – Maulvi Bazar – Brahmanbaria. A number of roads 
connected the border area to this main thoroughfare and then went further 
to the west on to the sites of ferries on River Meghna.  
e. 
North-eastern Sector could be further distinguished into two sub-sectors: 
Sylhet Sub-sector; and Brahmanbaria Sub-sector.   
164. 
Rivers 
a. 
River Surma. Entered the sector at Atgram, flowed south of Sylhet and 
joined Meghna west of Saidpur. Span was around 100 metres.  
b. 
River Kusyara. It entered the area close to Bhanga (India) further 
south of River Surma, moved between Magla Bazar and Fenchuganj, 
south of Saidpur before joining River Meghna. Span was 100-150 
metres. 

315 Note: The eastern portion of East Pakistan had varying types of terrain. In the area around Sylhet and to the 
east of it, it was either undulating or hilly. South of Sylhet right down to Comilla, it was an open plain area. 
Near Comilla again, there was a low hill range and south of it, it was open. In the south-eastern part of 
Chittagong hills, it was hilly and forested. Hence, for the convenience of description from the point of view of 
terrain and deployment to of Pakistan Army troops, the area has been considered under two broad sectors: 
North-eastern Sector to include Sylhet in the north to excluding Comilla in the south; and Mid & South-eastern 
Sector to include Comilla in the north and Cox’s Bazar in the south.  
316 Most of details about the Area of Operation have been taken from following books:  (a) Matinuddin, Tragedy 
of Errors, 399-406; (b) Singh, Victory in Bangladesh, 5-6 & 80-84.