86 

killed; his body was found by Indians the next morning. The rest of the 
force withdrew before dawn. It transpired later that they were advance 
elements of 32 Baloch ordered to occupy the Pirganj defences before the 
Indian thrust reached this place.  
r. 
At the same time, two companies of 8 Punjab, accompanied by tanks, 
came from Rangpur and attacked the roadblock in a spirited charge.239 
But by then, two companies of 5/11 Gorkha Rifles had also arrived and 
adequately strengthened the block. The Pakistani assault was soon 
broken by concentrated fire from Indian tanks, artillery and mortars. 
Unable to make much headway, the force withdrew. This perhaps 
constituted the search party for the General, and he went back to Rangpur 
with it.240 
s. 
Having cut the 16 Division forces in two through capturing Pirganj, the 
Indians reviewed their plan and decided to to launch a three-pronged 
attack from the north, against our rear and flank, all along the waistline 
from Hilli to Gobindganj. The main features of the plan were:- 
(1) 
202 Mountain Brigade to capture Hilli and advance eastward to link 
up with 66 Brigade in the Goraghat area and then advance to 
Bogra via Khetlal and capture it.  
(2) 
66 Mountain Brigade to advance from Nawabganj to capture 
Bhaduria and advance to Goraghat and Gobindganj to link up with 
340 Mountain Brigade.  
(3) 
340 Mountain Brigade to advance from Pirganj to capture 
Gobinganj and then advance along the main road to Bogra and 
capture it. 241 
t. 
On 10 December, the Indians were informed by Mukti Bahinis that the 
Pakistani garrisons in the Rangpur – Saidpur area were planning to 
withdraw across the Jamuna towards Dacca. To thwart such an 
eventuality, 340 Mountain Brigade ordered a roadblock to be set up in the 
area of Gaibanda. The town was occupied at 1600 hours on 10 
December. Its troops moved the same day across to the Phulchari ferry, 
where they destroyed the jetties and uprooted the rail track serving it. With 

239 Sukhwant Singh, The Liberation of Bangladesh, 173.  
240 Ibid.    
241 Singh, Victory in Bangladesh, 98-99.