31 

Rifles and the police. The reaction of such an action on the Bengali troops 
in the mixed units was/ not, however, assessed. 
b. 
Arresting of all prominent Awami League leaders. 
c. 
Imposing of martial law strictly. 
d. 
Controlling of all airfields. 
e. 
Securing of the Chittagong naval base. 
f. 
Ensuring the security of all towns. 
g. 
Cutting off East Pakistan from the rest of the world in terms of 
communication links. 
h. 
Taking away Radio and TV stations from the clutches of the Awami 
League and placing them again under the control of the government. 
76. 
A major difference between previous military actions and the one to be carried 
out in East Pakistan in March, 1971 was that the military action this time was to be 
carried out in a civil war situation and not in Aid of Civil Power as all authority had 
passed into the hands of the Awami League. Whereas, all the objectives were to be 
achieved as early as possible, the first action to be carried out was to deprive the Awami 
League of it‟s leadership. 
77. 
The troops available to General Tikka to carry out this stupendous task were:- 
a. 
14 Infantry Division consisting of four infantry brigades, an armoured 
regiment, five artillery regiments, two mortar batteries, one light anti-
aircraft battery, one commando battalion. 
b. 
The six East Bengal Regiments and the 16,000 strong East Pakistan 
Rifles were to be disarmed hence would not be part of the force required 
to re-instate the writ of the Centre. In fact, as events eventually turned out 
they joined the rebels. 
c. 
 In all, therefore, General Tikka had about 12,000 men in uniform from 
West Pakistan and 13 battalions of Mujahids and Razakars against over 
100,00 armed Bengalis and 60 million volatile local population spread 
over 55,000 square miles of isolated territory cut up by non-negotiable 
rivers and streams.  
The Crackdown 
78. 
It did not come too soon. If a pre-emptive strike had not been taken Colonel 
Osmani‟s plan would have come into action. The EBR and EPR were to rebel and 
capture Dacca airfield and the Chittagong sea port. The defecting police and EPR units