48 

(4) 
River Kabadak. Ran from north to south just east of the 
international frontier. It was about 75 metres wide.      
c. 
Military movement across this area had to overcome water obstacles at 
every ten to fifteen kilometres.  
129. 
Important Towns 
a. 
Jhenida. It was in Kushtia Sub-sector. Was an important communication 
centre in the northern half of this sector and located at the intersection of 
the main highway connecting Jessore and Hardinge Bridge and 
Chaudanga to Magura and Goalundo Ghat. The bridge was tactically 
important as it provided the only land link between the Southwestern and 
Northwestern sectors. 
b. 
Jessore. In the Jessore Sub-sector, it was the most prestigious town, with 
an important cantonment, in this sector. It was a communication centre 
from where a network of roads and railway lines ran in all directions, 
chiefly toward Hardinge Bridge in the north, Dacca in the east, Khulna in 
the south and Calcutta in the west. Jessore had an all-weather airfield.  
c. 
Khulna. The next most important town was Khulna, the second biggest 
industrial town in East Pakistan. It was linked to the port town of Chalna, 
which provided an exit to the Bay of Bengal and a link with West Pakistan. 
130. 
Communication Infrastructure 
a. 
The most important road in this sector ran north to south connecting 
Hardinge Bridge, Jhendia, Jessore and Khulna. It ran parallel to and at a 
distance of 45-70 kilometres from the Indian border.  
b. 
Kushtia was the hub of railways in the north. It was connected to North-
western Sector through Hardinge Bridge and on the other side was linked 
to Darsana and Jessore – Khulna.  
c. 
Sub-sector wise significant road/ tracks were:- 
(1) 
Kushtia Sub-sector. Important roads in this sub-sector which ran 
from west to east leading toward the main ferries on the Ganges 
were:- 
(a) 
Meherpur – Chaudanga – Jhenida – Faridpur. This was 
comparatively long route to Ganges. It also involved the 
likelihood of fighting in the built-up areas of Meherpur and 
Chaudanga.