99 

b. 
FJ Sector planned to carry out its task as under:-294 
(1) 
6 Bihar less two companies to infiltrate and attack Haluaghat from 
the south. 
(2) 
Two companies 6 Bihar to infiltrate and capture Sarchapur. 
(3) 
Mukti Bahini to isolate Pakistani defences in Haluaghat and 
Sarchapur simultaneously with these operations. 
(4) 
BSF to advance on the Baghmara - Mymensingh Axis to make a 
show of force toward Mymensingh. 
c. 
On of the night of 4/5 December, the 6 Bihar column hit the Pakistani 
forces about three kilometres southeast of Haluaghat. The Biharis 
captured the position but came under fire from mortars and jeep-mounted 
machine guns in Haluaghat. Firing went on the whole day and the Biharis 
closed in on the Haluaghat defences on the night of 5/6 December. On 6 
December Haluaghat was attacked by air; our troops slipped out on the 
night of 6/7 December.295 
d. 
After the fall of Haluaghat, 6 Bihar elements advanced to Sarchapur, and 
threatened Sarchapur from the southeast by last light on 7 December. 
Meantime the second column of two companies moved south and 
threatened Phulpur. Own troops abandoned Sarchpur, which the Biharis 
occupied after first light on 9 December.296 
e. 
The troops of 33 Punjab were concentrated at Mymensingh, which too 
had been developed as a fortress but on 10 December, the whole brigade 
was ordered to withdraw and take up defensive positions on the Goari 
Hillocks, twenty mile northwest of Dacca. This order was given because 
by this time, the enemy had pierced through the 39-A Division in east and 
the Indian 9 Division in the west was heading for Dacca. The efforts of the 
Eastern Command to get troops from other areas had, in the absence of 
any pre-planning in that behalf, also failed because of the non-availability 
of necessary transport facilities across the big rivers. It was, in these 
circumstances that the 93-A Brigade had been ordered to leave its 
prepared positions at Jamalpur and Mymensingh.297 

294 Singh, Victory in Bangladesh, 160.  
295 Ibid.   
296 Ibid. 
297 The Report of Hamoodur Rehman Commission, 440.