1 
INTRODUCTION1 
1. 
Shared interest in the protection of cultural, economic and political rights 
brought the Muslims of British India to a common platform, with the leaders of 
Bengal playing a seminal role in the formation of the Muslim League and the 
formulation of the demand for Pakistan. After the state came into existence, the unity 
of the two wings came under strain as a result of several factors; some of which 
were inherent in demography, differential-colonial-legacy and resource endowment, 
while others arose from narrow and short-sighted politics. 
2. 
Difference with the distant centre‟s view began to surface in East Pakistan soon 
after independence, when a group of students protested the Quaid-i-Azam‟s speech in 
Dacca in 1948, that Urdu alone would be the national language. Two years later in 
1950, the East Pakistan Muslim League asked for maximum autonomy. Then in 1954, 
after elections in East Pakistan, the United Front, which won with overwhelming 
majority, asked for a complete autonomy according to the Pakistan Resolution. The 
central government‟s manipulation to deny power to the elected majority in East 
Pakistan added to the accumulating grievances. Delays in constitution-making and 
holding national elections exacerbated East Pakistan‟s sense of exclusion.  
3. 
East Pakistan‟s isolation during the 1965 War and its lack of self-defence 
capability gave a fillip to the existing demand for autonomy. In March 1966, the Awami 
League leader Sheikh Mujibur Rehman put forward the Six Points. Ayub Khan‟s highly 
centralised government equated this demand for autonomy with secessionism.  
4. 
Alert to the brewing trouble and growing alienation in East Pakistan, India 
encouraged the separatist sentiments. The same year, a group of extremists in Agartala 
planned sabotage. A raid on an armoury led to the arrest of twenty-eight people 
including armed forces personnel in January 1969. The government also implicated 
Mujibur Rehman in this case, though he was in custody during the Agartala Conspiracy 
period. Mujib‟s Six Points and his trial made him a hero out of nothing. As if this was not 
enough, the federal government‟s indifference to the plight of the people in East 
Pakistan after 1970‟s flood broadened the mistrust fissures.  

1 Most of the details or historical facts have been taken from following books: (a) Abdul Sattar, Pakistan’s 
Foreign Policy 1947-2005: A Concise History (Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2007), 112-122. (b) Stephen 
Philip Cohen, The Idea of Pakistan (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2006), 73-77. (c) Sumit Ganguly, The 
Origins of War in South Asia: Indo-Pakistani Conflicts Since 1947 (Lahore: Vanguard Books Private Limited, 
1988), 101-126.