42 

PART – II 
THE WAR: PLAYING THE LAST ACT  
Terrain  
109. 
East Pakistan, separated by more than 1600 kilometres from West Pakistan, was 
surrounded on three sides by hostile Indian territory. On the fourth side lay the Bay of 
Bengal which could easily be dominated or blocked by the Indian Navy. Only a small tip 
on the south-eastern border had an opening towards Burma. The communication 
infrastructure in East Pakistan was poor. Most of its roads ended on river banks from 
where the loads had to be transferred on to steamers. It had Chittagong and Khulna as 
two sea-going ports. 
110. 
Geographically, East Pakistan had several advantages. It lay between West 
Bengal and Assam and the narrow neck joining the two could be cut off provided 
sufficient troops could be spared for such an offensive operation while keeping the 
defences intact. Calcutta the pride of India and its economic soul was only thirty miles 
away. It was well within range of the Pakistan Air Force stationed in East Pakistan. Any 
movement of ground forces in the direction of Calcutta could cause a panic in the 
sprawling city of 10 million people. The dissident elements of Nagas and Mizo could be 
encouraged to rise up against the central government in New Delhi. China could contain 
a fair amount of Indian forces along its border, during the period when Himalayan 
passes were not snow bound.45 
111. 
East Pakistan also had its vulnerabilities. A number of salients jutting into Indian 
territory could easily be chopped off. All communications, to Chittagong and Sylhet 
could be cut off without difficulty as the rail and road network passed very close to the 
international border. Then, due to major water obstacles the defence had to be 
compartmentalised. The concept of keeping central reserves would not work as 
movement to threatened sectors would take a considerable amount of time. With hardly 
any air-lift capability it would be virtually impossible to react to an enemy threat in time.46  
112. 
Terrain-wise, the Province could be distinguished into five sub-sectors (Map – 3). 
The Southwestern Sub-sector located between the Bay of Bengal and Ganges, while 
the Northwestern Sub-sector was bounded by Ganges and Jamuna. The Central Sub-
sector was wedged in north between the Jamuna and Brahmaputra/ Meghna. Whereas, 
along the eastern border with India, the province had two sectors: Northeastern Sector 

45 Matinuddin, Tragedy of Error,334. 
46 Ibid., 334-35.