168 

TACTICAL ASPECTS 
South-western Sector  
215. 
Premature Evacuation from Jessore 
a. 
The fall of Jessore, the strongest fortress in East Pakistan, was not only a 
serious blow to 9 (P) Division defences, but it considerably weakened the 
morale of the troops in East Pakistan. 107 Brigade decided to vacate 
Jessore when the defences on the both sides of the Indian penetration 
were still intact. The brigade commander without verifying decided that the 
defences had been smashed by the enemy tanks and there was nothing 
that could stop the enemy from entering Jessore immediately.  
b. 
He did not wait for the orders of the GOC. According to Hamoodur 
Rehman Commission Inquiry, on 6 December at approximately 1600 
hours when the GOC rang Brigadier Hayat to enquire whether he had 
gone forward to see what was happening. He came to know that the 
brigade commander had not gone ahead. As the GOC was talking to him, 
he paused a little and then said, “Sir, the enemy has entered Jessore 
cantonment; Khuda Hafiz… and put the telephone down.”498  As we know 
the enemy had not entered Jessore till then. Jessore was not lost due to 
lack of reserves but due to “premature evacuation”. 
216. 
Delayed Readjustment of Defences 
a. 
During the second week of November, when 107 Brigade fell back to 
general line of Afra – Jingergacha, it carried out deployment without much 
thought about keeping reserves or tactical dictates to occupy Jessore. 
The redeployment left the brigade with one and a half battalion for 
creating reserves or guarding Jessore but the brigade preferred occupying 
less threatened areas: Benapole by portion of 27 FF; and Satkhira with  
15 FF.  
b. 
It is believed that 15 FF, which was placed at Satkhira, some 30 miles 
away from Jhingergacha to guard a possible axis, could have been 
withdrawn to Jessore, to give the defensive positions more depth, 
especially, after the enemy had exposed its hand and was moving toward 
Jessore.  

498 The Report of Hamoodur Rehman Commission, 434.