165 

(b) 
Neglected Political Purpose. Connected to this incorrect 
assumption is the assertion that the forward defensive 
posture adopted in East Pakistan was desired politically but 
was not militarily viable. Given the most accepted 
Calusewitzian Concept that War is an extension of Policy, 
this assertion is absurd. There is no sense in a militarily 
viable option which does not serve the political purpose or 
vice versa as the war is not the end in itself but the means 
to achieving the political end. 
(c) 
Failure to Reconcile Political Ends and Military Means.  
The underlying reason for this assertion was, perhaps, our 
inability to reconcile the political ends to the military means. 
If the political end was to defend every inch of East 
Pakistan and the military means were not sufficient then it 
required reconciliation of the end with the available means. 
This would have then led to a solution which would have 
been both politically acceptable and militarily viable. This 
inflexibility and attempt to defend everything with means 
which were insufficient ended up with Eastern Command 
defending nothing. 
(d) 
Total Reliance on Military Element. The military objective 
reflected our total reliance on military element alone. A 
better option under the circumstances would have been to 
defend the core areas only for a sufficient length of time in 
which the operations could have been developed in West 
Pakistan or for other elements of national power to have 
been employed to help in developing a more acceptable 
political solution. Dependence on military element alone to 
the exclusion of other elements led us to a „win all or lose 
all‟ situation with the dice loaded against Pakistan, which 
was certainly not a rational approach. 
212. 
Defeat of Military Strategy. Sun Tzu considered it of “supreme importance in 
war to attack the enemy‟s strategy”. Our strategy i.e. “defence of East Pakistan lies in 
the west” was defeated even before it could be implemented. The linkage between the