16 

maintenance.40 It‟s effects were visible during 1971, as the armed forces 
had to struggle in equipping and maintaining themselves. On the contrary, 
Indians had been developing their armed forces at a fast pace ever since 
1962 War with China. Post 1965 situation did not affect them much, as 
their main supplies from Soviet Union remained intact. 
c. 
Training and Operational Planning. Indian army went through a 
methodical phase of preparation and training for the impending 
operations. They took the necessary time required from the political 
leadership and focused on the task by conducting war games and training 
own troops and Mukti Bahini in an ideal environment. On the contrary, 
Pakistan Army‟s commitments in martial law duties and ancillary tasks 
deprived them of the chance to hone their military skills and prepare for 
war.   
33. 
Military Strategy 
a. 
Pakistan. Our military strategy can be summed up in one sentence. 
„Defence of East Pakistan lies in the west‟. This concept was developed 
well before 71, when it was generally perceived that West Pakistan would 
be the main theatre of war. It was thus felt that in the eastern wing, which 
was geographically separated and ideally suited for defensive battles, a 
purely defensive strategy would be adopted, while in West Pakistan, 
operations were planned to capture objectives of strategic importance to 
strengthen the post war bargaining position. 
b. 
India. India decided to adopt a defensive strategy in the west and an 
offensive one in the east. In the east, while Dacca was visualized to be 
the ultimate objective, the initial plans were restricted to the capture of 
territory up to the river lines. Land operations were to be launched from all 
three sides. Indian Navy was tasked to effect a naval blockade in the 
south whereas IAF was to achieve complete air supremacy from the 
outset to ensure complete freedom of action to the ground forces. 
c. 
Relative Ground Forces Situation. Indians enjoyed an overall superior 
relative strength on both fronts:- 
(1) 
Pakistan had a peacetime force of only one infantry division of four 
brigades. Later this strength was raised to a total of five infantry 

40 Yahya Khan, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yahaya_Khan (accessed on 5 February, 2011).