111 

171. 
Indian Plans 
a. 
The Indians had appreciated that 14 Division was likely to guard the 
approaches east and north of Sylhet in strength and the best chance of 
success was to advance along the unexpected southern direction. An 
advance towards Maulvi Bazar and its capture would give the added 
advantage of splitting the 14 Division into two. The intention was to 
prevent the two brigades in Sylhet area from withdrawing toward Bhairab 
Bazar to link up with their division so that the enemy forces could be 
defeated in detail.328 
b. 
The tasks allotted to 8 Mountain Division were:-329 
(1) 
Advance along the Maulvi Bazar and Fenchuganj axes with a 
brigade each: 59 Mountain Brigade to capture Kulaura opposite 
Dharmanagar and then advance to Sylhet via Fenchuganj; 
whereas, 81 Mountain Brigade to capture Shamshernagar and 
advance to Sylhet via Maulvi Bazar.  
(2) 
Echo Sector, under Brigadier Wadke, was ordered to advance 
along the Jaintiapur Axis to Sylhet.  
(3) 
While the BSF and the EBR were instructed to contain the enemy 
in Charkai area.330 
(4) 
14 Division was to be deceived about effort‟s main point of 
application by giving the impression to the defenders that the 
operations along Dharmanagar and Kailashahar axes were only 
subsidiary while the major forces were poised to advance along the 
Jaintiapur and Charkai Axes.331 

328 Singh Victory in Bangladesh, 179.   
329 Ibid., 179-180. 
330 Ibid., 180. 
331 Deception Measures (Ibid.) 
    (1) The concentration and administrative build-up of 8 Mountain Division in the Dharmanagar – Kailashahar 
area was dovetailed into an overall deception plan.  Considerable activity was shown in Karimganj to confirm 
this impression.  
    (2)The advance of 81 Brigade from Kailashahar involved crossing the Manu near the border on the Indian 
side. The river was 250 feet wide and had no bridge over it. To achieve surprise it was decided to get the Public 
Works Department to build a bridge to show routine civil development unrelated to army requirements. In 
addition, only a class 9 bridge was constructed to show it was meant for normal civilian traffic and not heavy 
military transport. Medium guns were moved after dismantling them. These were subsequently assembled 
across the river and moved forward to support operations toward Maulvi Bazar.