29 

OPERATION SEARCHLIGHT44 
69. 
Lieutenant General Sahibzada Yaqub Khan, commander of the Eastern Theatre 
had, in February 1971, prepared plans for dealing with an insurgency situation in East 
Pakistan. The plan was code-named Operation BLITZ. He was, however aware that a 
military action alone was not the solution to the political impasse. “I need hardly mention 
that Operation BLITZ will not and should not be an end in itself but must be followed 
immediately by the projection of political and economic progress at the national level. 
Such a course would be an essential sequel to this fire brigade action for the wheel 
would only then be turned full circle”, wrote Yaqub to Yahya. 
Law and Order Situation Worsens 
70. 
The situation in East Pakistan after the postponement of the National Assembly 
session was fast deteriorating. Sheikh Mujibur Rehman had given the call for a virtual 
takeover of the administration of the province by his supporters which, by now, included 
almost all politicians, the majority of bureaucrats and a large number of the members of 
the Bengali elements in the armed forces besides the entire Bengali civil population. 
Although, all the personalities interviewed at Dacca categorically denied that the 
militants of the Awami League massacred the non-Bengalis even before the military 
crackdown by the Pakistan Army, however, there was ample evidence to prove that they 
went on a rampage as soon as the announcement of postponing the National Assembly 
session was made on March 1. The scene immediately prior to the proposed military 
action was of complete disorder and total disregard of governmental authority. 
71. 
General Yahya had by then lost complete faith in his military commanders in the 
eastern theatre. “A first class army in East Pakistan is completely demoralized because 
of two old women”, remarked the President to General Tikka Khan. Implying that if a firm 
action had been taken earlier things would not have gone out of hand. Yahya‟s 
insistence for a military action forced Lieutenant General Yaqub Khan to resign. He was 
replaced by Lieutenat General Tikka. There were only two alternatives at that stage. 
Order the army to restore the authority of the government or hand over powers to the 
majority party. The military junta was split on the question of suppressing the insurgency 
by a military action. Those in East Pakistan were not in favour of it as they had been 
witnessing the growing popularity of the Awami League in that province. They knew that 
even after eliminating the die-hard secessionists, the movement in favour of the Six 
Points Formula would not die down. They were concerned about the mass killings on 

44 Mitinuddin, Tragedy of Errors, 241-271.