13 

26. 
USA. Pakistan was an ally of USA since 1954.28 It was part of SEATO and 
CENTO and had been given written and unwritten assurances that USA would support 
Pakistan, in case of aggression from any country including India.29 However, India was 
equally, if not more important for USA, hence USA was hesitant to interfere in a bilateral 
dispute between the two neighbours. The leverage offered by this ambiguous stance 
allowed India to plan operations in East Pakistan, while on the other hand Pakistan felt 
over assured that US would intervene and prevent its disintegration. However, US 
followed a coldly calculated policy, which concluded that East Pakistan was destined to 
become independent; therefore, efforts should only be focused on preventing 
dismemberment of West Pakistan.  
27. 
USSR. USSR, which followed a reasonably balanced policy towards India and 
Pakistan after 1965, almost openly supported India in the months before and during the 
conflict. This was largely dictated by two factors; one, Pakistan refused to follow Soviet 
Containment of China policy at the cost of its relations with Beijing; second, India was 
sharply reacting to Soviet aid to Pakistan and wanted it to be terminated. Although in the 
South Asian context, USSR‟s interest was to facilitate Indian domination of the region, 
its grand strategic interest was to humble United States so that other countries in the 
region supporting USA, namely Iran, Turkey and Saudi Arabia could become wary of 
USA. It also wanted to frustrate China by bringing its South Asian ally to knees. Soviet 
Union‟s support to India was formalized through the Treaty of Peace, Friendship and 
Cooperation signed between India and USSR on 9 August 1971.30 During the conflict, 
Soviet Union provided military equipment to India, acted as a counter balance to China 
at the regional level and USA at the international level. It also played a major role at the 
UN Security Council by vetoing resolutions directed against India. 
28. 
China. China was in support of Pakistan in 1971 crisis. The support however, 
remained restricted to moral, material and political levels because of unavoidable 
compulsions. Sino - Soviet relations were strained after 1969 border clashes and China 
did not want to escalate them by physically intervening in the Indo-Pak border. It also 
did not want to get into a military confrontation with India at a time, when Nixon‟s China 
initiative was at its peak. An open Chinese involvement in war also had the potential to 
draw USA into the conflict, for which she was not prepared because of domestic 
environment and Vietnam issue. Therefore, Chinese restricted their support to material 

28 Kursheed Kamal Aziz, World Powers and the 1971 Breakup of Pakistan (Islamabad: Vanguard, 2003), 34.  
29 Sisson & Rose, War and Secession, 51. 
30 Ibid., 242.