18 

MUKTI BAHINI OPERATIONS41 
Background 
35. 
It is difficult for the armed forces of any nation, however disciplined and a-political 
they might be in normal times, not to be affected by tumultuous events in their country, 
more so if ethnic issues are involved. So was the case with the Bengali elements in the 
military establishment, particularly those serving in East Pakistan, during the days when 
the election campaign was in full swing. Although the Awami League was not 
demanding separation from West Pakistan initially, Sheikh Mujibur Rehman and his 
lieutenants were leaving no stone unturned to widen the existing gulf between the two 
wings. He was, without any restraint, playing to the tune of Bengali nationalism. His fiery 
speech on March 7, at the race course grounds, Dacca, left no doubt that he had finally 
given the call for an independent Bangladesh although he did not declare it openly. 
36. 
The affects of political activism had reached the barracks and the officers‟ 
messes in the units and formations, stirring the minds of both the ethnic groups alike. 
Many Bengali soldiers were attending the political meetings. Others, who had kept 
away, were following the speeches on the radio. Slowly and gradually they were getting 
emotionally involved. It was natural for the Bengalis to have rejoiced at the landslide 
victory of the Awami League. 
37. 
So, when the power was not transferred to the leader of the majority party in 
March, as announced by the president, there was a sudden wave of disappointment 
amongst the East Pakistani soldiers as well which gradually turned to bitterness against 
the military hierarchy and Bhutto in particular and all the West Pakistanis in general. 
After March 1, when Mujib declared that the postponement would not go unchallenged, 
and the entire Bengali population seemed to be behind him, the feelings of the Bengali 
troops were also, quite naturally, aroused. 
38. 
To avoid a rebellion by a large body of native soldiers the British had devised a 
system of mixing different religious and ethnic groups in any one military unit, especially 
those of the fighting arms. This practice was followed by the Indian and Pakistan armies 
even after independence. However, in the case of the Bengal regiments there was a 
deviation from the established rules of recruitment, which gave a chance for mass 
uprising.  

41 Mitinuddin, Tragedy of Errors, 221-238.