5 

PART – I 
TRACING THE MARKS OF MIS-STEPS 
ENVIRONMENT 
Domestic Environment - Historical Context 
15. 
The Bengali Sentiment. During the British Raj, except for a short period 
between 1905 and 1911, Bengal remained united. During this period, the politics and 
economy of Bengal were largely dominated by the Hindus who had won favours from 
the British. Muslims, who were largely down trodden, were represented in two 
categories: the aristocrats i.e. likes of Nawab Salim Ullah Khan etc, symbolizing the 
Persian-Urdu speaking culture of northern India and the native lower middle class 
Bengali peasants, representing the local Bengali culture. Despite the Hindu-Muslim 
socio-cultural divide, Bengalis were comparatively more regional than people of many 
other parts of the country. This was partly due to the influence of nationalists like 
Rabindranath Tagore and Romesh Chunder Dutt3  and partly because Calcutta 
remained the capital of the country till 1911. The strength of Bengali sentiment was 
vividly displayed when the partition of Bengal carried out by Lord Curzon in 1905, had to 
be undone in 1911. The strong Bengal centric sentiment continued till 1937 elections, 
when Muslim League was able to form a coalition government with AK Fazlul Haq‟s 
Krishak Party in Bengal. This coalition was an uneasy one, largely due to Fazlul Haq‟s 
provincial agenda, which did not go in line with the Muslim League‟s vision. It was during 
this period that Lahore Resolution was proposed and the word „states‟ included in it. The 
coalition finally collapsed in 1941, only within a year of the Lahore Resolution. The 
Bengali sentiment was partially overshadowed by the overwhelming force of the “Idea of 
Pakistan”, resulting into landslide victory of Muslim League in 1946 elections. The under 
currents however, remained. 
16. 
Socio-Cultural Aspects. Bengal projected a very vibrant socio-cultural 
environment, which cut across the Hindu-Muslim divide. The socio-cultural environment 
was, however, largely dominated by Hindu traditions, which were willingly accepted and 
followed by the Muslims. The province also had a far eastern touch on its culture and 
society, which was because of its geographic and climatic contiguity with some of those 
cultures. Except for religious values, Bengal did not share a common ground on social 

3 Romesh Chunder Dutt was a Bengali writer, civil servant, economic historian and translator of Ramyana and 
Mahabharata. He had been president of Indian National Congress.