177 

for collecting such a force as the troops were fully engaged in counter 
insurgency operations and it was not expected that the Indians would start 
an all-out war in East Pakistan. Dacca was allowed to be denuded of 
troops until August 1971, when under the instructions of GHQ, the 53 
Brigade was called back from Chittagong and placed as command 
reserve and then in September, 1971, the 36-A Division was raised. 
However, when a threat developed in the east and a breakthrough at Feni 
was becoming real, Eastern Command released the only brigade it had in 
Dacca for defence of border town.517   
c. 
Besides this, the Eastern Command had not given any serious thought to 
planning and preparing these defences for the fear of undermining the 
determination of their troops to fight to the last man and last round in the 
designated theatre fortresses. Not even a hint had been given to the 
divisional or brigade commanders that they might have to fall back from 
the fortresses to defend the Dacca bowl.  
239. 
Effective Utilization of Irregular Troops  
a. 
There was a general perception that irregular troops – the Razakars, the 
East Pakistan police, the Mujahids and the other elements of locally 
raised EPCAF – could not be relied upon. Most of them, in the opinion of 
officers, were ineffective unless backed up by regular troops.  
b. 
As a result, when only these troops were available for defending Dacca, 
the Eastern Command discounted them and did nothing to gel these 
elements into a coherent fighting force. It is difficult to accept that the 
morale of the Bihari elements of EPCAF, Razakars and Mujahids could 
have been so low. They had been adequately trained and armed and 
would have fought shoulder to shoulder with their West Pakistani 
comrades-in-arms to the last, if properly commanded.  

240. 
Withered Will to Resist. Cities are difficult to secure or capture by a military 
force, but in the case of Dacca, it fell like a ripe mango. Eastern Command had troops 
which could have delayed the collapse for a week or two. But the will to resist had 
exhausted. The feeling of impending defeat and insecurity pervaded Dacca. No 
commander was prepared to send even a battalion from his sector. Most divisional 

517 The Report of Hamoodur Rehman Commission, 441.