159 

207. 
Pakistan 
a. 
Political Aim. Was to preserve its integrity as united Pakistan. 
b. 
Implications. The integrity of an ideological state consists of two 
elements i.e. its ideological as well as territorial frontiers which has 
following implications:- 
(1) 
Ideology was more important as it provided the very reason for the 
existence of a united Pakistan.  
(2) 
The two elements are not mutually exclusive. 
(3) 
The selection of means and methods to ensure the security of one 
should be carefully weighed against its adverse effects on the 
other.  The best available means and methods to ensure territorial 
integrity of Pakistan which weakened her ideological foundation 
were, therefore, irrelevant. 
c. 
Flaws in conception of Defence Policy. Given the above implications, 
flaws of Pakistan‟s defence policy were:- 
(1) 
Incorrect Interpretation of Political Aim. Preserving integrity of a 
united Pakistan was translated and understood in a predominantly 
physical sense. The resulting defence policy was thus faulty.  
(2) 
Incorrect Perception of National Defence. We failed to 
understand national defence as a comprehensive concept which 
should provide defence against both direct and indirect threat and 
consequently failed in developing a total response. 
(3) 
Developing Military Element at the Cost of other Elements of 
National Power. The development of armed forces alone was not 
enough as military power could not defeat political ideas. An 
increase in military capability was not seen in relation to the 
marginal reduction in overall security in terms of its effects on 
quality of life, economic stability and more importantly the political 
acceptability of the ends for which the increased military capability 
was intended.  Disregard of most of these considerations resulted 
in a situation in which the whole structure was thrown in 
disequilibrium. 
(4) 
Response Limited to Military Element Alone. Confronted with 
the changing internal and external national security environments