182 

CONCLUSION522 
247. 
It was not the first time that a country‟s political boundaries have been altered. 
Armies have surrendered in much larger numbers in other parts of the globe. 
Interventionist policies by powerful neighbours have often exacerbated the instability 
across the border. But none of these indisputable facts of history can condone the errors 
and omissions committed by the civil and military leadership in Pakistan since 
independence which led to the eventual tragedy.  
248. 
The pain and anguish of December 1971 would gradually fade away. But what 
should always be remembered is that history has a cruel habit of repeating itself if past 
mistakes are made over and over again. What then are the lessons we must learn from 
failure to maintain the territorial integrity of Pakistan which we had jointly struggled to 
establish.   
249. 
First: A delicate fabric woven from a single strand cannot sustain the pulls and 
pressures inherent in a multi-ethnic and poly-lingual society, more so when one of its 
constituent units happens to be located in a different geographic zone. Such a 
parchment needs to be strengthened by weaving into it other core values which 
respective interest groups within a nation consider essential.  
250. 
Second: Ethno-centric sub-nationalism is not an unusual phenomena. It is an 
intrinsic component of multi-ethnic societies. It need not become a hindrance to national 
integration. But to keep it within bounds a great deal of tolerance and accommodation 
has to be shown by other dominant groups within the country. Cultural pluralism has to 
be accepted. Any attempt to force a uniform way of life on those who cherish their own 
identity will be counter-productive. The dominant-subordinate syndrome must be 
avoided. 
251. 
Third: The legitimacy of a regime in power is an essential factor in making it 
acceptable to the majority of a country‟s population. Coup d‟ etats, martial laws, 
prolonged military rule, and undemocratic methods to remain in power always lead to 
frustration and bitterness. Attempts are then made to use street power to remove a 
government which lacks the popular will.  
252. 
Fourth: Distortions in economic development exacerbate internal conflict. Though 
no government can ensure a uniform pace of development in all regions of a state but 
the least that can be done is to let the people utilise to a large extent the wealth 
generated from their respective areas. In other words greater devolution of power and 

522 Matinuddin, Tragedy of Errors, 491-493.