176 

23 Punjab was defending approach leading through Chauddagram. When the enemy 
encircled its position and it withdrew, the withdrawal turned into a rout. The battalion 
headquarters with some elements of one company managed to reach Laksham but the 
remaining lost their way and got dispersed. A similar thing happened to 25 FF, major 
portion of which was defending position in and around Mian Bazar. When the brigade 
commander ordered the battalion to fall back to its depth position in gap between Lalmai 
Hills and Lakhsham, he did not know that the Indians had already occupied position 
behind 25 FF. As a result, the CO and about 35 persons on arriving at the rear position 
found themselves surrounded by enemy and surrendered.514 
236. 
Abandoning Laksham – A Fortified Position. The decision to exfiltrate was not 
a fool hardy act but also a reckless and callous decision which deliberately sacrificed 
many lives, including those of the sick and wounded. Leaving behind of the sick and 
wounded was an act of gross violation of military ethics. The story about shortage of 
ammunition and other weapons is also false because Laksham had enough weapons 
and sufficient stock of ammunition and other supplies. Even the operation of exfiltration 
was poorly conceived and still more poorly executed. Proper orders were not issued and 
no route for exfiltration determined. The troops just moved out in two columns on the 
night of 9 December to cross an enemy invested area and marched across some 12-15 
kilometres. Out of a total number of 4000, combatants and non-combatants who moved 
out of Laksham only 500 or so, including the brigade commander and the CO 15 Baloch 
managed to reach Comilla. The rest were killed or captured.515 
237. 
Lack of Understanding of Local Commanders. Troops‟ withdrawal from 
Comilla and southern tip of Lalmai Hills allowed Indians to open up and maintain their 
main supply route to Chandpur via Lalmai.   
Dacca Bowl 
238. 
Denuding the Centre of Gravity 
a. 
As such no detailed plan either for the defence of Dacca bowl or for the 
inner defence of Dacca was prepared nor were the troops allocated for 
this purpose although it was fully known that Dacca would eventually be 
the lynch pin in any strategy for the defence of East Pakistan.516  
b. 
After 25 March, when the strength of the troops in East Pakistan was 
raised to three divisions, no thought was given to formulating any scheme 

514 The Report of Hamoodur Rehman Commission, 447.  
515 Ibid., 449.  
516 Ibid., 453.