27 

and „liberate‟ vulnerable enclaves which could later be used as jump off points by the 
Indian army. A need was felt to provide some political guidance to the so-called freedom 
fighters. The Indian government, therefore, formed a political committee of eight activists 
on September 9, from members of the self-styled Bangladesh government in exile, to 
ensure a greater control over the Mukti Bahini.      
64. 
By October, 1971 the Mukti Bahini had carried out extensive explosions in private 
and public places. They attacked government offices and godowns, damaged bridges 
and railway lines, disrupted electric supply lines, robbed banks and killed innocent men, 
women and children whom they suspected of collaborating with the government. As the 
date for the Indian attack came near, the rebellious units of the EBR along with Indian 
Army personnel, tried to capture areas of strategic importance. In this they were 
supported not only by tanks and artillery but they received the support of the Indian Air 
Force as well. Belonia salient in the East was attacked on 8/ 9 November, Bhurigram in 
the north on night 13/ 14 November. These were preliminary operations carried out at 
the battalion level, even before the all out attack by the Indian armed forces on East 
Pakistan which began on November 21. The casualties were evacuated to Indian 
medical centres where they were given medical treatment and the sick and wounded 
were looked after. 
65. 
By mid-November highly exaggerated reports, for the consumption of the 
international media, of the achievement of the Mukti Bahini, started coming in. Over 
25,000 regular soldiers of Pakistan were reported killed. They claimed that out of five 
divisions atleast three had been put out of commission by November 21. Not even 10 % 
of what was being put across was, however, true. The effectiveness of the Mukti Bahini 
was grossly inflated to build up their morale, lower that of the Pakistan Army and gain 
more international support. 
Effectiveness of Mukti Bahini 
66. 
 An interesting aspect of the Mukti Bahini‟s fighting qualities was depicted by an 
Indian writer. He mentions that the rebels were mortally afraid of the Pathans. Indian 
army officers were often asked by some of the chicken-hearted mutineers, “Pathan 
marya hai ye nahin” (Has the Pathan been killed or is he still alive).” Agar mara nahin to 
agay nahin jaaoon ga” (If he has not been killed we will not move forward). General 
Aurora while commenting on the performance of the Mukti Bahini said that the Bengalis 
had paranoia from the Punjabi Musalman. “They would not get anywhere close enough 
to them. They only sent small chokras‟ (boys) to gain information” said Aurora.