15 

b. 
Strategic Thinking. The leadership in Pakistan appeared to be confused 
in adopting a strategy to handle the crisis of East Pakistan. It kept on 
shifting between policy of appeasement and coercion, which only 
complicated the already intricate situation. Mujib‟s arrest in Agartala 
Conspiracy Case and later his exoneration, Yahya‟s declaration of Mujib 
as „future Prime Minister of Pakistan‟37 and concurrently his refusal to 
transfer power are a few episodes, which indicate lack of clear strategic 
thinking at our end.  
c. 
Morale. Pakistan army was faced with a difficult situation in East 
Pakistan. Due to ever increasing hostility from the local population, a 
protracted employment on internal security, feeling of home sickness, lack 
of resources and above all absence of clear political direction affected 
their morale. On the contrary, Mukti Bahini and Indians who were in full 
support of each other, maintained a high morale till the very end. 
d. 
Media. Instead of co-opting the media, authorities in East Pakistan 
decided to do away with it. On the day of Operation SEARCHLIGHT, 
foreign journalists in Dhaka were bundled into trucks and taken to the 
airport to be sent away immediately.38 This proved to be a key mistake as 
after that “the foreign press became increasingly gullible in accepting, 
without effort at verifying, the substantial exaggerations that were 
appended to the list of horror stories from Dhaka.”39 Our own efforts to 
project the situation in our favour miserably failed as no one was willing to 
accept our version of the facts.  
32. 
Preparedness 
a. 
National Spirit. The nation was not mentally prepared for a military 
confrontation in 1971. It was embroiled in internal political crisis, which 
fundamentally focused on political dispensation of the country. On the 
contrary, spirit of East Pakistan rebels and their protectors was high. 
b. 
Equipment of Armed Forces. Soon after the 1965 War had started, USA 
had imposed an embargo on military aid on both India and Pakistan. This 
embargo did not affect the Indian Army but produced major challenges for 
Pakistan armed forces in the fields of equipment procurement and 

37 Jackson, South Asian Crisis, 28.  
38 Nawaz, Crossed Swords, 268.  
39 Sission & Rose, War and Secession, 217.