170 

centre. The route to Dacca lay open with only a task force comprising 
elements of 38 FF and 50 Punjab with one artillery battery in support. At 
this stage a great opportunity offered itself to the Indian 2 Corps along the 
front of both its divisions for a drive towards Goalundo Ghat en-route to 
Dacca, but it was not seized. 
b. 
Rather than developing their operations toward Magura, the Indians on 
finding Jessore empty, followed in pursuit of 107 Brigade toward Khulna. 
This mistake by the Indians cost them dearly; they had to fight fierce 
battles all the way to Khulna.  
North-western Sector  
220. 
Faulty Deployment  
a. 
The intelligence appreciation upto 1970 was that the Indians‟ major 
offensive would be launched in this sector which appeared to be suitable 
for the use of tanks. 16 Division was, therefore, made comparatively 
stronger than the other divisions located in East Pakistan. But, the 
Division without appreciating the threat deployed troops all along the 
border. There was as such no brigade defensive position as admitted by 
both General Niazi and General Nazar Hussain.501  
b. 
Had 16 Division deployed a brigade each in Rangpur and Bogra Sub-
sectors with a task force in Nator, the division would have had 34 Brigade 
as reserve to influence the battle. Instead, 16 Division distributed a 
brigade each to all the sub-sectors. 34 Brigade was tasked to defend 
Nator Sub-sector but at the same time, it was expected to act as division 
reserve. Besides, 34 Brigade was considerably depleted by the 
withdrawal of units and sub-units from it to fill in the gaps in defence both 
within and outside the divisional area. 12 Punjab was taken away from 
this brigade and sent to Jessore. Another two companies of 32 Baloch 
were also given to the colonel staff of the 16 Division when he was put in 
command of the troops west of River Tista.  
c. 
Similarly, the division had no contingency plan for withdrawal across 
Jamuna towards Dacca.502  

501 The Report of Hamoodur Rehman Commission , 444.  
502 Ibid., 436.