33 

army jawans lost their lives defending the territorial integrity of Pakistan against its own 
citizens. He accepted that it was an overreaction and over kill by the troops under his 
command. 
83. 
Tikka Khan drove around Dacca on March 26 to check the results of the military 
action. On the way he saw that all Bangladesh flags had disappeared and Pakistan flags 
had taken their place. He was visibly relieved as the open defiance against the 
government had at least temporarily subsided. After three days of military action in 
Dacca and its surrounding areas all was quiet, it did not strike him that the result 
achieved was through fear and that no Bengali had changed his support to the Awami 
League. In fact the hatred had increased. 
East Bengal Regiments Rebellion 
84. 
1 East Bengal Regiment. Commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Raza-ul-Jalil, a 
Bengali Officer, it was located at Jessore. On March 29, when the commanding officer of 
1 East Bengal was informed by his brigade commander that his battalion was to be 
disarmed he got furious. “It is an insult, this means that I am not being trusted,” retorted 
Raza-ul-Jalil. A compromise solution was worked out. It was mutually agreed that the 
weapons would be deposited in the kotes (armoury) and the keys handed over to the 
brigade commander. The next day when the brigade commander came to collect the 
keys CO 1 East Bengal tore off his badges of rank and along with the keys threw them 
on the ground in front of his brigade commander. Simultaneously, 1 East Bengal opened 
fire on 22 and 25 Baloch which had accompanied the commander to forestall any 
resistance. The two West Pakistani manned battalions replied in kind. Two guns of 55 
Field Regiment were ordered to fire directly into the quarterguard of 1 East Bengal. 1 
East Bengal retreated into the area of the ranges. A full scale attack by two infantry 
battalions supported by a field regiment was mounted against 1 East Bengal at about 
1600 hours the same day. The East Bengal regiment was finally overpowered and 130, 
Bengali soldiers were „captured‟. 
85. 
2 East Bengal Regiment. It was located at the old palace at Joydebpur        
(Map - 18) and had been split into companies and platoons. A company was at Tangail, 
another at Mymensingh, one platoon of the third company was at Rajenderpur and one 
platoon at Ghazipur. It‟s task was to enforce law and order. The battalion was 
commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Masaudul Hussain Khan an officer hailing from East 
Pakistan. The second-in-command was Major KM Safiullah, also a Bengali officer. 
Safiullah recalls with pride that after March 1, (when the National Assembly session had