6 

and cultural aspects with Muslims of northern India. This was visible in food, dress, 
language and festivals etc. It is also worth pointing out here that Bengalis, despite their 
self belief in the richness of their customs, traditions and intellect, were not so well 
perceived by many others in the country which included the British, who considered 
them non martial race. Their language was also looked down upon by the Muslim 
aristocrats.4  
17. 
East – West Equation. It is in the backdrop of socio-cultural environment and 
Bengal centric sentiment that creation of Pakistan and east-west relations should be 
studied. At the time of partition there were inbuilt inadequacies in the relationship 
between both the wings, which fundamentally boiled down to constraints imposed by 
geography and economy. As for economy, East Bengal had been a poor province 
during the British rule; whereas, areas that constituted West Pakistan were quite 
prosperous. The socio-cultural and economic differences were underpinned by the facts 
of geography. Sensing the likely troubles between both the wings, Maulana Abul Kalam 
Azad made a prophetic statement about a decade and a half before 1971. He said, “Mr. 
Jinnah and his followers did not seem to realize that geography was against them. 
These two regions have no point of physical contact. People in these two areas are 
completely different from one another in every respect, except only in religion. No one 
can hope that East and West Pakistan will carry all their differences and form one 
nation.”5 Quaid-e-Azam also appeared to have fully understood the likely complications 
of east, west relations: while addressing an East Pakistani audience in Dhaka on 21 
March 1948 he said, “You belong to a nation now; you have now carved out a territory, 
vast territory, it is all yours; it does not belong to a Punjabi or a Sindhi, or a Pathan, or a 
Bengali; it is yours. Therefore, if you want to build yourself into a nation, for God‟s sake 
give up this provincialism.”6  Such was the broad environment, which set the stage, for 
an uneasy twenty four years relationship between East and West Pakistan. 
Sowing the Seeds of Discord - Initial years (Upto 1965)  
18. 
The Language Issue. With the domination of Urdu speaking community both at 
the central and provincial levels, the already partially aggrieved Bengalis (due to award 
of Calcutta to India) were further antagonized by the announcement that Urdu would be 

4 Gordon A. Leonard, Bengal: The Nationalist Movement 1876-1940 (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1974), 9.  
5 Maulana Abul Kalam Azad’s saying. Mohammad Ayoob & K. Subrahmanyam, The Liberation War (New 
Delhi: S. Chand Publishers, 1972), 1.  
6 Shuja Nawaz, Cross Swords: Pakistan, Its Army and the Wars Within (Karachi: Oxford University Press, 
2008), 77.