44 

on two contingencies: Contingency A – A local uprising with India providing moral and 
material support but not carrying out a physical attack; Contingency B – A major 
insurgency accompanied by India invading East Pakistan.48  
119. 
In Contingency A: a forward posture was to be adopted. Troops were to be thinly 
deployed and strung out all along the border to deal with uprisings anywhere in East 
Pakistan and to prevent the capture of any chunk of territory by rebellious elements. In 
Contingency B: the main defences were to be around Dacca which was to be strongly 
defended with light elements deployed ahead to delay the enemy advance towards the 
capital. Sufficient time was to be given to shift from Contingency A to B.49   
120. 
This was in keeping with the General Headquarters‟ (GHQ) earlier directive of 
August, 1967 which said, “In the East Pakistan contain and neutralise as many enemy 
troops as possible inflicting maximum casualties without running the risk of annihilation.” 
On 12 November 1969, an Operational Directive specific to Eastern Command was 
issued by GHQ which stated the mission to 3 Corps (Eastern Command) in just five 
simple words – “3 Corps will defend East Pakistan.” It also spelt out certain 
assumptions. These were: (1) we can expect to get a warning of an attack by India upto 
a maximum of seven days; (2) initiative of starting hostilities will lie with India; (3) main 
effort will be directed against West Pakistan resulting in major and decisive battles to be 
fought in the western theatre; (4) normal communication between East and West 
Pakistan will be disrupted; (5) China‟s support will be confined to political statements 
and demonstrations along the Sino-Indian Border and (6) the Pakistan Army should be 
prepared to continue full scale military operations for atleast three months. As we shall 
see later, four out of six assumptions specified by the GHQ came true.50   
121. 
Eastern Command carried out deployment of her forces as per Contingency A. 
Its planning was based on the earlier evaluation of the enemy threat shared with it by 
GHQ which visualised the possibility of main offensive being launched in the 
Northwestern sub-sector with possible auxiliaries in the East. However, around            
19 November, the later assessment was that enemy main thrust would come through 
Agartala.51   
122. 
The only alternative that the Eastern Command made in their existing plans to 
meet this new development was to create an adhoc division under Major General Rahim 

48 Matinuddin, Tragedy of Errors, 339.  
49 Ibid.  
50 Ibid.  
51 The Report of Hamoodur Rehman Commission of Inquiry into the 1971 War, (Islamabad: Vanguard Books 
Private Limited, 2003), 419.