179 

arms units. It was not uncommon to find a single tank or a gun supporting 
detachments well away from their parent units. This affected the 
command and control aspects, and in his effort to rationalize the situation 
General Niazi organized two adhoc divisional headquarters and three or 
four brigade headquarters. But these hurriedly organized headquarters 
suffered the attendant shortcomings of adhocism lacking adequate 
communications, trained staff and other ancillary units, and were therefore 
not fully effective.518  
b. 
Similarly, for some inexplicable reason, Headquarters 9 (P) Division was 
moved to the South-western Sector to take over two brigades originally 
belonging to 14 Division, while Headquarters 14 Division were 
commanding two brigades of 9 (P) Division in the North-eastern Sector.    
243. 
Inadequate Logistics. Inadequate logistic backing had not helped matters. The 
logistic area established in East Pakistan was originally meant to cater for one infantry 
division and the attendant administrative units. Stockpiling had taken into consideration 
the likelihood of the eastern wing being isolated for a limited period, but it did not 
visualise that the force level would be increased fourfold in a crash programmed time 
schedule, especially when the new inductions could not bring in their integral transport 
and stores because of the limited airlift. Surface transport could be mustered locally from 
unwilling owners, from a truck to a cycle rickshaw on the roads and the water transport 
of country boats. Troops deployment in pursuit of Mukti Bahini guerrilla was spread so 
far from the existing lines of communications that the administrative backing could not 
catch up with the fighting troops.  
244. 
Psychological Pressure 
a. 
Added to the physical discomfort was the psychological pressure of being 
isolated amid a hostile population. Sustained operations for about eight 
months in an unfavourable environment of climate, terrain and 
antagonistic population had resulted in battle fatigue. Battle casualties 
were mounting and could not get proper attention because of inadequate 
facilities for their evacuation. Thus there was a steady erosion of morale, 
aggravated by international media which condemned outrightly the part 
Tikka Khan and his West Pakistani troops played in Bangladesh.  

518 Matinuddin, Tragedy of Errors, 346.