69 

NORTH-WESTERN SECTOR 
The Area of Operation164 
139. 
General 
a. 
The North-western Sector was surrounded by the Siliguri Corridor in the 
north; the Brahmaputra (Jamuna) in the east; the Ganga (Padma) in the 
south; and the international border with India in the west. In size, it was 
roughly one-third of the whole of East Pakistan (Map - 7).   
b. 
It had swept-back wings, with a narrow torso in the centre keeping the 
wings together. The tips of the wings were at Thakurgaon in the north and 
Nator in the south.  
c. 
This sector was isolated from the rest of East Pakistan except through the 
Hardinge Bridge over Ganga which connected Jessore with Ishurdi on the 
Pabna – Rajshahi road. There were ferries across Brahmaputra River 
from the direction of Dacca.  
d. 
Rainfall in this area was very heavy and the countryside, especially in the 
Rajshahi – Naogaon and Pabna areas, had suffered heavy floods during 
September and October 1971. The water table was very high and while 
the upper crust of the ground after the winter harvest appeared firm, it 
could not stand up to the movement of medium tanks.  
e. 
The Area of Operation in this sector could further be divided into three 
sub-sectors: Rangpur Sub-sector; Bogra Sub-sector; and Nator Sub-
sector.   
140. 
Rivers 
a. 
The rivers ran from north to south dividing this sector into number of 
smaller compartments. Any advance from the west was against the grain 
of the country and necessitated constructing a large number of bridges 
over rivers and nullahs to carry heavier military equipment.  
b. 
The area had following important rivers:- 
(1) 
River Brahmaputra/ Jamuna. It was a major river skirting North-
western Sector from east. At places it‟s width was more than         
4 kilometres.  
(2) 
River Ganga. Also called Padma, cupped the sector from south.  

164 Most of details about the Area of Operation have been taken from following books:  (a) Singh, Victory in 
Bangladesh, 7, 167-170 & 213-231, Matinuddin, Tragedy of Errors, 21-23 & 407-411.