106 

c. 
River Meghna. It shaped up west of Saidpur and then flowed down till 
Dacca. It was a major river with span as wide as 12-18 kilometres.   
d. 
River Titas. Was mostly in Brahmanbaria Sub-sector. Flowed west of 
Chandura and Brahmanbaria before making a loop around Ujanisar. 
From there it again went north-west, touched Gokarna only to move 
south joining River Meghna near Nabinagar.    
165. 
Important Towns 
a. 
The main towns and communication centres in this sector were Sylhet, 
Maulvi Bazar, Brahmanbaria. There were other smaller but important 
towns such as Fenchuganj, Shamshernagar and Akhaura.  
b. 
Sylhet, located on the northern bank of the Surma, was the district 
headquarters and an important communication centre. It was 
connected by rail with Kulaura via Fenchuganj in the south. It was also 
a junction for roads from Jaintiapur, Charkai, Fenchuganj and Maulvi 
Bazar. It had an all-weather airfield. 
c. 
Maulvi Bazar was an important communication centre which controlled 
the road movement from Sadipur and Sherpur ferries south of Sylhet 
as any such movement from Sylhet to Comilla and Dacca was 
possible only over the ferries.  
d. 
Brahmanbaria was an important communication centre, located on the 
western bank of River Titas. The railway line from Akhaura to Dacca as 
well as the main road from Comilla to Ashuganj passed through 
Brahmanbaria. It was also linked to Ajabpur by motorable tracks.  
e. 
Fenchuganj was an important township on the southern bank of the 
Kusyara. The railway from Kulaura to Sylhet passed through 
Fenchuganj, which had no proper road link with Kulaura. 
f. 
Kulaura was an important town near the border. It was important for 
controlling movement towards Fenchuganj and Maulvi Bazar from 
east.  
g. 
Shamshernagar had an all-weather airfield and was connected with 
Sylhet and Comilla by a motorable road. 
166. 
Communication Infrastructure 
a. 
There were very few all-weather roads in North-eastern Sector. Most 
of them were on high embankments generally 1-2 meters high