Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
102
conquest of East Pakistan in December 1971, we escaped to Nepal. Early in 1974,
we were repatriated from Nepal to Karachi. “
Sohail’s slain father, Mr. Tanvir Ahmed, as a member of the local Council in
Rahmatganj locality, had devotedly worked for the social uplift of the Bengalis as
well as the non-Bengalis. “My father advocated fraternisation between Bengalis
and non-Bengalis “, said Sohail.
Sohail recalled that it took the federal troops some days before they could
retrieve all the dead bodies of non-Bengalis and arrange their proper burial.
Heaps of human skulls and bones were found in the gutted houses of non-
Bengalis.
“The Awami League killers in Thakurgaon had instructions to kill all the non-
Bengali male adults “, said Afzal Siddiqi, 50, who lost his two sons and a
daughter in the carnage in Thakurgaon. He had migrated to East Pakistan from
Calcutta in 1947 and settled in Thakurgaon in the mid 1960’s. Repatriated from
Dacca in January 1974, he reported that he escaped the massacre of non-Bengalis
in the last week of March 1971 by hiding in a dry, derelict water tank, not far
from his house in Rahmatganj. He said:
“I worked as a commission agent for the sale of household wares. My three
children were born in East Pakistan My Bengali wife had died some years ago. In
spite of our close links with East Pakistan, the Awami Leaguers called us Biharis
“Since early March 1971, non-Bengalis were harassed and intimidated in
Thakurgaon by the Awami League militants. But in the last week of the month,
the killers went on the rampage and wiped out most of the non-Bengali
population in Thakurgaon. I was away from my house when an assassination
squad raided my house, looted it, murdered my two sons and kidnapped my
teenage daughter. When I returned to my house I saw it aflame. The bodies of
my sons lay on the doorstep. I knew that the killer gang was at work. Fearing
that they would return for me, I went into hiding in a dry water tank which had
a large hole in it. I slipped into it and covered it with leaves. It served as my
hideout for a fortnight before the Army crushed the rebels. “
Witnesses from Thakurgaon estimated that out of the 9,000 non-Bengalis who
lived in this town, barely 150 survived the March-April 1971 massacre. A non-
Bengali army major held nearly 1,000 Bengali rebels at bay for more than 72
hours. When his ammunition was exhausted, he fought the raiders with a dagger
and died a hero’s death. The killer mob slayed his wife and his children and
paraded their dead bodies as trophies of victory. The attacking mob was led by
the local leaders of the Awami League, the sons of the head of the local
administration and half a dozen police officers.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
103
HILLI
Amongst the other towns of Dinajpur district where non-Bengalis were
liquidated en masse by the Bengali rebels between the second fortnight of March
1971 and the third week of April were Hilli, Phulbari, Jamalganj, Ponchagarh and
Chaur Kai. Estimates of the non-Bengali death toll in these four towns ranged
from 3,000 to 4,000. The Times of London, in its issue of April 6, 1971, reported:
“Thousands of helpless Muslim refugees who had settled in Bengal at the time
of partition arc reported to have been massacred by angry Bengalis during the
past week The facts about the massacres were confirmed by Bihari Muslim
refugees who crossed the border into India this week and by a young British
technician who crossed the Indo-Pakistan frontier at Hilli today He said that
hundreds of non-Bengali Muslims have died in the north western town of
Dinajpur alone “.
Most of the killing of the non-Bengalis, it was gathered from eyewitnesses, was
conducted by the rebels of the East Bengal Regiment, the East Pakistan Rifles and
armed volunteers of the Awami League. The pattern and mode of extermination
of the non-Bengalis here was similar to “Operation loot, kill and burn “ staged
by the Bengali rebels in Dinajpur and Parbatipur. The rebels, as they retreated to
the sanctuary of the Indian border in the face of the advancing Pakistani Army,
carried away with them a number of teenage non-Bengali girls whom they had
kidnapped from Dinajpur and other places in the district. The border town of
Hilli remained for many days the principal escape chute of the Bengali rebels
into India. Some of these unfortunate captive girls — amongst them were a few
from Punjabi and Pathan families— made a brave and desperate bid to escape
the clutches of their fleeing captors but they were mowed down with machine
gunfire by the rebels in Hilli. The rebels, while they held Hilli, were aided by the
Indian Border Security Force and received arms and ammunition from their
Indian benefactors. In Phulbari, Ponchagarh, Jamalganj and Chaur Kai, the
liquidation of non-Bengali families was wholesale and ruthless. Some non-
Bengalis of Bihar origin, it is reported, escaped the rebels death noose and
succeeded in crossing the border into India. The Indian police and military forces
caught them and quite a few are believed to be languishing in jails in India.
Witnesses reported that not more than five per cent of the 5,000 non-Bengalis
who lived in the town of Ponchagarh survived the March-April 1971 massacre.
Awami league cadres, rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles and infiltrators from
India waged the massacre of the non-Bengalis in Ponchagarh.
The President of the East Pakistan Refugees Association, Diwan Wirasat Hussain,
in a memorandum submitted to the British Parliamentary Delegation in Dacca on

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
104
June 20, 1971, estimated that out of the more than 50,000 Muslim refugees from
India who had settled at the time of the 1947 Partition in Birganj, Manickpara,
Shetabganj, Sahebganj, Deviganj and Sall Danga in Dinajpur district, barely 150
survived the March-April 1971 massacre of non-Bengalis. According to his
figures, more than 100,000 non-Bengalis were killed in Dinajpur district.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
105
CHAPTER TEN
Slaughter in Laksham, Rajbari,
Goalundo and Faridpur
“I am the lone survivor of a family of nine; all my dear ones were butchered in
Laksham in March 1971 by the Bengali rebels “, said 59- year old Masoom Ali,
who was repatriated to Karachi from Dacca in February 1974.
Masoom Ali’s 26-year-old son was employed as a ticket checker in the East
Pakistan Railway at Laksham. He was killed in the carnage. Masoom Ali had this
painful memory of the murder of his family:
“
“The non-Bengali element in Laksham’s population did not exceed 1,000.
Amongst them were also some families of West Pakistan origin. The Bengalis
referred to all of us by the generic name of Bihari. Since the first week of March
1971, because of the Awami League’s uprising, acute tension existed in Laksham
and the non-Bengalis were apprehensive. The police force was immobilised as far
as the safety of the non-Bengalis was concerned; no policeman was willing to
rescue any non-Bengali from the thugs.
“In the night of March 19, 1971, about 500 Bengali rebels, many armed with guns,
raided the Railway quarters wherein lived the non-Bengali employees and their
families. The raid was conducted with such suddenness and ferocity that we had
no time even to think of escape. A killer gang broke the door of our house and
opened fire on all of us. In a matter of minutes our house was turned into a
slaughter-house; they killed my son, his wife and their four small children and
the teenage sister and brother of my daughter-in-law. One of the killers struck
me on the head and I was unconscious for two days. The federal troops, who
took over control of Laksham on April 16, 1971, arranged the burial of my dear
ones. For months I was mentally disturbed; I had dreadful nightmares. I think
that at least 800 non-Bengalis perished in the March 1971 massacre. I still
remember those lurid bloodstains on the walls and floor of Railway Quarter No.
93/H in Laksham where my kith and kin were done to death before my stunned,
helpless eyes. I wish I hadn’t survived “.
RAJBARI
“These broken glass bangles arc my most cherished possessions; they are the
only mementoes I have of my two pretty daughters who were kidnapped by the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
106
Bengali rebels from our house in Rajbari in the March 1971 rebellion “, said
sobbing Hafiza Begum, 46, in Karachi after her repatriation from Dacca in
January 1974.
“The butchers slaughtered my 55-year-old husband before my eyes and dragged
my brave, shrieking daughters at gunpoint to shame and death “, Hafiza
tearfully added.
Hafiza broke down a number of times as she narrated the harrowing details of
the gruesome tragedy in her life. She said:
“Rajbari had never experienced any tension between the Bengalis and the non-
Bengalis before the March 1971 uprising of the Awami League. We lived in the
Ganeshpur locality in a cluster of a dozen non-Bengali houses. Since early March,
alarming rumours were afloat but our Bengali friends told us that there would be
no violence in Rajbari against the non-Bengalis.
“In the night of March 19, 1971, I was sitting in the house of a neighbour when
our locality was raided by a large gang of Bengali rebels. Yells of “Joi Bangla
“ and the screams of the victims rent the skies. I rushed towards my house. On
the way, I saw the killer gangs smashing the locked doors of the houses of non-
Bengalis and attacking the inmates with daggers, staves, iron bars and scythes.
As I entered my house, I saw the butchers attacking my husband who was
resisting them. I heard the cries of my two unmarried daughters who were trying
to beat back the attackers with frying pans and small sticks. I joined the fray in
support of my family. One of the butchers struck me on the head and I collapsed
on the floor. The next day, when I regained consciousness, my husband lay dead
by my side. There were stab wounds all over his dead body. I had excruciating
pain in the neck and the left side of the skull. There was no trace of my two
daughters; I crawled into the room where my girls lived, I found these broken
bangles; their abandoned Saris had bloodstains. Like a mad woman, I limped out
of the house and shouted for them. I found no survivors in the houses of the non-
Bengalis. A frightened Bengali woman who lived in my neighbourhood helped
me hobble back to my house and advised me not to stir out otherwise the killers
would get me. I placed my husband’s blood-soaked body on a cot inside a room
because it was impossible to bury him just then
“After the Pakistan Army liberated Rajbari in the third week of April 1971, my
husband was laid to eternal rest in a local graveyard along with the other slain
non-Bengalis. For days, I roamed all over Rajbari town in search of my two
kidnapped daughters but I could not find them. The killers, it seemed, had
kidnapped scores of non-Bengali young women, ravished them and killed most
of them just before the federal troops regained control over Rajbari. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
107
Hafiza was sent to Dacca and lodged in a Relief Camp for destitute women and
children. In January 1974, she was repatriated to Karachi.
GOALUNDO, FARIDPUR
Two of the few survivors of the March 1971 killing of non-Bengalis in Rajbari
were Zarina Khatoon, 35, and her husband, Tamizuddin, who was employed in
the Power House in Rajbari. They lived in peace until December 17, 1971, when
India accomplished the armed grab of East Pakistan and the Mukti Bahini went
on the rampage against the non-Bengalis. Zarina and her husband, along with
their eight month-old son, fled from Rajbari to Goalundo where, it was
rumoured, the Red Cross would protect the non-Bengalis and accommodate
them in relief camps. At Goalundo, a killer gang gunned to death Zarina’s
husband in the market place before her stunned eyes. The Mukti Bahini gunmen
tossed Zarina and her suckling child into a jail in Faridpur town where hundreds
of non-Bengali women and children were held captive. Zarina said:
“Life in this dungeon of a jail in Faridpur was worse than death; many scores of
women died of hunger and disease. We ate barely a meal a day; the rice was full
of stones. Any one who protested against the abominable conditions in the
prison was given a beating by the prison guards. After six months, I was set free
along with some other non-Bengali women. All of us looked like skeletons. I got
a job as a maid-servant in the house of a Bengali businessman who had fattened
on the wealth of a West Pakistani family which was liquidated by the Mukti
Bahini after it captured Faridpur. He paid me no salary because, he said, he was
protecting me from the Mukti Bahini.
“When the Red Cross invited applications from non-Bengalis wishing to go to
Pakistan, I immediately applied for repatriation. In February 1974, the United
Nations repatriated me to Karachi from Dacca by air. “
Six months of incarceration in Faridpur jail and the horrifying memory of the
1971 massacre of her husband and many of her relatives in Rajbari, Faridpur and
Goalundo have made Zarina a nervous wreck. “I am continuing to live only for
the sake of my little child “, said Zarina, with tears brimming in her eyes. “I can
never forget the cold-blooded shooting of my husband in the market-place in
Goalundo, “ she added. In 1969, Zarina’s husband had worked for six months in
the Power House in Faridpur. In 1972, during her captivity in prison and, later
on, when she worked with a Bengali family as a maidservant, Zarina found no
trace of the dozens of non-Bengalis she had known in Faridpur in 1969. She was
told that most of them had been killed.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
108
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Brutality in Kushtia
Awami League militants and rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles unleashed their
genocidal fury on the non-Bengali population in the town of Kushtia in the last
week of March 1971 and it continued without a let-up right up to April 16 when
the Pakistan Army liberated it. It is estimated that more than 2,000 non-Bengalis
perished in the massacre in Kushtia town. Amongst the other towns in Kushtia
district, where non-Bengalis were liquidated en masse, were Chuadanga,
Meherpur and Zafarkandi. The death toll of non-Bengalis at these places was
well over 2,500.
Dulari Begum, 35, whose husband, Mohammed Shafee, was a Railway employee
and who lived in Quarter No. 13 in the Harding Bridge Colony in Kushtia,
punctuated her pathetic story with sobs and tears. She said:
“On March 23, the Bengali rebels ordered all the non-Bengalis in our residential
colony to congregate in the building of a school for safety. As they were the
rulers of the town, we had no choice but to obey their order. Once we were
inside the school building, the rebels cordoned it off. In the evening, a killer gang
armed with guns, daggers, sickles and spears attacked all the non-Bengali men in
this school-turned-abattoir. One of the killers stabbed my husband in the chest
and he died on the spot. They piled up the dead bodies in trucks and dumped
them in the river Ganges, if there was some life left in one of these bodies, he had
no chance of survival in the watery grave. The executions continued all through
the night and the killers took delight in torturing their victims.
“The next morning, the killer gang sprayed petrol on the doors and windows of
the school building and set it ablaze. Hundreds of wailing widows and I broke
through the locked gate of the building, rushed towards our houses and some of
us were wounded on the way by the rebels’ firing. I locked myself inside my
house; I found my eight year old son cowering under a table. My house was
looted by the vandals. After a few days, a band of Bengali rebels again raided my
house and tried to kidnap my son. But, miraculously, a posse of federal troops
reached our colony just in time and the rebels bolted. The Pakistan Army moved
me and my son to a camp in Ishurdi where widowed women and orphaned
children were accommodated. Except for my son, all my relatives had perished
in this cyclone of murder. My son and I underwent fresh suffering after India’s
conquest of East Pakistan in December 1971. We were repatriated to Karachi in
January 1974 “.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
109
Raj Bibi, 30, whose husband, Noor Khan, was a car driver in the Mohni Mill in
Kushtia, gave this sad account of his slaying by the Bengali rebels early in April
1971:
“On March 23, 1971, the Bengali rebels, who carried rifles and machine guns,
raided non-Bengali houses in the Arwapara locality near the Mohni Mill in
Kushtia. We lived in a rented house in this locality. The raiders ordered the non-
Bengalis to surrender their firearms which many of them did. Some non-Bengalis,
we learnt, were accused of storing firearms and they were clapped in a jail. Many
reports of the belabouring of non-Bengalis on the roads were received by us.
“On March 30, 1971, a band of Bengali rebels broke into our house. My husband
had slipped out of the backdoor into the paddy fields, but my brother, who was
well-built, fought the six attackers with amazing courage. My aged mother, who
ran to the resale of my bleeding brother, was struck on the head by a rebel with
his stave. She fell down and fainted. Blood gushed from her skull. In a burst of
wailing, I ran to the side of my mother. In the mean time, my brother injured
some of the attackers and escaped in the fields. For four days, my mother and I
lived in fear in our looted house. On April 4, a killer gang raided our area and
ordered sixty non-Bengalis to go with them to do forced labour. When they
refused and resisted their tormentors, a dozen armed rebel soldiers liquidated
them with machine guns. My husband and my brother returned to our house
within hours of the arrival of the Pakistan Army on April 16. My brother’s
wounds festered and despite medical treatment in hospital he died after a few
days. “
Raj Bibi’s mother was killed in the Indian bombing of Kushtia in the second week
of December 1971. The Mukti Bahini jailed her husband early in 1972 along with
many other Biharis and they were liquidated by their Bengali captors. In
February 1974, Raj Bibi was repatriated, along with her three-year-old daughter,
to Karachi.
Rasoolan, 40, whose husband, Mohammed Shakoor, was jailed and killed by the
rebels early in April 1971, said:
“In the last week of March 1971, armed bands of Awami Leaguers and rebel
Bengali soldiers raided non-Bengali houses in our locality and drove away
hundreds of non-Bengali men to the Kushtia jail. In a raid on my house, they
grabbed my husband, who was employed in the Telegraph Department, and
took him away. One of the raiders said he would be lodged in the jail. My aged
mother, my two children and I begged the raiders to spare my husband’s life but
they were brutes.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
110
“We locked the door of our house, shuttered the windows and prayed to God.
We had very little grain left. The grain shops had stopped selling food grains to
the non-Bengalis. ‘Don’t sell food to the Biharis’ read signboards in Bengali
owned shops. My mother and I lived on water for three days; my children—two
small sons and a daughter — ate uncooked rice and stale vegetables. Our effort
was to give the impression that no one lived in our house. We had also explored
an escape route for an emergency.
“Early in April, a killer gang banged on our door. We slipped out of the
backdoor and headed for the fields. In a barn, shielded by a large mound of earth,
we spent many days of fear and terror. The crackle of gunfire echoed all the day
long; the killers were busy killing. At night, I used to crawl to a pond to get water
for my thirsty children and my mother. It was polluted but it slaked our parched
throats. When the Pakistan Army regained control over Kushtia in mid-April
and we heard yells of “Pakistan Zindabad “ (Long Live Pakistan), instead of the
shouts of “Joi Bangla “, we moved out of our hideout. The federal troops were
kind to us and did their best to locate my missing husband. They said the rebels
had killed all the non-Bengalis they had put into the jail “.
Twenty-two-year-old Saida Khatoon, who lived with her husband, Zafar Alam
Malik, in the Thanapara locality of Kushtia and escaped the massacre of non-
Bengalis by seeking refuge in the house of a Bengali family, had this recollection
of the gruesome happenings in March 1971:
“Tortures of unthinkable bestiality were inflicted on the non-Bengalis who were
herded by the Bengali rebels in Kushtia jail in March 1971. I learnt from some
God-fearing Bengalis, after the Pakistan Army had liberated Kushtia that the
Bengali rebels had slaughtered all their non-Bengali captives held in this jail.
They were starved and denied water for days on end; any one who protested
was dragged into a dungeon-like room where he was bludgeoned to death. The
tormentors took delight in stripping their human prey naked and then they
singed their bare bodies with burning cigarettes.
“There was no trace left of almost all the non-Bengali women I knew before tile
March 1971 killing. They were also butchered. Some pregnant women were
killed by the Bengali rebels with indescribable beastliness. Their wombs were
ripped open with bayonets and their unborn babies were also killed.
“Some wounded Bengali rebels were treated in the Kushtia Hospital. The rebels
marched quite a few of their captives to the Hospital where at gunpoint they
were made to “donate “ blood for the wounded Bengalis. The “donors “ were

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
111
promised safety by their captors; invariably each one of them was gunned to
death. “
Saida Khatoon lived for some months in Kushtia. Just before India’s armed grab
of East Pakistan, she shifted to Dacca. In October 1973, she was repatriated to
Karachi.
“I heard the screams and crying of a Sindhi girl from the house next door where
she was being tortured and raped by her Bengali kidnapper “, said Mohammad
Ali, 33, who was stranded in Kushtia in the last week of March 1971. Employed
in the town of Pabna in a trading firm, he had gone to Kushtia on a business trip
when violence against the non-Bengalis erupted. Born and brought up in East
Pakistan, he spoke Bengali as well as a native of the land. Sheltered in the house
of a Bengali friend, he posed as a Bengali and escaped the massacre of non-
Bengalis in Kushtia. He was repatriated to Lahore in October 1973.

