Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
22
About the Dacca University and its affiliated Colleges, whose total destruction by
the Army was alleged by foreign information media hostile to Pakistan late in
March 1971, Maurice Quaintance of the Reuters News Agency had this to say
after visiting the University Campus on May 7, 1971:
“Journalists, Friday, were shown Dacca University where the Army fought a
pitched battle with students and Awami League supporters on the night of
March 25. The fighting centered on the two University dormitories, Iqbal and
Jagannath, where the Army say crude home-made bombs and an arsenal of
weapons boosted the defenders as the troops moved to take over the strongpoint.
A large hole in the dormitory showed where the Army used rockets to flush out
those they say rejected an offer to give themselves up. On the front lawn before
the dormitories, a senior officer took newsmen over a training area of barbed
wire entanglements and high stonewalls where he said students had trained for
the clash that was to come. “
About the captured Indian soldiers whom foreign newsmen met in Dacca and
the seized Indian arms and ammunition shown to them on May 7, 1971, Maurice
Quaintance of Reuters cabled:
“In Dacca, three Khaki-clad soldiers on Friday confessed they were captured
prisoners sent from India to Pakistan last month to help the dissident East
Pakistan Rifle units supporting the secessionists. Speaking through an interpreter,
one told six foreign correspondents at Dacca Army headquarters that he came
into Pakistan territory at night after being told with others of his platoon, that
they were moving to the border post.
“Army Headquarters in Dacca on Friday displayed a selection of captured
weapons and ammunition said to be mainly of Indian origin. They included
rifles, mortar bombs and hand grenades all of which, the Army said, bore
markings proving they were manufactured in India. “
London’s Daily Telegraph, in its issue of April 7, 1971, carried a report from its
staff correspondent in Dacca, quoting a native of Dundee:
“He describes how after President Yahya’s broadcast on March 26, a mob came
to the factory. The goondas (thugs) went on the rampage. They looted the factory
and offices, killed all the animals they could find and then started killing people.
They went to the houses of my four directors, all West Pakistanis, set fire to the
houses and burnt them alive, including families totalling 30. They killed the few
who ran out. “
The Sunday Times of London, reported in its issue of May 2, 1971:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
23
“Ten days of piecing together the details in East Pakistan have revealed a huge
and almost successful mutiny in the Pakistan Army and the brutal massacre of
thousands of non-Bengalis— men, women and children. More than 20,000 bodies
have been found so far in Bengal’s main towns but the final count could top
100,000.
“Eye-witnesses in more than 80 interviews tell horrifying stories of rape, torture,
eye-gouging, public flogging of men and women, women’s breasts being torn
out and amputations before victims were shot or bayoneted to death. Punjabi
Army personnel and civil servants and their families seem to have been singled
out for special brutality. “
White with fear and with dazed, unbelieving eyes, I saw a Bengali student jingo
behead a non-Bengali captive in a room in the Jagannath Hall of the Dacca
University on March 24, 1971 because his relatives failed to send the demanded
ransom of Rs. 3,000, said Mohammed Hanif, 23, who lived in Quarter No. 49 of
“B“ Block in the Lalmatia Colony in Dacca. Employed in the Tiger Wire
Company in Dacca, Hanif said on his repatriation to Karachi in January 1974:
“In the afternoon of March 24, I engaged a motorised Rickshaw (three-
wheeled taxi) and asked the driver to take me to my home in Lalmatia
Colony. I had spoken to him in broken Bengali and he knew that I was a
non-Bengali. All of a sudden and in spite of my shouts in anger, he drove
the vehicle into the compound of the Jagannath Hall where six armed
students grabbed me. They took me inside a shuttered room where they
frisked me thoroughly and snatched my watch and Rs. 150 from my
pocket. They told me that I should write a letter to my close relatives,
asking them to hand over to the bearer Rs. 3000 as ransom money to save
my life. I hesitated and asked for some time to make up my mind. They
tied my hands with strong ropes and marched me to a large hall where
many roped non-Bengali captives squatted on the ground.
“The student jingo who had asked me to write the ransom letter paced
towards a hapless victim at the far end of the hall. He told his prey in
Bengali that the ransom money had not materialised and the deadline
given to his relatives had passed, so he must die. The terrified victim
shouted, squirmed and tried to run. But six toughs grabbed him while the
jingo in the lead slit his throat with a ‘Ramdao’ (a kind of dagger) and
decapitated him
“I was horror-stricken by what I had seen. At midnight, I told my captors
that I would write the ransom letter to my elder brother. I wrote it in the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
24
morning of March 25 and asked my brother to arrange to give my captors
Rs. 3,000 within 24 hours. The deadline set by the Bengali captors for the
receipt of money was the morning of March 26. But God was merciful and
late in the night of March 25, the Army went into action against the rebels
in Dacca and they were routed in the Jagannath Hall encounter. We were
rescued by the federal troops“.
“I am the lone survivor of a group of ten Pathans who were employed as
Security Guards by the Delta Construction Company in the Mohakhali
locality in Dacca; all the others were slaughtered by the Bengali rebels in
the night of March 25, 1971 “, said 40-year-old Bacha Khan. He said he
escaped death by climbing a tree in the darkness of the night.
Repatriated to Karachi from Dacca in September 1973, Bacha Khan said:
“I was one of a group of ten Pathans employed by the Delta Construction
Company in Dacca. We lived in the staff quarters in the Company’s
premises. Since the first week of March, the Awami League militants and
young thugs were intimidating non-Bengalis, particularly the West
Pakistanis. So all of us were on the alert.
“On March 25, a killer gang of Bengali rebels raided our staff quarters. As
it was a surprise attack, they succeeded in killing three Pathan guards. I
and the other surviving Pathans decided to put up a fight with the three
guns we had. We held the raiders at bay for some time but they had more
ammunition than we had. Taking advantage of the darkness all around, I
slipped away from the scene and climbed a tree. The next morning I saw
the dead bodies of the six other Pathans whom the rebels had killed at
night after their ammunition was exhausted. The rebels took away our
guns. “
“The rebels burnt my hut and killed my nine-year-old son on March 17,
1971 “, said 36-year-old Chand Meah who was employed in the Bengal
Rubber Industries in Dacca. He lived in a hut in the Nakhalpara locality in
the Tejgaon suburb on the way to the Dacca Airport. Chand Meah was
repatriated to Karachi from Dacca in January 1974. He said: “Nakhalpara
was very near the factory where I worked. I had saved some money and
bought a small plot of land in this locality. I had erected a hut because I
could not just then afford to build a pucca house. My wife, my 9 year-old
son and I lived in it. Our relations with our Bengali neighbours were
friendly. Since the first week of March, an element of tension had crept in
because of inflammatory harangues by Awami League demagogues and
there were rumours that there would be a carnage of non-Bengalis.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
25
“On March 17, when I was away from my hut on duty in the factory, a
large killer gang of Awami League thugs attacked the non-Bengali huts in
Nakhalpara, looted them and put them to the torch. They also burnt my
hut and killed my son, who, in spite of his young age, tried to resist the
attackers. When I returned to what once was my home I found the rubble
still smouldering and my wife was lamenting over the dead body of our
dear son “.
“I estimate that some 1,000 non-Bengalis were killed or wounded in barely three
hours in the Adamjee Nagar New Colony in Dacca on March 19, 1971 “, said
Mohammed Farid, 26, who was employed as Assistant Supervisor in the
Spinning section of the Adamjee factory.
Farid, who witnessed the gruesome massacre and escaped it by dint of good luck,
was repatriated to Karachi in January 1974. He said:
“Adamjee Nagar had in the past witnessed tension between the Bengali
and non-Bengali employees and many non-Bengalis had suffered in
clashes. The Awami League had built up a base of influence amongst the
Bengali workers and since the first week of March 1971, party cadres were
inciting the Bengali workers against the non-Bengalis.
“On March 19, a killer gang of Awami League militants, armed with guns,
sickles, daggers and staves came into our factory. The Bengali security
guards joined them and they rampaged through the mill and the houses
of the non-Bengali millhands.
“The killer gang attacked the Weaving section and slayed scores of non-
Bengali employees in barely half an hour of Operation Murder. I saw
many dozens of wounded millhands running towards my Spinning
section. I hid myself behind a big machine at the far end of the Hall. The
killers swarmed into my unit and attacked the non-Bengal employees.
Some of the victims ran out and the killers chased them, shooting with
guns. The killing spree of the rebels continued for nearly three hours. At
night, when I emerged from hiding, hundreds of dead bodies were
littered all over the factory premises. The killer gang looted the houses of
non-Bengalis and burnt many. They slaughtered hundreds of innocent
men, women and children and threw many corpses into flaming houses
“Close to the water tank lay the dead bodies of many non-Bengali girls
who, I learnt, were ravished by the killers and then murdered. It was a
terrible scene. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
26
“A Bengali neighbour sheltered me and my aged mother from the terror
and fury of the killer gang which had slaughtered my husband, my father
and my two teenage brothers “, said 22-year-old Roshanara Begum who
lived in a house in the Tong: suburb of Dacca. In the March 23 raid on her
house, the killer gang set it on fire and also kidnapped her teenage sister.
Repatriated to Karachi in December 1973, she gave this pathetic account of her
woes:
“My parents hailed from the Indian state of Bihar but my brothers, my
sister and I were born in Dacca. My father was employed in the Postal
Department and he had opted for service in East Pakistan in the 1947
Partition of the sub-continent. He bought a plot of land in Tongi in Dacca
and built a modest little house on it. We lived in peace and we had
excellent relations with our Bengali neighbours “Since the first week of
March, Awami League militants were spreading hatred for non-Bengalis
amongst the Bengali population.
The situation was tense and we had heard of attacks by killer gangs on
non-Bengali homes in many localities of Dacca city. But our neighbours
were decent people and they assured us that we were safe. All of us spoke
excellent Bengali but our mother tongue was Urdu. So we were known as
Biharis. At school, I studied through the medium of Bengali language.
“In the night of March 23, 1971, an armed gang of Awami League thugs
raided our house. They looted it and set it ablaze. We had no guns. The
raiders overpowered my father, my husband and my two young brothers
and shot them. They kidnapped my teenage sister. In the encounter
between my male relatives and the killers, my mother and I succeeded in
escaping through the backyard into the house of a God-fearing and gentle
Bengali neighbour who sympathised with us and hid us in his home.
Aged 15, my sister was a student in the 9th class in school. After the
federal troops routed the rebels on March 26, I did my best to trace her but
we could not locate her. The Bengali rebels had kidnapped non-Bengali
girls by the hundreds in Dacca and slaughtered them before the federal
army crushed their rebellion. The souvenir I have of my loving husband is
our two and half year old son who was born to me a few months after the
slaying of Feroz Ahmed, my husband “.
“I heard the screams of an Urdu-speaking girl who was being ravished by
her Bengali captors but I was so scared that I did not have the courage to
emerge from hiding “, said 24 year-old Zahid Abdi, who was employed in

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
27
a trading firm in Dacca. He escaped the slaughter of non-Bengalis in the
crowded New Market locality of Dacca on March 23, 1971 and was
sheltered by a God-fearing Bengali in his shop. The killers raped their
non-Bengali teenage victim at the back of the shop and later on slayed her.
Repatriated to Karachi in October 1973, Zahid Abdi said:
“On March 23, I took a bus to the New Market shopping locality in Dacca.
As the bus neared my destination, I saw a crowd of Awami League thugs,
armed with guns and daggers, on the rampage. Even before the bus could
come to a halt, I jumped from it and ran towards a side lane. I had heard
that some non-Bengali passengers had been molested or done to death by
the Awami League hoodlums. On the way towards the side lane, I saw a
few wounded men sprawled on the roadside. A Bengali shopkeeper,
whom I had known in the past, took pity on me and hid me in his shop.
When he saw some thugs coming towards it he locked it up, with me in
hiding, and stood guard. When the killers came, he told them that he was
a Bengali and that he had shut his shop for the day.
“Acting on his advice, I decided to spend the night in the shop because
the road back home was unsafe. Late at night, I heard the screams and
shouts for help in Urdu of a girl who was being ravished by her captors in
a dark place close to the shop where I was hiding. Her four captors took
turns to rape her. After they had accomplished their satanic acts, the killer
gang shot the girl and melted away in the void of the night. The shop was
locked, and in the forenoon, when my protector opened it, I told him of
the fiendish happening of the previous night. We looked for the body of
the girl; there was no trace of it but bloodstains and torn pieces of a
woman’s clothing were visible at the spot where I thought that the girl
was raped and murdered. My Bengali saviour, with tears in his eyes, told
me that hundreds of non-Bengali girls had suffered a similar tragic fate
and that the devil’s minions were on the loose all over the city. “
Zahid Abdi’s estimate is that some 2000 innocent, hapless non-Bengalis perished
in the carnage in the New Market shopping locality and its neighbourhood.
“The thugs did not spare a single non-Bengali shop or business premises
in the area and looted every article of value “, said Zahid Abdi.
“I wish the federal Army had crushed the Awami League militants with full
force in Dacca in the very first week of March 1971 when they had defied the
Government’s authority“, said Anisur Rahman, 26, who was employed in a

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
28
trading firm in Dacca. A graduate of the Dacca University, he lived in the
Nawabpur locality and was repatriated to Karachi in February 1974. He said:
“On March 23, a huge mob of Awami League militants, many with
blazing guns, went on the rampage in the Nawabpur locality. They looted
the houses of non-Bengalis, machine gunned the inmates and burnt many
houses. They looted every shop owned by a non-Bengali. Some of my
relatives perished in the carnage in our locality. My escape was nothing
short of a miracle.
“The Awami League militants had guns and plenty of ammunition.
Amongst the killers were many Hindus who appeared to be well-trained
in the use of firearms. On March 9, the Awami Leaguers had taken away,
under the pain of dire punishment, weapons owned by non-Bengalis. We
were rendered defenceless. In the period of the Awami League’s
insurgency in Dacca, kidnapping non-Bengalis for ransom and then
slaying them was the favourite modus operandi of the Awami League
rebels. Hundreds of student bodies had sprouted all over the city and
their hoodlums staged daring hold-ups on the roads and looted the
houses of non-Bengalis. The Awami League High Command had frozen
the bank accounts of non-Bengalis and restricted their withdrawal right.
Awami League cadres used to reap huge cuts by getting sanctions for
larger cash with drawals by the non-Bengalis. The kidnappers of many
affluent West Pakistanis seized their cars as ransom. From March 1 to 25,
Dacca had no government and no administration worth the name; it was
Thug
Rule.
Some
Bengali
civil
servants,
who
were
loyal
to
the
Government, wanted to go to their offices. The Awami League cadres
warned them that they and their dear ones would be turned into
mincemeat if they disobeyed Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s strike order. “
“Dacca was a city of terror and fire in the third week of March 1971 “, said
Mohammad Taha, 55, who lived all through that nightmarish period in his house
on Noor Jahan Road in Dacca. Repatriated to Karachi from Kathmandu, where
he had escaped from the Mukti Bahini in East Pakistan, Taha said in March 1974:
“The crescendo of the Awami League’s violence rose sharply in the
second week of March 1971 and life became a nightmare for tens of
thousands of innocent non-Bengalis who had never even tinkered with
politics“.
Taha added: “Arson, rape and murder had become the order of the day.
Three of my very close relatives were killed in the carnage.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
29
Killer gangs shanghaied non-Bengalis on the streets and from their homes
and the Bengali police had gone into purdah. The non-Bengalis thanked
God when the federal Army went into action against the ruthless rebels.
But on December 17, 1971, when the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini
seized Dacca, hell burst upon the non-Bengalis again and hundreds of
thousands of innocent people were butchered by the Mukti Bahini victors
and their trigger-happy supporters “.
Shah Imam, 30, who was engaged in business in Dacca and who lived in the
Bikrampur locality, testified:
“In the third week of March 1971, a Bengali killer gang murdered my
paternal uncle, my elder brother and his teenage son in a steamer on way
from Barisal to Dacca.
“I learnt from the Bengali bargeman that, in midstream, about 50 armed
thugs, shouting ‘Joi Bangla’, attacked the non-Bengali passengers. They
forced the Sareng (captain) to anchor the steamer on a deserted bank of
the river. The killer gang lined up the non-Bengali passengers on the bank
of the river and gunned them to death. They pilfered every article of value
from the bodies of the slain men, women and children and threw the dead
into the river. After the federal troops routed the rebels, I tried to locate
the dead bodies of my murdered relatives and visited the scene of the
slaughter but there was no trace of them although there were bloodstains
at many places along the bank. “
Shah Imam was repatriated to Karachi in March 1974.
“My only daughter has been insane since she was forced by her savage
tormentors to watch the brutal murder of her husband “, said Mukhtar
Ahmed Khan, 43, while giving an account of his suffering during the Ides
of March 1971 in Dacca. Repatriated to Karachi in January 1974, he said:
“We lived in a rented house in Abdul Aziz Lane in Dacca. I was in
business and we had prospered. I had married my daughter to a
promising young man.
“In the third week of March 1971, a gang of armed Bengali rebels raided
the house of my son-in-law and overpowered him. He was a courageous
young man and he resisted the attackers. My daughter also resisted the
attackers but they were far too many and they were well-armed. They tied
up my son-in-law and my daughter with ropes and they forced her to
watch as they slit the throat of her husband and ripped his stomach open

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
30
in the style of butchers. She fainted and lost consciousness. Since that
dreadful day, she has been mentally ill. She trembles and she raves many
a time as memory reminds her of that grisly event in her broken life. “
“We sought refuge, with our wounded father in the woods near Tongi, a
suburb in Dacca, and lived there on water and wild fruits for three days “,
said Ayesha Khatoon, 22, on her repatriation to Karachi from Dacca in
February 1974. She testified:
“On March 25, 1971, a killer gang broke into our house and looted all the
valuables we had. They trucked away all the loot. My father, Mr.
Nooruddin, a local businessman who owned the house, resisted the
raiders. The Bengali rebels stabbed him in the chest and escaped with
their booty.
“As the killers had said that they would return, my brother and I helped
our father walk some distance to the woods nearby. We spread a bed
sheet and my wounded father lay on it. I bandaged his wounds but we
had no food. My brother brought water from the pond and some wild
fruits. We lived on this repast for three days. In the afternoon of March 28,
we spotted some Pakistani troops and my brother ran towards them. The
soldiers took us back to our home. I nursed back my father to full recovery.
“But more travail and misfortune lay in store for us. After less than 9
months, the Mukti Bahini went on the rampage against the non-Bengalis
in Dacca. In the last week of December 1971, a gang of armed Bengalis
came to my house and grabbed my husband, Zafar Alam. They asked us
to give them all the cash and my ornaments. I had none left. They said that
they would set free my husband if my father signed a bogus document of
sale of our house to the leader of the killer gang. To save the life of my
husband, my father readily agreed to do so. The killer gang promised to
bring back my husband after some questioning. Full two years have
passed and I have no news of him. I presume that the thugs killed him. I
understand that the killer gangs practised this fraud on a lot of helpless
non-Bengalis after the Indians and the Mukti Bahini occupied East
Pakistan in December 1971. The killer gang drove us from our house and
we lived in the Red Cross camp in Dacca. “
Aliya Bibi, 40, who lived in a flat with her son in the Mohammedpur locality in
Dacca, reported after her arrival in Karachi in January 1974:
“On March 25, 1971, a gang of Awami League militants and some thugs
raided my house and looted it. They did not spare anything of value. My

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
31
16-year-old son had climbed an umbrageous tree and the raiders did not
detect him.
“But in the last week of December 1971, he was killed by the Mukti Bahini.
Life has been a torment for me since then. “
Saira Khatoon, 35, who lived in Mirpur in Dacca, gave this account of the
murder of her husband, Abdul Hamid, in the March 1971 carnage of non-
Bengalis in Dacca:
“My husband left our home in Mirpur on March 25 to go to a meeting in
the city. On the way the Bengali rebels waylaid and murdered him.
“As I did not see his dead body, I appealed to the federal Army to help
me in locating my husband, dead or alive. The Army tried to trace him but
the presumption was that he was ambushed and killed as was the fate of
my other male relatives in Dacca and other places in East Pakistan “, said
Saira Khatoon.
“I have no choice but to believe that my husband was killed by the rebels
in March 1971 “, she added. “Hundreds of non-Bengali teenage girls were
kidnapped, raped and murdered “, she further said.
Zaibunnissa, 33, lived in a flat on Noor Jahan Road in the Mohammadpur
locality of Dacca. Her husband, Abdus Salam, was employed as a driver in the
Dacca office of the Pakistan International Airlines. She gave this account of the
raid on her house by the Bengali rebels and the death of her husband:
“On March 25, 1971, a gang of Awami League militants raided our house.
My husband resisted the attackers and grappled with them. The raiders
were armed and they overpowered him. They stabbed him and then
looted our house. After the raiders had gone, I felt some sign of life in my
husband. The next morning I took him to a local hospital. The rebels had
been routed but the Bengali hospital staff was sullen. They did not pay
much attention and my husband died.
“After December 16, 1971, my 10 year old son and I suffered again. The
Mukti Bahini wanted to kidnap my son and I had to keep him in hiding
for days on end until we were moved to a Red Cross Camp. Even there,
the Mukti Bahini used to kidnap the non-Bengali men and teenage girls
every now and then. “

