Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
122
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Terror Rule in Noakhali
Although the population of non-Bengalis in Noakhali did not exceed 2,500, they
commanded respect in the town and their relations with the Bengalis were
friendly. Most of them were employed in trading firms; some owned shops and
small businesses. Since the middle of March 1971 tension was felt in Noakhali
and the non-Bengalis felt unsafe. On March 21-23, 1971, armed bands of Awami
Leaguers and the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles and Ansars conducted the
extermination of the non-Bengali ethnic minority in Noakhali. It is estimated that
some 2,000 non-Bengali men, women and children were butchered in this
carnage. The rebels kidnapped many non-Bengali teenage girls, raped them and
killed most of them before the Pakistan Army routed them in the last week of
April, 1971.
An eye-witness of the March killing in Noakhali was Fazlul Haque, 37, who
worked in the Noakhali branch of the Eastern Federal Insurance Company.
Before his posting in Noakhali in 1969, he lived in Chittagong. He was all by
himself in Noakhali; his parents and other relatives were in Chittagong. His
testimony reads:
“All the nine inmates, two others, like me, were forewarned and had stayed
away. Almost three-fourth of the non-Bengali population in Noakhali perished in
this pogrom. Even women and children were slaughtered by the hundreds “.
Witnesses from Noakhali said that they had received reports of violence against
non-Bengali families in Maijdi, Begumganj, Chaumohni, Hatia and Lakshmipur.
The population of non-Bengalis at these places was not large and they were
scattered. Some non-Bengali traders, it seems, were held for ransom and their
retail shops were looted. At Maijdi Railway station, some non-Bengali Railway
employees were manhandled and killed during the March 1971 disturbances.
Between the last week of March and the last week of April 1971, a few non-
Bengalis were killed by the Awami League militants in some of the off-shore
islands, including Sandwip, South Hatia, and Dakhin Shahbazpur.
“A dozen Urdu-speaking employees of the Eastern Federal Insurance Company
had rented an apartment on New Road in Noakhali. It was like a Mess. I lived in
this apartment. My co-residents and I had good relations with our Bengali
neighbours.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
123
“In the second week of March 1971, some non-Bengalis were roughed up,
without the slightest provocation, by Awami League militants. On March 20,
1971, when I went to my office, some Bengali colleagues warned me that the
Awami League militants would attack the houses of non-Bengalis. They urged
me not to go back to my apartment. In the afternoon, armed bands of Awami
Leaguers went on the rampage against non-Bengalis, looting their houses and
gunning the men to death. I hid myself for three days in the bathroom of my
office building. Subsequently, I sought refuge in the home of a Bengali colleague.
The killers had raided the communal apartment where I used to live and they
had murdered.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
124
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Sorrows of Sylhet
The intensity of the Awami League’s rebellion in most parts of the Sylhet district
was not as severe as in many other districts of the province. One of the reasons
was that the population of non-Bengalis in Sylhet was not large. Another reason
was that the indigenous inhabitants of Sylhet (of Assamese origin) were opposed
to the Awami League’s plans for establishing an independent Bengali state. In
the 1947 British-supervised referendum on the issue whether Sylhet should stay
in India or join Pakistan, the people of the district gave a massive vote in favour
of Pakistan. The proposal for a province of North Bengal drew immense support
from the indigenous Assamese inhabitants of Sylhet district.
The Awami League’s terror machine wrecked the peace in Sylhet in March 1971
and some non-Bengalis were slaughtered by murderous gangs of Awami League
militants who received arms smuggled from neighbouring India. In the tea
gardens in Sylhet district, Awami League activists incited the Bengali labour to
violence against the non-Bengali executives and other staff members and some
families were slaughtered. The exact number of the non-Bengalis in Sylhet who
were killed in March 1971 is difficult to ascertain but it is believed to be in the
neighbourhood of 500.
“The killer gang broke into our house in Sylhet and gunned my only son and his
wife to death “, said 50-year-old Mrs. Wahida Khatoon in Karachi. Her son, Zafar
Ahmed Siddiqi, employed as an Accountant in the Sylhet office of the Pakistan
International Airlines, and his wife, Siddiqa, were shot dead on April 4, 1971, by
a posse of rebel gunmen in their home in the heart of the town. When Wahida
Khatoon tried to save her son, a killer shot at her and the bullet scraped her skull,
leaving a gash in it. She still bears the scar of that wound. But far worse is the
scar on her heart caused by the slaughter of her son and his wife. Wahida Begum
said in her testimony:
“The killers said they were shooting us because we did not belong to Bengal and
because Urdu was our mother tongue. They looted our house.
“I was wounded and I bled profusely. My son, Zafar’s six children were
orphaned. In this horrifying tragedy, our 18-year-old Bengali maidservant,
Hajera, was a tower of strength. She shielded my grand-children from the fire
and fury of the rebels who had killed my son and his wife. The Bengali land lord
of our house, moved by our plight, sheltered us in his own home and arranged

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
125
for my medical treatment. Our maid servant, Hajera, looked after me and my
grand-children with utmost devotion and at a peril to her life. Of Bengali origin,
she was born in Sylhet and had worked in our home for some years.
“My eldest son, Nasim Ahmed Siddiqi, was employed as an Executive Engineer
in Serajganj. In March 1971, his house was looted by the rebels and he was
tortured in the local jail. His life was saved by his Bengali assistant.
“When the killer gang ransacked our house, Hajera begged them not to kill us.
She was hit by a gunman’s bullet in the leg as she leaned over Zafar’s little
daughter to protect her.
“On May 4, we left Sylhet and came to Pakistan through a long and arduous
route. Hajera came with us and cheerfully bore the tribulations of this hazardous
journey.
“I can never forget that grisly night of April 4, 1971, when the killer gang had
murdered, before my stunned eyes, my son and his wife and I was injured. All
through the night, Hajera and the children cried over the blood-spattered bodies
of Zafar and his wife. The next day some Sylheti neighbours and our Bengali
landlord came and buried the dead bodies in the grave yard and I was
hospitalised with their help. “
Reports of violence against non-Bengali families were received in March-April
1971 from Lalabazar, Fenchuganj, Gopalganj, Gobinda-ganj, Balaganj and
Jagannathpur. The federal Army secured Sylhet on April, 10, 1971.
Mohammed Jalaluddin Khan, 22, whose father was the Station Master at the
Mantala Railway Station near Sylhet, testified after his patriation to Lahore from
Dacca in September 1973:
“I was a Third Year student in the Shah Jalal College at Mantala. In the 1947
Partition, my parents had migrated from Uttar Pradesh in India to East Pakistan.
On March 2, 1971, a gang of Awami League hoodlums raided our house in
Mantala and took away all the valuables in our home. But they spared our lives.
My father had built a house in Ghorasal near Dacca because he intended to live
there after his retirement from the Railway service. Soon after our house in
Mantala was looted, we proceeded by train to Ghorasal. At the Railway Station, a
Bengali member of the Jamaat-e-Islami told us that Ghorasal had become unsafe
for non-Bengalis and that we should go to Dacca (where my brother-in-law lived
in the Mohammedpur locality). In Dacca, the Awami League’s terror regime held
the city in its grip and life was a nightmare for the non-Bengalis. We lived in
Mohammedpur which was an oasis of safety for the non-Bengalis. For days, we

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
126
held at bay killer gangs led by the Awami League militants. Some of the non-
Bengalis from Mohammedpur, who committed the folly of stirring out of the
locality at night, were never seen again; they were shanghaied and liquidated by
killer gangs. The Pakistan Army’s intervention on March 25, 1971, was a life-
saver for us “.
After the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini seized Dacca in the third week of
December 1971, Jalaluddin and his elder brother were kidnapped from
Mohammedpur by a killer gang and taken to a human slaughter-house in a river-
side area called Bandh in Dacca. Jalaluddin was almost petrified when he saw
these cut-throats butchering his elder brother.
“I prayed to God “, said
Jalaluddin, “and all of a sudden I felt the surge of strength in my body. I broke
through the cordon of the slaughterers and ran towards the Bihari Camp in the
Girls’ College on Nurjehan Road. The Bengali officer-in-charge of the Camp gave
me asylum and I lived in it until my repatriation to Pakistan in September 1973. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
127
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Shootings in Molvi Bazar, Bheramara, Narkuldanga
“The Bengali insurgents made their non-Bengali captives dig their own graves
before gunning them to death “ reported 34-year-old Qamruddin Khan, who
owned a tailoring shop in the Tulsitala locality of Molvi Bazar.
“There were very few survivors of the March-April, 1971 massacre of the non-
Bengalis in Molvi Bazar “, he added.
Qamruddin Khan, who was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in October 1973,
had this recollection of that heart-chilling pogrom:
“I had migrated in 1950 from Bihar to East Pakistan. I liked Molvi Bazar and I set
up my business of tailoring. I spoke Bengali very well and I had Bengali and non-
Bengali customers.
“There had never before been any tension between the Bengalis and the non-
Bengalis. Since early March 1971, the Awami League militants were fanning
hatred for the non-Bengalis by spreading all manner of false rumours.
“On March 19-20, the lava burst and the Awami Leaguers and the rebels of the
East Pakistan Rifles and the police conducted the wholesale slaughter of the non-
Bengalis—men, women and children. Non-Bengali men who resisted the Bengali
attackers in their homes were gunned to death right inside their homes; others
were dragged to paddy fields or the banks of rivers where they were lined up
and machine-gunned. Many dead bodies were thrown in heaps in shallow
graves; others were tossed into the river. The killers showed no mercy to children,
particularly boys. Good-looking teenage girls were kidnapped for sexual assault
by the insurgents; most of them were shot or throttled to death before their
violators fled from the town after the Pakistan Army liberated it on April 28,
1971. “
Qamruddin had a miraculous escape; he sought refuge in a small Mosque where
he lived as a dumb mendicant for a month.
He added: “Some Bengalis tried to protect their non-Bengali neighbours. This
was at a grave risk to their own lives. The police had ceased to function; the
policemen had joined the rebels in plunder and murder. Anyone who challenged
the Bengali rebels was swiftly liquidated. My estimate is that some 2,000 non-
Bengalis perished in the March-April, 1971 massacre in Molvi Bazar. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
128
BHERAMARA
“I wish my captors had killed me just as they had slaughtered my loving
husband in Bheramara on March 22, 1971 “, said 21-year-old Nasim Jahan, who
was abducted and ravished by a Bengali rebel during the Awami League’s
uprising in East Pakistan.
Nasim, who was repatriated to Karachi in November 1973, sobbed out the story
of her woes and suffering in these words:
“We lived in the Taltala locality of Bheramara; our neighbours were mostly non-
Bengalis. My husband, Qudratullah, was employed in a local trading firm. He
had a double-barrel gun in the house.
“Since the first week of March 1971, the non-Bengalis were subjected to threats
and intimidation by the Awami League militants. In the middle of the month,
when the rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles and the Ansars joined the Awami
Leaguers, some non-Bengalis were savaged on the streets.
“On March 22, a huge mob of armed insurgents went berserk and soaked our
locality in blood. Many of the attackers had rifles and machine-guns. When they
raided our house, my brave husband tried to hold them at bay by firing his gun
on them. They riddled our house with bullets. When our ammunition was
exhausted, the gunmen ripped open our front door and killed my husband
brutally. As he writhed in the agony of death, they brained his skull with a
bayonet. The memory of that heart-rending scene haunts me constantly. I tried to
kill myself with a kitchen knife to escape their clutches; one of them
overpowered me and dragged me to a deserted building where many captive
young women like me were held under heavy guard. Late at night, a killer gang
arrived to feast on us; we were their booty, their slavegirls. It was the night of
insufferable torture, shame and sin for the captive non-Bengali women.
“The next morning, one of our captors claimed me as his share of the loot. A
bachelor, he said he needed a cook in his house. At gunpoint and wearing a torn
Sari, I walked in shame and tears to his mudhouse. He warned me that I would
be caught and killed if I tried to escape. For a fortnight, I lived in his bouse and
cooked food for him and he raped me. A day before the federal troops captured
Bheramara, he said he would quit the town and that as an act of mercy he would
spare my life. The captors of the other non-Bengali girls had instructions from
the rebel commander to kill them before withdrawing from the town. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
129
After Bheramara was liberated by a contingent of the Pakistan Army, Nasim
Jahan was moved to a Relief Camp in Dacca. Along with some relatives, she
escaped to Nepal and lived in Kathmandu for some months.
NARKULDANGA
Maqsood Ahmed, 22, who was a student in Bheramara, lost his two brothers and
his paternal uncle in the carnage of non-Bengalis in Narkuldanga on March 22-23,
1971. He escaped to Nepal and was repatriated from there to Karachi in January
1974. He gave this account of the March massacre:
“The Bengalis and non-Bengalis had lived like brothers in Bheramara and
Narkuldanga. We lived in the Ferozepur Colony in Narkuldanga; most of its
residents were non-Bengalis. Some years ago, a non-Bengali religious divine died;
Bengalis and non-Bengalis jointly contributed to the construction of a tomb for
him. Every year, on the occasion of his death anniversary, there used to be large
congregations of Bengalis and non-Bengalis at Feroze Baba’s tomb. The Mosque
in our locality always drew a large crowd of Muslims at prayer-time.
“Since the first week of March 1971, Awami Leaguers sowed discord between
Bengalis and non-Bengalis by spreading false rumours. We learnt that some
armed Bengalis from India had surreptitiously come to Bheramara and
Narkuldanga and that they were training the local Awami Leaguers in the use of
firearms.
“On March 23, about 500 Awami Leaguers and rebel soldiers, armed with sten
guns, rifles and daggers (Ramdaos) attacked our locality and slaughtered the
non-Bengali menfolk by the hundreds. Some families who sought refuge in the
premises of this tomb were mowed down with gunfire. The rebels looted every
house after its non-Bengali occupants had been liquidated. They murdered even
children. The killers kidnapped many young women and teenage girls. They
were raped and quite a few were shot dead before the rebels retreated from the
town. I had slipped out of my house just when the slayers entered our locality; I
hid myself in a grain store for some days. My uncle and my two elder brothers
were killed by the rebels. “
The death toll in the massacre of the non-Bengalis in Bheramara and
Narkuldanga in March-April 1971 was estimated at more than 2,000. An accurate
figure was difficult to reach because the rebels burnt many dead bodies in
blazing houses.
Zamir Ali, 52, who lived in the Ferozepur Colony in Narkuldanga, spent the last
two weeks of March 1971 in Raita with his cousin who was married to a Bengali

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
130
woman. His cousin was a contractor and did business with the Railway staff at
Raita. According to Zamir Ali, six non-Bengali families were murdered in the last
week of March 1971 by the Bengali rebels in Raita town and their dead bodies
were flung into the Padma River. The house of his cousin was attacked in mid-
March by a killer squad but the plaintive urgings of his Bengali wife, whose
father wielded influence in Raita, saved the family from the cut-throats, Zamir
Ali was repatriated to Pakistan in December 1973.
While he was away in Raita, Zamir Ali’s one-room house in Narkuldanga was
looted by the rebels. He did not have a family; his wife and his son had died in
1967 in a smallpox epidemic. According to Zamir Ali, the Bengali rebels escaped
en masse to India from Raita and many other towns in the Kushtia district. The
fleeing Bengali rebels from Bheramara and Narkuldanga, he said, brought with
them many teenage non-Bengali captive girls to Raita en route to West Bengal
where the Indian authorities gave them sanctuary. Some non-Bengali girls, who
tried to escape, were brutally killed by their captors, he added.
Razzaq Ali, who lived and worked in Bheramara, was in the town of Kumarkhali
in the last week of March 1971. Aged 44, Razzaq was employed as a clerk in a
small trading firm in Bheramara. He claimed that almost all the 100 or more non-
Bengalis in Kumarkhali were massacred in the last week of March by the Bengali
rebels. He was repatriated to Pakistan in January 1974. He testified:
“I was born in Calcutta, and, although my father hailed from Bihar, I spoke
Bengali like a native. After Partition in 1947, I settled in the Kushtia district. The
Awami Leaguers and their supporters massacred most of the non-Bengali male
adults in Bheramara. I was a bachelor and I lived with a Bengali family whom I
had known from Calcutta. I had to go to Kumarkhali on urgent business. I was
not detected by the Bengali rebels because of my excellent command of the
Bengali language. On March 28, I saw dozens of dead bodies of non-Bengali men
on the pavements in Kumarkhali; their houses were looted and burnt. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
131
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Death Stalks Rangpur
Militants of the Awami League and the Bengali rebels from the East Pakistan
Rifles went on the warpath against the non-Bengalis in Rangpur town in the
second week of March 1971. Non-Bengalis who lived in Bengali-inhabited
localities were terrorised and driven from their homes. Some were kidnapped
and hacked to death in nearby paddy fields. The police force had joined the
rebels. The Bengali rebels declared total war on the non-Bengalis in the last week
of March 1971 when armed mobs attacked the predominantly non-Bengali
localities in the town and stayed more than 5,000 innoccent men, women and
children.
The flames of strife and bloodshed engulfed almost every town in the Rangpur
district. The loss of non-Bengali lives was particularly heavy in the towns of
Saidpur, Nilphamari and Lalmonirhat. Estimates of the death toll of non-
Bengalis in these three towns range from 6,000 to 10,000. An impediment in the
way of arriving at a correct estimate was the fact that the murderers floated the
bodies of many of their victims in the rivers or incinerated them in blazing
houses.
Twenty-five-year old Mohammed Yusuf, who worked as a Motor Mechanic in
Rangpur and lived in the Alamnagar colony in a thatched hut, was the lone
survivor in a family of twelve. His parents, his five brothers and four other close
relatives were liquidated by a killer gang in the last week of March 1971. Yusuf,
who was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in February 1974, had this
recollection of the carnage of non-Bengalis in Rangpur town:
“In the night of March 27, 1971, about 500 armed Awami Leaguers and soldiers
from the East Pakistan Rifles encircled our Bihari-inhabited locality, looted and
burnt many huts and opened a barrage of gunfire as their victims tried to escape
from the conflagration. The killers smashed into our little house and sprayed us
with bullets from their blazing guns. All of us writhed in a stream of blood which
spouted from our bullet-riddled bodies. I was hit in the left thigh and I lost
consciousness. When I woke up the next morning, I was the only one alive in our
family of twelve. An abondoned barn was my hideout for a week until the
federal troops arrived and the rebels fled on April 26, 1971. “

