Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
182
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
Grief in Brahmanbaria
The population of non-Bengalis in the town of Brahmanbaria was small. Most of
them had come from the Indian State of Bihar at the time of Partition in 1947.
They had learnt the Bengali language. They were mostly traders; some were
employed in commercial firms.
In the third week of March 1971, the Awami League militants and the rebels
from the East Pakistan Rifles and the East Bengal Regiment began intimidating
the non-Bengalis. On March 23, some shops of non-Bengalis were looted and
burnt by riotous mobs. The local police gave no protection to the non-Bengalis.
On March 26, the Bengali insurgents launched a full-scale attack on the non-
Bengalis. Their houses were ransacked by armed gangs. Many non-Bengalis who
resisted the hoodlums were shot deed. The attackers included the rebel soldiers
from the East Bengal Regiment who were armed with machine guns and
bazookas. They indulged in wanton destruction of property owned by the non-
Bengalis.
At gunpoint, some 500 Biharis — aged men, women and children — were driven
out of their homes by the insurgents and herded in the dingy jail in
Brahmanbaria. The insurgents had killed most of the Bihari young men. Inside
the prison, the Bihari hostages were the victims of inhuman brutality. Many
hungry children who cried for food and water were slain by the trigger-happy
prison guards. Dozens of Bihari girls were spirited away at night by the
secessionist gunmen and their protesting relatives were beaten up with rifle butts
and truncheons. For days on end, the Bihari hostages had no food to eat. Quite a
few died of hunger and thirst inside this veritable inferno.
On April 17, 1971, as a column of the Pakistan Army closed in on Brahmanbaria
and the Bengali insurgents retreated, the jail was turned into a slaughter-house
by the mutineers. The rebel company commander of the East Bengal Regiment
ordered the execution of all the non-Bengalis lodged in the jail. Just before sunset,
a dozen Bengali machine-gunners wiped out every non-Bengali inside the prison.
After accomplishing the massacre of the innocents, the hatchet-men made a bee-
line for the Indian border. “We had never even dreamt of such butchery “, said
the Pakistani soldiers who buried the murdered Biharis the next day.
The Sunday Times of London, in its issue of May 2, 1971, reported the gory
killing of the non-Bengalis in Brahmanbaria after its Pakistan Correspondent,

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
183
Anthony Mascarenhas, had visited the battle-scarred town in the preceding
month:
“At Brahmanbaria, across the border from the Indian State of Tripura, I found
the bodies of 82 children who had been lined up and shot. About 300 other non-
Bengali bodies were scattered around the jail where they had been housed after
the Bengali convicts had been freed. They had been shot dead by the rebels
before the rebels fled in front of the West Pakistani advance “.
“I saw Indians from Agartala in India carrying arms and ammunition to the
Awami League rebels in Brahmanbaria “, said Kalu Meah, 45, who worked as a
porter at the Brahmanbaria railway station. Repatriated to Karachi in November
1973, Kalu Meah said that he escaped the massacre of non-Bengalis by hiding in
an abandoned goods wagon at the Brahmanbaria Railway station for a week
early in April 1971.
Kalu Meah said that all his relatives in Brahmanbaria, Comilla, and Bhairab
Bazar were slaughtered late in March and early in April 1971. A widower, he had
a son who was butchered in Comilla while his younger brother was killed in
Bhairab Bazar. Kalu Meah testified:
“The Awami Leaguers had close contact with the Indian military people in
Agartala which was not far away. All through the period of their insurgency,
they used to get arms and ammunition from Agartala. I saw many Indians,
carrying weapons, moving about freely in Brahmanbaria in the company of the
Awami League insurgents. The killer gangs wiped out most of the non-Bengali
Railway employees and their families. All through March, non-Bengalis
travelling in trains were victimised; many were killed and thrown from running
trains. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
184
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
Turmoil in Bogra, Naogaon
The Awami League militants and the mutineers of the East Pakistan Rifles had
seized control of Bogra town in the second week of March 1971. They looted the
shops owned by non-Bengalis and extorted money from the owners at gunpoint.
One of their many acts of lawlessness and violence was the storming of the jail.
They let loose all the prisoners and inducted many of the notorious jailbirds into
the rebel ranks. The crescendo of the Awami League’s violence and xenophobia
gained in intensity after the freed prisoners swung to their side.
Some non-Bengali yourg men were lynched in the streets. Their parents were
manhandled. On March 26, willer gangs of Awami Leaguers and rebel soldiers,
fired by a gencidal frenzy, exterminated vast multitudes of non-Bengalis — men,
women and children. Their houses were burnt after being looted; teenage girls
were kidnapped by the hundreds; many were savaged and raped. Some 700 non-
Bengali men, women and children, driven out of their homes by Awami League
gunmen, were herded early in April, 1971, in the Bogra Jail. The Bengali rebels
who were routed in battle by the advancing federal Army planned to blow up
the jail with dynamite before abandoning the town. But the timely arrival of the
Pakistan Army saved this tortured mass of humanity from being blown to
smithereens.
Hakim Ashrafullah, 59, who practised the Eastern system of Medicine in Bogra
since 1951 and whose only son was butchered by a killer gang late in March 1971,
said:
“My ancestral home was in Lucknow where my father, Hakim Barkatullah, was
respected for his deep knowledge of Eastern Medicine. I spent a part of my youth
in Calcutta. After Partition in 1947, I migrated to Dacca, and in 1951, Bogra
became my home. I liked the town and its people. I attained considerable success
in my practice of Eastern Medicine. I was popularly known as “Chacha “ (Uncle)
and I had hundreds of Bengali and non-Bengali friends. During the presidency of
Ayub Khan I was elected a Basic Democrat and the Bengali vote for me was
massive.
“In the last week of March, Bogra became a welter of fire and gore for many
thousands of non-Bengalis. The killings continued all through the first half of
April. My son was employed in a local soap factory; he and all the other non-
Bengalis were brutally killed. I never found his dead body; I learnt that it was
flung into a burning house. This was a common practice followed by the killer

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
185
gangs for getting rid of the heaps of dead bodies of non-Bengalis. Pregnant
women were bayoneted to death; teenage girls were assaulted and those who
resisted their captors were strangled or tossed into derelict wells. I was sheltered
and saved by a Bengali neighbour whom I had treated in past years. He cried
over the madness that had overtaken many of his compatriots. But he was
powerless before the fury and ruthlessness of the killer mobs which were after
the blood of the non-Bengalis. Similar was the plight and helplessness of a vast
number of decent Bengalis who were shocked and grieved by the carnage of
non-Bengalis. I escaped to Nepal in 1972, soon after the Indian Army grabbed
East Pakistan. In June 1973, I reached Karachi. The death toll of non-Bengalis in
the March-April 1971 butchery in Bogra town was in the neighbourhood of 3,000.
“
In Naogaon, a small town near the Bogra district, most of the non-Bengali
community of 4,000 were liquidated between March 25 and April 20, 1971.
Awami League militants and rebel soldiers barricaded the roads leading to the
localities where the non-Bengalis were concentrated. On March 26, the killer
gangs looted and burnt the houses of non-Bengalis and mowed them with
gunfire. The only survivors of this massacre were some fifty young women who
were paraded in the Bazar almost in the nude. They were lodged in well-
guarded houses where the rebel Bengali soldiers took turns to rape them. Just
before their retreat in. the face of the advancing federal Army, the rebels killed
these unfortunate girls. It took the Pakistan Army many days to bury the dead
bodies which were strewn all over the town. A few injured survivors, who
literally rose from heaps of dead bodies, said that some of the killers were
definitely Bengali infiltrators from India.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
186
CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
Horror in Santahar
The Railway junction town of Santahar in Bogra district felt the tremors of the
Awami League’s uprising in Dacca since the early days of March, 1971. The
Awami League militants fabricated and spread rumours that Pakistan Army
contingents and West Pakistanis had killed Bengalis in Dacca and other towns.
These rumours were designed to incite Bengalis against the non-Bengali
community in Santahar. The volcano of tension exploded on March 25 when
armed Awami Leaguers and the mutineers of the East Pakistan Rifles and the
East Bengal Regiment let loose a reign of terror on the non-Bengalis. Out of
nearly 22,000 non-Bengalis resident in Santahar, it is estimated that more than
15,000 were slaughtered by the rebels before a column of the Pakistan Army re-
occupied the town on April 27, 1971. At the Santahar Railway Station, many
hundreds of non-Bengali employees and their families were done to death by the
rebels. A killer gang gunned 65 non-Bengalis who were praying in a Mosque on
March 26, 1971. In another Mosque, some 70 non-Bengali momen, whose fathers
or husbands had been slaughtered, were assaulted by rapists who were said to
be Bengali Hindu infiltrators from India. In the second week of April, 1971, a
rebel gang paraded 60 non-Bengali girls almost in the nude. Some of these
unfortunate girls were whisked away to India by their retreating captors. Those
lucky non-Bengalis who survived the March-April, 1971, killings were butchered
by the Mukti Bahini after December 17, 1971.
Thirty-year-old Nafisa Khatoon, whose husband, Mohammed Zaheeruddin,
owned a cloth shop in Santahar and was killed by the insurgents, described the
tragedy that made her a sorrowing widow in these poignant words:
“It was the forenoon of March 25. Scared by the tension which prevailed in
Santahar, my husband did not go to the cloth shop which was located in the
commercial hub of the town. Word reached us that miscreants had looted his
shop. All of a sudden, a dozen armed Bengalis broke into our house. My
husband tried to plead with them and uttered to give them all the cash and
jewellery in our home. I cried aloud and begged them for mercy. My two little
children, white with fear, slipped under a table. The killers dragged my husband
into the compound and shot him dead. It was the end of the world for me when I
saw him slump to the ground and a stream of blood spurted from his head and
chest. I fainted. When I woke up, I found my orphaned children wailing over the
cold-blooded murder of their father. They had seen his dead body.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
187
“The killers ransacked my house; all the cash and every valuable was gone. They
stole even my wedding ring. Late at night, I wrapped my husband’s dead body
with white bedsheets and a neighbour earned it to the graveyard for burial.
Dressed as a rustic Bengali woman, I slipped out of my house with my two
children the next morning. I headed for Parbatipur where some relatives of my
husband lived. The trek was an ordeal; we had painful blisters on our feet; the
children were hungry. We saw dead bodies on the wayside and in the streams.
Roving bands of Awami League murderers were at large. They were after the
blood of non-Bengalis. We reached Parbatipur, almost dead with hunger and
fatigue. We could not locate our relatives; the massacre of non-Bengalis had
taken place in Parbatipur also. But a life-saver for us was the news that a
contingent of the Pakistan Army had entered the outworks of the town. The
Awami League insurgents fled. Our troops looked after us for two days and then
sent us to Dacca where we lived in a Relief Camp in the Mohamrnedpur locality.
“
After December 17, 1971, when the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahmi entered
Dacca, life again became a nightmare for Nafisa Khatoon and her children. The
conditions in the Relief Camp in Mohammedpur in Dacca were miserable. The
handouts of food to Nafisa and her children were skimpy. On February 2, 1974,
they were repatriated to Karachi in a United Nations aircraft. “God answered
our prayers; we are safe in Pakistan “, said Nafisa. More than three years of
horror and misery had aged Nafisa and her hair had turned grey.
Fifteen-year-old Mohammed Shakoor, whose father, Mohammed Shafeeq, was
brutally killed by a gang of Awami League militants on March 25, 1971, had this
grim recollection:
“My father was employed as a truck driver in Santahar. He spoke Bengali very
well and he had put me in a school where the medium of instruction was Bengali.
We had no quarrel with our Bengali neighbours. Our house was on the outskirts
of the town ard nearby was a graveyard. In the morning of March 25, I went to
school and attended my classes. Some of my Bengali schoolmates called me a
Bihari although I spoke Bengali as well as they did. At 2 p.m. I left the school and
walked towards my home. As I reached the graveyard, I saw a group of
miscreants, armed with guns ard knives, storming my mudhouse. I was scared
and I hid behind the walls of a grave. After a few minutes I heard the shrieks of
my father. I peered through a hole in the wall and saw the killers dragging him
out of the house. He was bleeding profusely. They tied him with ropes to the
trunk of a tree and stabbed him in the chest and the belly. He was dead. These
accursed men looted our house. At the point of a gun, they forced my mother
and my little sister to follow them in the direction of a nearby village. This was
the last I saw of them. For a month, I lived in the graveyard in horror and terror.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
188
I saw the spectre of death all over the place. I ate wild fruits and slaked my thirst
at night with muddy water from a nearby stream. I was sick. I often heard the
roar of guns and the whining of bullets. Late in April, troops of the Pakistan
Army entered Santahar. They buried the dead body of my father in the
graveyard and sent me to Dacca where I stayed in the Relief Camp at
Mohammedpur. They searched the entire neighbourhood to retrieve my mother
and sister but there was no trace of them. After the Indian Army ard the Mukti
Bahini captured Dacca on December 17, 1971, life again became a torture for me.
I was penniless and I had no relatives and friends. God was my only anchor of
hope and I prayed every night. On January 29, 1974, the United Nations airlift
brought me to Pakistan — to safety and freedom. “
The agony of the past three years was writ large on the face of Shakoor. His
knees trembled as he spoke of the impaling of his father by his killers and the
traumatic days and nights he spent in the graveyard before the Pakistan Army
rescued him.
Twenty-seven-year-old Qamrunnissa, whose husband, Abdul Majid, was killed
by the Bengali insurgents in Santahar in the last week of March 1971, gave the
following account of her agony and suffering:
“In the third week of March, the Awami League activists and their supporters
had set up a so-called Peace Committee in Santahar. In the name of the Peace
Committee, they called upon the non-Bengalis to surrender their firearms and
other weapons. Believing the Awami Leaguers’ assurances of protection, the
non-Bengalis handed over to them whatever weapons they had. On March 25, a
big mob of armed rebels raided our locality. They set fire to some houses; they
fired their guns indiscriminately to frighten us. Some fifty cut-throats, armed
with rifles, daggers, spears and staves, rushed into my house and brutally killed
my husband, my three brothers-in laws, my father-in-law and my teenage
nephew. We begged the killers to spare the lives of our dear ones. I clasped the
dead body of my husband and wailed over it. The brutes hit me with the butt of
a rifle and almost broke my arm. They pulled me by the hair and dragged me
outside the house. My legs were singed and I could hardly walk. At the point of
their blazing guns, they marched me and many other wailirg Bihari and Punjabi
women to the Railway Station. They forced us to hand over to them the
ornaments some of us wore. Many of the girls were raped by their inhuman
captors.
“In the last week of April, I and a few other women escaped from the captivity
of these brutes. My feet were blistered but we succeeded in reaching a cluster of
shady trees on the bank of a river. Our captors launched a search for us but a
squall hit the area and these human hounds could not trace us. The next day our

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
189
prayers were answered by the Almighty and the Pakistan Army entered
Santahar. The federal troops rescued us. They took us to Naogaon where my
wounds were treated and, later on, I was taken to Dacca and lodged in a Relief
Camp “.
Qamrunnissa was shifted to Chittagong in mid-1971 and lived with her parents.
In February 1974, she was repatriated to Karachi. “Even now I am harried by
dreadful dreams; I see those thugs killing my dear husband; I see them chasing
me with their blazing guns “, she moaned.
Amanullah Khan, 26, who lived in Quarter No. 195 in the Railway (Loco) Colony
in Santahar, had this harrowing recollection of the massacre of non-Bengalis in
March, 1971:
“In the evening of March 26, a large gang of armed Awami Leaguers attacked
our residential colony in which non-Bengalis were in the majority. Some of the
non-Bengalis had weapons, and we exchanged gunfire with the attackers all
through the night. Early the next morning, the non-Bengalis moved to the
Railway Station, and some old men, women and children sought refuge in the
Mosque which was only 200 yard away. Those of us who had weapons had no
ammunition left. So we were defenceless. In the forenoon, a hundred Bengali
rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles came to the Railway station and forcibly took
away whatever weapons we had. At noon, we learnt that the rebels had looted
the Ranipur Police Station and had killed all the non-Bengalis there. We were
panicky. In the afternoon of March 27, about seven hundred armed Awami
Leaguers and rebel soldiers stormed the Mosque near the Railway Station and
gunned to death all the non-Bengalis sheltered in it. After the Pakistan Army re-
occupied Santhar, 53 dead bodies of non-Bengali men, women and children were
found strewn all over the Mosque. The houses of non-Bengalis had been looted
and burnt; there were very few survivors. I had witnessed the gruesome
massacre of the non-Bengalis in the Mosque from the window of a store room in
the Railway Station. I escaped to Nepal after India’s seizure of East Pakistan. In
September 1973, I came to Karachi. I am convinced that many of the rebel
soldiers, who mowed down the non-Bengalis in the Mosque, were, in reality,
armed infiltrators from India. “
“Six Bengali hoodlums, claiming to be soldiers of the Mukti Bahini, grabbed me
when I was giving a woollen sweater to an ill-clad Pakistani prisoner-of-war in
Santahar in the third week of December 1971 “, said 55- year-old Ghulam Rasool,
a Railway employee based at Parbatipur, who was on duty on that day in
Santahar. Ghulam Rasool had escaped the March 1971 massacre of non-Bengalis
at Parbatipur but suffering was in store for him late in December 1971 at the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
190
hands of the Mukti Bahini. Repatriated to Karachi from Dacca m February 1974,
he said:
“The Mukti Bahini, after the fall of Dacca to the Indian Army on December 17,
1971, had ordered its followers in Santahar to slaughter every adult male non-
Bengali. Some Sikh soldiers of the Indian Army tried to persuade the Mukti
Bahini not to indulge in wanton killing. I was in mortal agony when I saw the
Pakistani soldiers, who had surrendered to the Indian Army, being marched to
the POWs camp on route to India. It was winter and, sadly, the Pakistani soldiers
were being marched barefooted. Some of them did not have warm clothes. A few
Biharis broke the cordon and gave woollen sweaters to our soldiers. Realising
that it would endanger the lives of the givers, the Pakistani soldiers motioned
them not to do so. I had also given a sweater to a soldier. The next minute, six
Bengali hoodlums grabbed me and threw me into a dungeon where dead bodies,
chopped limbs of human victims and filth were littered on the floor. It was a
slaughter house used by the Mukti Bahini for murdering their victims. There
were many other non-Bengali captives in this stinkirg black hole. The Mukti
Bahini guards slapped and kicked me and threatened that I would be shot. In the
evening, a posse of Indian soldiers visited this dungeon and freed the non-
Bengali captives. As I had no home or place to live in Santahar, I requested that I
should be allowed to stay for the night in the local Jail which, although full of
Biharis and pro-Pakistan Bengalis, was less unsafe. The next day, I left for
Parbatipnr and reached it after a perilous md trying journey “.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
191
EPILOGUE
The sheaves of eyewitness accounts, documented in this book, prove beyond the
shadow of a doubt that the massacre of West Pakistanis, Biharis and other non-
Bengalis in East Pakistan had begun long before the Pakistan Army took punitive
action against the rebels late in the night of March 25, 1971. It is also crystal clear
that the Awami League’s terror machine was the initiator and executor of the
genocide against the non-Bengalis which exterminated at least half a million of
them in less than two months of horror and trauma. Many witnesses have
opined that the federal Government acted a bit too late against the insurgents.
The initial success of the federal military action is proved by the fact that in
barely 30 days, the Pakistan Army, with a combat strength of 38,717 officers and
men in East Pakistan, had squelched the Awami League’s March-April, 1971,
rebellion all over the province.
The rebellion was master-minded, by the hardcore, pro-India leadership of the
Awami League, a regional political party which initially campaigned for
provincial autonomy but subsequently espoused the secession of the eastern
province from the federal union. The Awami League had won the majority of
seats reserved for the province of East Pakistan in the constitution-making
National
Assembly
and
the
East
Pakistan
Legislative
Assembly
in
the
countrywide December, 1970, general elections. But it had no legislative support
in the four provinces of West Pakistan. In wooing the electorate in East Pakistan
before the polls, the Awami League committed itself to the concept of a single
Pakistani nationhood by proclaiming in its election manifesto “Pakistan shall be
a federation, granting full autonomy to each of the federating units “. Having
secured the confidence of the majority of the voters in East Pakistan on the
platform of autonomy within the framework of a united Pakistan, the militant
ruling caucus in the Awami League took to the path of rebellion and secession of
East Pakistan from the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. It unloosed terrible orgies of
killing and destruction of the non-Bengali ethnic minority to which the generic
name of Biharis was given by their tormentors. After the federal Army crushed
the Awami League’s revolt, most of its hardcore leaders and followers sought
sanctuary in India’s protective lap and invoked its massive military and financial
support for their secessionist campaign.
Seizing it as the golden opportunity of the century to undo Pakistan, India used
the Bengali rebels; it had trained and armed, for the war of attrition against
Pakistan in its eastern wing for some nine months. After the Bengali guerrillas
had been used by India as cannon fodder to soften the Pakistani defences in East
Pakistan, Indian tanks, guns and troops rolled over the border on November 22,

