Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
82
and set the jute stock on fire. As huge tongues of fire leapt from the blazing jute
godown, the killers tossed all the dead bodies into the fire, My command over
the Bengali language enabled me to convince the killers that I was a genuine
Bengali and they spared my life. But they belaboured me on the charge that I was
a “West Pakistani agent “ and ordered me “never to do business with the non-
Bengalis. “
“I walked swiftly in the direction of my house and did my best to avoid
detection by the killer gangs which were on the loose in the town. On the way, I
saw the rebels dragging through the streets the West Pakistani Sub-divisional
Officer of Satkhira. Blood was oozing from his forehead and knees and his hands
were tied with a rope. Some Bengalis spat on him and threw stones. I also saw
the killers pushing, at the point of a bayonet, a hapless non-Bengali woman with
two shrieking, small children who were clinging to her body. As she collapsed
on the ground from sheer exhaustion, one of her captors kicked her head with his
boot while the other throttled the older child........
“When I reached my house, I found it ablaze. My younger brother, who was its
only occupant at that time, had escaped the dragnet of the killers. I sought shelter
in the house of a trusted Bengali friend. After the federal army re-established its
control over Satkhira in April 1971, my brother rejoined me. I moved to Dacca,
and in January 1974, I was repatriated to Karachi.
“The rebels kidnapped many non-Bengali young women from Satkhira. Some,
who resisted the rapists, were killed; others were taken away to India by the
retreating rebels and sold to brothels in West Bengal. “
Twenty-six year-old Nawab Ali, who lived in his father’s house in Bara Bazaar in
Satkhira and was engaged in the jute trade, had this unhappy memory of the
Ides of March 1971:
“My father had lived for many years in Calcutta. After Partition in 1947, we
moved to Khulna where my father prospered in business. We spoke Bengali very
well. Profits in the jute trade in Satkhira were far more attractive and we settled
there. We bought a house and some other property. I assisted my father in his
business.
“The massacre of non-Bengalis was started in the second week of March 1971
with stray incidents. Between March 17 and 20, the pogrom of the Bengali rebels
against the non-Bengalis received impetus from the infiltration of trained Indian
saboteurs into Satkhira. The rebels had machine guns, rifles, grenades and an
endless supply of ammunition.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
83
“On March 20, the rebels unleashed all over the town the campaign of terror and
fire which they had initially conducted in a few selected localities against the
non-Bengali residents. My parents were killed in the massacre; I went into hiding
before they stormed my house and I escaped the noose of death. The killer gangs
committed acts of unimaginable brutality; they tortured the non-Bengali men
before shooting them. They chopped up the bodies of women and carved “Joi
Bangla “ on their foreheads. They slaughtered children by the hundreds and
tossed their bodies into blazing houses or dumped them in a nearby river. They
kidnapped many scores of innocent girls and subjected them to multiple rape in
deserted school buildings which were converted into ‘comfort lodgings’ for the
sex-hungry rebel soldiers. The retreating rebels carried away many of these
captive girls to India; some who tried to escape were shot. “
Nawab Ali was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in January 1974.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
84
CHAPTER SEVEN
Hell in Dinajpur
The Awami League’s terror machine had swung into action in Dinajpur from the
first week of March 1971. Bengali mass militancy, whipped up by the Awami
League’s demagogues, manifested itself in protest rallies, street violence and
terrorisation of non-Bengalis. The Awami League’s storm troopers paralysed the
local administration and set up their own regime of force and intimidation.
The crescendo of violence gained momentum in the second week of the month
when the Awami League militants, beefed up by the rebels from the East
Pakistan Rifles and encouraged by their initial success in grabbing civil authority,
unleashed death and destruction on the hapless non-Bengalis.
All through the second fortnight of March and the first week of April 1971, the
genocidal liquidation of the non-Bengali population was conducted with
demonic fury. Estimates of the death toll of non-Bengalis in Dinajpur town in a
month of the Awami League’s hellish rule range from 15,000 to 30,000, while in
the district of Dinajpur the non-Bengali death toll was about 100,000. Eye-
witnesses claim that one of the main reasons for this disparity in figures is the
fact that the bodies of thousands of non-Bengalis, slain by their captors in an
open-air human abattoir on the bank of the Kanchan river, were dumped in its
waters. Hundreds of corpses were incinerated in the houses of non-Bengalis
which were put to the torch after their inmates had been decapitated.
On March 22, the Awami Leaguers, brandishing sten guns and rifles, led a
violent procession through the heart of the town, inciting the Bengali populace to
eliminate the non-Bengalis. On March 25, a killer mob burnt a passenger bus,
which was owned by a non-Bengali, on the outskirts of Dinajpur. Its driver and
seven non-Bengali passengers were done to death. The Bengali rebels, on the
same day, burnt a postal service van on the Dinajpur-Saidpur Road, shot its
conductor and wounded its driver. They also ambushed a Pakistan Army jeep
and wounded the five soldiers who were riding in it. The treatment meted out to
thousands of women and children was fiendish and debased. More than 400
non-Bengali young women were kidnapped to India by the retreating rebels.
In the last week of March 1971, the pogrom against the non Bengalis reached its
peak. Violence mushroomed into the sacking and setting afire of all the stores,
businesses and houses owned by non-Bengalis. Yelling, frenzied and roaming
crowds — at times 10,000 strong— held marches and rallies all over the town,
swearing death and destruction of the non-Bengalis and the federal government.
Even at night, the town shook all through the week with bursts of gunfire by the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
85
rebel soldiers and other armed Bengalis, the crashing of shop windows and
doors, the crackling of flames which spiralled from non-Bengali houses set ablaze
and the thunder of slogan shouting and looting mobs. The Awami League
demagogues, with their fiery tongues, breathed hatred for the non-Bengalis and
sanctified the looting and burning of non-Bengali shops and homes as acts of
duty in the line of Bengali patriotism. The river-side slaughter-houses worked
with fiendish thoroughness. Bengali officers from the rebel elements of the East
Pakistan Rifles and the East Bengal Regiment supervised the hordes of thugs and
hoodlums who worked as executioners and vampires in these human abattoirs
for the liquidation of the non-Bengalis.
The abridgement of the non-Bengali population in Dinajpur by the Awami
League militants in a month of their accursed rule was so colossal that when the
Pakistan Army re-established its control in the town, stray non-Bengali survivors
consisted mostly of old women and children. Heads of many victims were hung
on tree-tops by the rebels to “teach a lesson to the non-Bengalis. “
Twenty-four-year-old Noor Jahan, whose husband, Abdur Rashid, was killed in
the carnage of non-Bengalis in Dinajpur, underwent spasms of trepidation and
sobbed frequently as she related the story of her woes:
“We lived in the Zulum Colony near the Tomb of Saint Sherghazi in Dinajpur
town. Since the middle of March, we were hearing alarming rumours that the
Bengali rebels would kill the non-Bengalis and that the houses of non-Bengalis
were being marked by the Awami League volunteers.
“In the night of March 25, 1971, at about 9 o’clock, a huge mob of armed
Bengalis went on the rampage in our locality and slaughtered men, women and
children by the hundreds. They killed my husband and my brother in a
murderous attack on our house. To the best of my memory, they did not spare a
single non-Bengali male adult in our locality. They wiped out even male children.
They lined up the wailing non-Bengali women and marched them at gunpoint to
the village of Baraul, 8 miles from Dinajpur, near the Indian border. I was in this
crowd of unfortunate, condemned women. The shame and torture which our
satanic captors inflicted on us was so horrifying that I would hate to describe it.
“The most gruesome massacre in Dinajpnr was of the 250-plus Pathans—men,
women and children—in our locality. The Awami League hatchetmen and the
rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles tied up every Pathan with ropes; chopped off
bits of flesh from the body of the victim and threw dust on him. As the victim
writhed in pain, the sadist killers would laugh over his plight and lop off another
bit of his body. The groans and cries of these sturdy Pathans and their appeals to

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
86
their captors for inflicting a swift death on them, instead of torturing them, still
echo in my cars.
“Our Bengali captors dumped us in a cluster of huts in the village of Baraul. At
night, they fell upon us like vultures. Some women who resisted their violaters
were shot “to teach a lesson to the others. “ Their bodies were mutilated; their
breasts were slashed off and
“Joi Bangla “ was carved with knives on their
lifeless foreheads. On April 10, a unit of the Pakistan Army captured the village
and rescued us. “
Noor Jahan was shifted to Dacca in mid-1971 and accommodated in a Relief
Camp there. In January 1974, she was repatriated to Karachi.
Twenty-year-old Sakina Bibi, whose husband, Abdus Shakoor, was done to
death by the Bengali rebels in a raid on her house in Neelmati in Dinajpur on
March 22, 1971, gave this grisly account of her plight:
“The non-Bengalis in our locality lived in hutments. A killer mob of Bengali
rebels attacked our locality at night; they burnt the shacks and looted every
article of value in our homes. In less than half an hour, they gunned to death all
the non-Bengali male adults in our locality. They wounded my husband with a
scythe and then shot him. “
“After killing all the non-Bengali men, they lined up about four hundred
sorrowing non-Bengali women and, at gunpoint, stripped off their Saris. I
wanted to throttle myself when one of our tormentors, brandishing a scythe in
my face, tore off my clothes. With guns ready to shoot, they forced us to parade
in the nude. A few women, who tried to escape, were mowed down by the
gunmen. In this march of the naked women, I spotted the wife of my brother.
She said the killers had done him to death; they had also killed her little son. We
walked five miles to Narkuldanga. By the time we reached this place, not more
than 150 captive women were left. A few were shot; many were taken away by
the other rebels on the way as their share of the loot. One of them was my sister-
in-law; she was young and pretty. I never saw her again.
“Our Bengali captors detained us in six huts. For the first three days, we had not
a morsel of food. We lived on water and wild fruits picked from the trees. All
through the period of our captivity, the hapless captive women were subjected to
multiple rapes. Six teenage girls who tried to escape were shot. On April 10,
when the Pakistani troops routed the rebels, the retreating Bengalis tried to
slaughter all of us but we were rescued in the nick of time. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
87
Sakina lived for two years in Dacca before being repatriated to Karachi in
January 1974.
Abdul Majid, 26, who lived in Paharpur in Dinajpur and who escaped the March
1971 massacre of non-Bengalis by dint of good luck, had this recollection of the
sorrowful events in his home town:
“On March 3, the Awami League militants went on the warpath in Dinajpur.
They disrupted the Rail track and wrecked the train services. They looted the
Railway godowns and burnt some trains. They belaboured those non-Bengalis
who had refused to boycott work at the Railway station.
“In the first week of March, riotous mobs of Bengalis looted non-Bengali shops.
They also wrecked the Iqbal High School where many non-Bengali boys studied.
Some teachers, who tried to dissuade the Bengali miscreants from destroying the
furniture of the school, were manhandled.
“In the third week of the month, a huge mob of armed Awami Leaguers and
their supporters, many with sten guns and rifles, attacked the Balwadanga
colony. I believe that more than 2,000 non-Bengalis perished in the slaughter in
this locality. Some of the non-Bengalis sought refuge in the Iqbal High School.
The next day, the Bengali rebels ransacked the school and killed all those
sheltered in it.
“The Bengali rebels started mass slaughter of non-Bengalis all over Dinajpur
from March 22 and it continued without a let-up until April 10 when the federal
army retrieved the town. Thousands of non-Bengalis were taken by the rebels to
open-air slaughter-houses along the bank of the Kanchan river and done to death.
Their dead bodies were flung into the river. Leaders of the Awami League, such
as Abdul Bari, a member of the East Pakistan Assembly, Dr. Khalilur Rahman,
Riyazul Islam, an advocate, and a Major Usman were in the forefront of those
Bengali militants who planned, instigated and organized the killing of the non-
Bengalis in Dinajpur. Hundreds of non-Bengali women were marched in the
nude by their Bengali captors through the town and driven to nearby villages
where their tormentors ravished them in huts which were hurriedly turned into
billets for sexual assault. “
After the Pakistan Army re-established its authority over Dinajpur, Majid
emerged from hiding and helped the federal troops in burying the non-Bengali
dead. He said:
“I led the federal troops to the Iqbal High School where I knew that the non-
Bengalis had been slaughtered. Nearly 2,500 rotting dead bodies, with bullet

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
88
marks and knife wounds, were retrieved and given a mass burial. The wombs of
some pregnant women had been slit open by their tormentors. The heads of
some decapitated bodies were missing. I spotted many dead children whose
limbs had been splintered. I saw the slaughter-houses operated by the Bengali
rebels on the banks of the Kanchan River; it seemed river of blood had flowed
there. I saw the fiendish implements with which the slaughterers tortured their
victims before the actual kill. “
Abdul Majid was repatriated to Karachi from Dacca in November 1973.
Qamrunnissa Begum, 40, whose husband owned the Bengal Rice Mills in
Dinajpur, gave this account of his murder in the March 1971 massacre of non-
Bengalis:
“In 1947, we had migrated from Calcutta to East Pakistan. We lived for some
years in Dacca and then we shifted to Rangpur. Subsequently, we settled in
Dinajpur where my husband bought a rice mill. He had about a hundred
employees and the Mill yielded substantial profits. He had a Bengali ‘sleeping’
partner who had made no investment in the mill. When our mill yielded large
profits, this person tried to commit frauds on the mill and my husband
terminated his services after paying him a fat sum of money as compensation.
“On March 25, when killer gangs were on the loose in Dinajpur and the non-
Bengalis were being butchered by the thousands, this former Bengali partner led
an armed band of cutthroats and attacked our mill. He and his gang shot dead
my husband and looted all the rice and every other article of value in the Mill.
After the death of my husband, the killers looted our houses. We took shelter in
the home of an old Bengali friend of our family. “
Qamrunnissa, her two sons and a daughter lived in poverty in Dacca for a year.
In 1974, they were repatriated to Karachi from Chittagong.
Twenty five-year-old Abdul Qadir, who was employed in the Dinajpur Rice Mill,
had this nightmarish recollection of the slaughter of 69 non-Bengali employees of
the Mill and of his miraculous escape from a steaming boiler in March 1971:
“The Dinajpur Rice Mill was one of the largest rice mills in the northern part of
East Pakistan. It had 700 employees, mostly Bengalis. Its owner was Haji Karim,
a God-fearing non-Bengali, who was kind and gentle and looked after the well-
being of his employees. Although in the sixties, he was active and personally
supervised the working of his Rice Mill. He had a Government contract for the
milling of rice procured by it.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
89
“On March 25, a killer mob led by armed Awami League storm-troopers and
rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles raided our mill, looted all the cash and the rice
stock and slaughtered the non-Bengali employees and their families. The
attackers overpowered the non-Bengalis, tied them with ropes looted from the
Mill store and flung their screaming victims into the steaming boiler. I saw with
my own eyes the owner of the Mill Haji Karim, being tossed into this blazing
cauldron of death. Even some non-Bengali women, employed in the Mill were
done to death in this fiendish manner.
“The cord with which my hands were tied was weak and I slipped out of the
Hall where the non-Bengalis were herded before being despatched to death. I hid
myself in a store room where rice was stocked; I prayed all through the night. I
emerged from hiding after the Pakistan Army regained control over Dinajpur.
The killer gang liquidated the family of Haji Karim and looted his house. Except
my aged mother, all my other relatives perished in the carnage.
“Many in the killer gang were local Hindu militants. I have no doubt that the
infiltrators from West Bengal played a part in the massacre of non-Bengalis in
Dinajpur. What amazed me was the fact that this avalanche of fire and death
engulfed the non-Bengalis with calamitous suddenness. Before March 1971, we
had never dreamed of such mass killing and our relations with the Bengalis were
cordial. “
Sameeda
Khatoon,
26,
whose
father,
husband
and
elder
brother
were
slaughtered in the massacre of non-Bengalis in March 1971 in Dinajpur, said:
“We lived in the Gharipara locality of Dinajpur. My husband, Mohammed
Nazeer, was a bus driver. My father owned a shop in the heart of the town. On
March 23, a riotous Bengali mob created a disturbance in our locality and looted
the houses of some non-Bengalis. But on March 26, the rebels became more
daring, and in the night they launched a campaign to liquidate all the non-
Bengalis in our locality. They looted my father’s shop and brutally killed him
and my husband who was with him at that time. They attacked our house and
the house of my elder brother, which was close to ours. I saw from the doorstep
of my house that a killer mob dragged my brother and his two adult sons from
their house and butchered them with scythes and knives on the roadside. My
brother’s wife fell on the feet of the killers and begged them to spare the lives of
her husband and her two sons but they struck her with a stick and she collapsed.
I was horror-stricken when I saw these brutes murdering my brother and his two
sons. I started crying aloud. The killer mob looted my house and told me that the
rebels would come back after a few days to slaughter me and my daughter.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
90
“We were told that April 10 was the deadline set by the Bengali rebels for the
murder of the surviving women and children in our locality. We cried and
prayed to Allah for succour. We heard the echo of gunfire and thought that the
killer mob was coming in our direction. But our prayers were answered when a
unit of the Pakistan Army entered Dinajpur and re-established its authority. We
were saved from the butchers knives. The army moved us to Dacca where we
lived in a Relief Camp for widowed women and orphaned children. After the
Indian Army seized East Pakistan on December 17, 1971, we underwent more
suffering and many women were kidnapped by the Mukti Bahini. In March 1974,
I was repatriated to Karachi along with my little daughter. “
“I have not been able to comprehend the real reasons for the xenophobia against
the non-Bengalis which gripped a segment of the Bengali populace in Dinajpur
in March 1971 “, said 28-year-old Abdul Khaleque whose family had lived in that
region long before the Partition of the sub-continent in 1947.
Khaleque’s Urdu-speaking grandfather had settled in Dinajpur in the 1920’s. His
mother was a Bengali and he and the other members of his family spoke
excellent Bengali. Yet, in the massacre of the non-Bengalis in March 1971 most of
them were done to death. Khaleque, who lived in his ancestral house on Mission
Road in Dinajpur, luckily escaped the killing by going into hiding in the house of
a Bengali friend in another part of the town. In February 1974, Khaleque was
repatriated to Pakistan. He said:
“There were many other families, such as ours, which had settled in Dinajpur
long before Partition. They were bilingual i.e. they spoke Bengali as well as Urdu.
They had endeavoured for merger with the local Bengali population by inter-
marrying. Every member of my family was a born Bengali and spoke Bengali
with the accent prevalent in Dinajpur. Yet in the madness of March 1971, all of us
were considered Biharis although none of us had seen the face of Bihar after
Partition. It had never occurred to me in my wildest fancy that any Bengali in
Dinajpur would ever think of slaughtering any member of my family for being a
non-Bengali. But after March 21, a fiendish insanity gripped a large portion of the
Bengali population. Instigated by the Awami Leaguers, they exterminated nearly
90 per cent of the non-Bengali population in the towns of Dinajpur district.
“In some villages near Dinajpur, where small groups of non-Bengalis lived, the
slaughter was so brutally complete that not a single non-Bengali survived. I
became a nervous wreck after I saw the heaps of rotting dead bodies of non-
Bengalis in the streets and houses in Dinajpur when I emerged from hiding and
the federal troops had re-established their control. I heard about the infernal
slaughter-houses which the killer gangs had set up on the banks of the Kanchan
River. There the non-Bengalis were slain by the hundreds and their bodies were

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
91
thrown in the river. I believe that at least 30,000 non-Bengalis were done to death
in Dinajpur town in March and April 1971.
“An example of the trickery and fraud used by the Bengali rebels to liquidate the
non-Bengalis was the invitation from the Deputy Commissioner to 25 leading
non-Bengali businessmen of Dinajpur to attend a meeting of the local Peace
Committee in the Iqbal High School building. When they arrived at the school
building for the meeting, each one of them was murdered by the Bengali rebels “
We were awaiting our execution in a slaughter-house on the bank of the river in
Dinajpur when the Pakistan Army rescued us “, said 55-year old Hamida
Khatoon. She had worked for years as a nurse in the Sadar Hospital in Dinajpur.
Repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in February 1974, Hamida gave the following
account of the unfortunate events of March 1971 in her home town:
“We had lived for the past many years in Dinajpur and it had never occurred to
us that life would become a nightmare for the non-Bengalis as it did in March
1971 during the Awami League’s rebellion.
“On March 23, a group of Awami Leaguers ordered all the non-Bengali menfolk
in our locality to attend a meeting of the Peace Committee of the area. While the
non-Bengali men were gone for the meeting, armed gangs of Bengali rebels
attacked their houses in the locality and looted every article of value with the
thoroughness of seasoned thieves. At midnight, a non-Bengali neighbour, who
had gone to the meeting, came running to us and informed us that all those who
had gone to attend the so-called meeting had been butchered in the school
compound by the rebels. The next day, the rebels rounded up all the non-Bengali
women and children in our locality and took us to a camp on the bank of the
river where we saw the horrifying massacre of the non-Bengali men. Their
bodies were being flung into the river. We were told that in a couple of days we
would also be done to death. There were very few young women left in our
group; the killers had kidnapped the young ones for rape. I can never forget that
hell-like, open-air slaughter-house run by the murderers on the river bank On
April 10, when we had resigned ourselves to fate and death because of the
physical and mental torture we had undergone, a posse of the federal troops
rescued us from the jaws of death.
“We were shifted to a camp in Saidpur. In the last week of December 1971, the
Mukti Bahini killers were after my blood because I had told the Pakistan Army
about the gruesome killings done by the rebels in March 1971. I was jailed for 18
months in Saidpur and tortured for weeks. In the first week of February 1974, I
was released from prison, and shortly afterwards I was repatriated to Pakistan. “

