Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
32
Zaibunnissa and her son were repatriated to Pakistan from Dacca in December
1973.
Shamim Akhtar, 28, whose husband was employed as a clerk in the Railway
office in Dacca, lived in a small house in the Mirpur locality there. They had
escaped the March 1971 massacre because of the strong resistance put up by the
Bihari young men of the locality against the rebels who attacked them. But after
the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini seized East Pakistan in the third week of
December 1971, life became an ordeal for Shamim, her husband, Fasihuddin and
her three little children. She described her tragedy in these words:
“On December 17, 1971, the Mukti Bahini cut off the water supply to our
homes. We used to get water from a nearby pond; it was polluted and had
a bad odour. I was nine months pregnant. On December 23, 1971, I gave
birth to a baby girl. No midwife was available and my husband helped me
at child birth. Late at night, a gang of armed Bengalis raided our house,
grabbed my husband and trucked him away. I begged them in the name
of God to spare him as I could not even walk and my children were too
small. The killers were heartless and I learnt that they murdered my
husband. After five days, they returned and ordered me and my children
to vacate the house as they claimed that it was now their property.
“Biharis“, said the gang leader, “have no right to live in Bangladesh.“ At
gunpoint, they drove me with my children to an open plot of land where
we slept on the bare earth in the cold for three days. My children starved; I
was too weak to get them even a morsel of food. A foreign Red Cross team
took pity on us and moved us to a Relief Camp in Mohammadpur.“
Shamim and her children were repatriated to Pakistan from Dacca in January
1974.
Zaibunnissa Haq, 30, whose journalist husband, Izhar-ul Haque, worked as a
columnist in the Daily Watan in Dacca, gave this account of her travail in 1971:
“We lived in our own house on Razia Sultana Road in Mohammedpur in
Dacca. My husband had, in the past, worked in the Daily Pasban and was
well-known as an Urdu writer and journalist.
“On March 25, 1971, a gang of armed Awami League storm troopers
raided our locality and looted my house. My husband was not at home;
otherwise the raiders would have kidnapped him.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
33
“After the Indian Army and Mukti Bahini occupied Dacca on December
17, 1971, a reign of terror and death was unleashed on the non-Bengalis,
especially those of us who lived in Mohammedpur and Mirpur. A dozen
Bihari young men of our locality, including my husband, used to patrol
the area at night to keep marauders at bay. On December 19, late at night,
a gang of armed Bengalis raided the locality and machine-gunned my
husband. My world was shattered when I saw his dead body. People in
the entire neighbourhood cried because he was popular and had looked
after the safety of the neighbours with immense courage.
“On December 21, a posse of Mukti Bahini soldiers and some thugs rode
into our locality with blazing guns and ordered us to leave our house as,
according to them, no Bihari could own a house in Bangladesh. For two
days, we lived on bare earth in an open space and we had nothing to eat.
Subsequently, we were taken to a Relief Camp by the Red Cross.
In January 1974, we were repatriated to Pakistan. Fatima Bibi, 40, whose husband
was employed in a trading firm in Tongi, testified after her repatriation to
Karachi from Dacca in February 1974:
“On March 25, 1971, armed Awami Leaguers had looted our house and
beaten up my husband, Abdur Rahman, who had resisted them. My three
young sons were away from the house when the raid took place. They
were brave boys and they took an oath to punish the thugs. In April 1971,
they joined the Razakar Force and taught a lesson to many of the Bengali
thugs who had looted the homes of non-Bengalis in March.
“In the third week of December 1971, when the Indian Army and the
Mukti Bahini captured Dacca, my three sons were killed in action. On
December 17, 1971, an armed gang of 30 Bengalis raided our home and
brutally killed my husband. At gunpoint, they ordered me to leave the
house with my three children. I headed for the woods nearby. We lived on
water and wild fruits and we slept on leaves. The cries of my starving
children caused me pain and agony. I thought of suicide and headed
towards the railway line. God wanted to save us. A foreign Red Cross
team was passing our way in a jeep and they motioned us to stop. When I
told them of our plight, they took us to the Red Cross Relief Camp in
Mohammedpur where we lived for more than two years“.
Noor Jahan, 33, whose husband, Mukhtar Ahmed, was employed in the
Telegraph
and
Telephone
Department
in
Dacca
and
who
lived
in
the
Government staff Quarters in Gulistan colony, said on her repatriation to Karachi
in January 1974:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
34
“We had escaped the March 1971 massacre of non-Bengalis in Dacca. But
in the third week of December 1971, after the Indian Army and the Mukti
Bahini occupied Dacca, my husband was murdered by a gang of armed
Bengalis. Some 20 armed men raided my house soon after his death, and
looted every article of value. They turned us out of the house at gunpoint
and we were on the streets. Another gang of armed Bengalis drove us to a
large building where some 500 Bihari women and children, whose
husbands had been kidnapped for murder, were lodged. We were told
that any one found escaping would be shot. We prayed to God for the
safety of our children. After five days of hunger and torture, a Red Cross
team took us to a Relief Camp in Mohammedpur in Dacca. Life in the
Relief Camp was an ordeal because the Mukti Bahini jingoes used to
kidnap the Bihari young men and women by the scores every week. No
one was sure that he would be alive the next morning. Many did not sleep
for nights on end. At night, women whose husbands or sons had been
slaughtered before them would shriek and wail as the memory of their
dear ones haunted them“.
Anwari Begum, 30, whose husband, Syed Mustafa Hussain, was employed in the
Telegraph and Telephone Department in Dacca, lived in their own house in the
Mirpur locality. Repatriated to Karachi from Dacca with her children, in October
1973, Anwari said:
“In the March 1971 massacre of non-Bengalis in East Pakistan, every
member of my family, including my parents, was slaughtered in Dinajpur
where my father owned a house and some property. In the third week of
March 1971, a gang of armed Bengali thugs looted my house in Mirpur
but my husband escaped the massacre because he was away on duty in
his office.
“In the third week of December 1971, my husband was murdered by a
Mukti Bahini gang and his dead body was delivered at my house by a
posse of Indian troops deployed in our locality. His neck was severed and
some parts of his body were mutilated.
“Shortly afterwards, we were driven out of our house by the Mukti
Bahini and lodged in a Red Cross Camp.“
Allah Rakhee, 45, whose husband, Mohammed Yusuf, was a 38 thriving
businessman in Dacca and who lived in their own house in Block D in the
Mirpur locality, had this poignant memory of the tragedy in her life in March
and December 1971:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
35
“In the third week of March 1971, a gang of Awami League volunteers
had looted our house when I was all alone in it. They said that they would
kidnap my husband and my two teenage sons but the federal army routed
the rebels and we had peace for nine months.
“On December 17, after the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini had
captured Dacca, a score of armed Bengalis raided my house. They shot my
aged husband in the compound of our house. I had hidden my two sons
in the lavatory. Just when the killer gang was about to leave, one of the
raiders stepped into the lavatory and saw my two sons who cried to
escape. He shouted for help and the whole gang rushed inside and
overpowered my sons. They dragged the two boys to the compound and,
before my dazed eyes, shot them dead. The killers slapped me, and, at the
point of a bayonet, they drove me in their truck to the Red Cross Camp.
My eldest son had joined the Pakistan Army. I have no news of him. I
learnt that the Mukti Bahini threw the dead bodies of my husband and my
two sons into the river.“
“I had a glimpse of the fiendish slaughter-house set up for murdering hapless
non-Bengalis in Dacca“, said 25-year-old Salma Khatoon, after her repatriation to
Karachi from Dacca in January 1974. Her slain husband, Nazar Alam Khan, was
employed in the State Bank of Pakistan in Dacca. She testified:
“In the last week of March 1971, the Bengali rebels had murdered the
parents and elder brother of my husband in Rangpur. In the third week of
March, some armed Bengali thugs had looted my house in the Bashabo
locality near Kamlapur station in Dacca. But my husband had escaped
their murderous search.
“In the third week of December 1971, when the Indian Army and the
Mukti Bahini ruled Dacca, he went to his office and did not return home.
In the night of December 18, a posse of Bengali gunmen looted my house
and told me that I should leave it although we owned it. When my
husband did not return even on the third day, I went to his office. The
office was locked from outside. Through a window I saw a group of
tough-looking men burning old records, bank notes and registers. I also
peeped inside a dark store room which had large blood stains and torn
clothes. This, I believe, was used as a kind of abattoir for killing non-
Bengali Bank employees. I met the wife of a Bengali colleague of my
husband in the adjacent staff quarters for Bank employees. She told me
that a Mukti Bahini gang had raided the Bank on the day my husband
disappeared and it murdered all the non-Bengali employees on duty.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
36
They had dumped the bodies, she said, into a hastily dug pit at the back of
the office building.
“My orphaned children and I lived for two years in the Red Cross Camp.
The Mukti Bahini seized my house and told me that the Biharis would not
be permitted to own even an inch of land in Bangladesh.“
“For two hours, my house in Mohammedpur was riddled and pocked with
bullets by a gang of armed Bengali marauders late in March 1971“, said Qaiser
Jahan, 22, who escaped to Nepal from East Pakistan in 1972 and was repatriated
to Karachi in December 1973.
Qaiser Jahan and her husband, Aziz Hussain, a prosperous businessman, lived in
their own house on Noor Jahan Road in the Mohammedpur locality in Dacca.
They had escaped the March 1971 massacre of non-Bengalis and the gunmen
who fired on her house did not loot it. But in the third week of December 1971,
when the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini seized East Pakistan, her
misfortunes began. Early in December 1971, her husband had gone on a business
visit to Chittagong. Weeks passed and there was no news of him. Qaiser Jahan
heard of the massacre of non-Bengalis in Chittagong on December 17, 1971. The
next day, at midnight, a gang of armed Mukti Bahini soldiers attacked the
Mohammedpur locality and they continued machine-gunning her house till the
early hours of the morning. Panic-stricken, she decided to leave for Khulna
where some relatives of hers lived. Qaiser Jahan said:
Kulsoom, 35, whose husband, Abdul Kareem, had his own small business firm in
Dacca, lived in their own house on Jagannath Saha Road. She was widowed early
in 1971. Her 24 year old son was employed in a trading firm in central Dacca. In
the third week of March 1971, a gang of armed Awami Leaguers raided and
looted her house. Her son was not at home when the raiders came. But in
December 1971, Kulsoom’s little world was shattered:
“It was December 12. My son, Mohammad Yasin, had gone to his office.
My son was a brave young man. He said he was not frightened by India’s
bombing and would go to work. In the evening, I was stunned when some
Civil Defence workers brought me his battered dead body. He was killed
when Indian aircraft bombed the building where he worked.
“I was benumbed by the loss of my son. In the third week of December
1971, a Mukti Bahini gang raided and looted my house and threw me and
my three small children on the streets. We lived for more than two years
in a Red Cross Camp in Dacca. In February 1974, we were repatriated to
Pakistan“.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
37
Ayesha Begum, 40, who was repatriated to Karachi from Dacca, with her three
orphaned children, in December 1973, testified:
“In the third week of March 1971, a gang of armed Awami Leaguers had
fired on our house in Mirpur in Dacca but the appearance of an Army
patrol made them run away.
“For nine months, my husband, Abdul Bari, a Bank employee, lived in
peace in our house in Mirpur. But in the third week of December 1971, a
posse of Mukti Bahini soldiers, led by some gangsters of our locality, came
to my house and looted it. They ordered us to leave the house at once and
go to the Red Cross Camp. Just then my husband returned home from
work and in a matter of minutes the killer gang overpowered him and
shot him in the chest. I was stunned and utterly speechless. One of them
slapped me and threatened that if I did not vacate the house immediately I
would be killed. I begged them to give me some time to bury my husband
but they refused. I appealed to them in the name of God and two of them
agreed to help me in burying my husband. We dug a grave in an open
space nearby and laid him to eternal rest. My children and I walked to the
Red Cross Camp where we lived for two years.“
Najmunnissa, 30, and her three orphaned children were repatriated from Dacca
to Karachi in January 1974 after they had spent two years in the Red Cross Camp
in Mohammedpur. Her husband was an employee of the East Pakistan
Government and he owned a small house in Mirpur where he and his family
lived. In the third week of March 1971, when he was away on duty, some armed
thugs had looted his house. In the third week of December 1971, the Mukti
Bahini murdered him while he was on his way to his office. A Mukti Bahini gang
raided Najmunnissa’s house in the evening of December 18th and told her that
her husband had been executed. They gave her no clues to the whereabouts of
his dead body. Brandishing sten guns, the raiders ordered her to leave the house
at once as the Bengalis returning from India had to be accommodated.
Najmunnissa said:
“I was a widow; my children were orphans. My tormentors shoved a gun
in my face to force me to quit the house where we had lived for years. We
were on the streets. Subsequently, the thugs changed their mind and
carted us away to a big building where many hundreds of hapless non-
Bengali women and children were herded. The male members of their
families had been liquidated by the Mukti Bahini in human abattoirs. Life
in the captivity of the Mukti Bahini in this prison was a hell. A Red Cross
team located us and took us to a Camp in Mohammedpur. They said our

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
38
Bengali captors were planning our murder in the building and we were
saved in the nick of time.“
Some eye-witnesses from Dacca said that their relatives had been subjected to
violence by the Awami league militants at a number of places not far from Dacca.
Some of the towns named by these witnesses are: Keraniganj, Joydebpur,
Munshiganj, Rupganj, Madaripur, Pubail, Tangibari, Chandpur, Matlab Bazar,
Hajiganj and Baidya Bazar. Many non-Bengali families fled from these small
towns to Dacca after the Awami League’s terrorisation campaign gained
momentum in the third and fourth weeks of March 1971. Quite a few non-
Bengali families, witnesses said, were killed by the Bengali rebels in the last week
of March 1971. Their houses were looted. Money was extorted by thugs from
some well-to-do non-Bengali businessmen engaged in trade at these places. In
Joydebpur, 22 miles from Dacca, an armed mob, led by Awami League militants,
put up barricades on the rail track and the main highway to block troop
movement on March 19, 1971. A posse of Pakistani troops exchanged fire with
the rebel gunmen in the mob. A rebel was killed and two soldiers were wounded.
In the last week of March 1971, a killer gang looted many non-Bengali houses in
Keraniganj and Munshiganj and murdered some non-Bengali men. In Chandpur,
violence against the non-Bengalis spiralled in the third and fourth weeks of
March 1971 but the death toll was not large. In Baidya Bazar, the rebel gangs
wiped out a dozen non-Bengali families and looted their property. Thugs
ambushed and held up some non-Bengali businessmen for ransom. In Pubail and
Tangi-bari, the Awami League militants and their rebel confederates murdered
dozens of affluent Biharis. Shops owned by the Biharis were a favourite target of
attack. Kidnapping of teenage girls was also reported from these places. The
Awami League militants and the rebels ravished the kidnapped non-Bengali
girls and shot them before the federal army controlled the area. This was
obviously with the intention of eliminating evidence and witnesses of their
crimes. But in areas bordering on India, the retreating Bengali rebels carried
away with them the non-Bengali girls whom they had kidnapped and ravished.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
39
CHAPTER TWO
Terror in Narayanganj
“The killer gang had orders to murder every non-Bengali in our factory “, said
Asghar Ali Khan, 38, who was employed as an Overseer in the Pakistan Fabric
Company’s factory in Narayanganj, an industrial township close to Dacca.
He gave this pathetic account of the slaughter of non-Bengalis in March 1971 in
Narayanganj:
“The non-Bengali population resident in Narayanganj was not large.
Many non-Bengalis worked by day in Narayanganj and commuted in the
evening to their homes in nearby Dacca.
“Since the first week of March, Awami League militants were at work in
Narayanganj, inciting the Bengali mill workers against the non-Bengalis.
They had marked the houses of non-Bengalis by the middle of the month.
“On March 21, a large, violent mob of yelling Awami Leaguers attacked
the factory and the quarters where the non-Bengali employees and their
families lived. They did not damage the factory but they butchered the
non-Bengali employees and their families. I was the sole occupant of my
quarter and I slipped into the house of a very dear Bengali friend when
the Awami League’s raid began. He hid me in his house and I was saved.
“In the afternoon of March 26, after the Bengali rebels had been routed,
the federal troops visited our factory and arranged the mass burial of the
160 dead bodies of non-Bengalis which lay stacked in their quarters.“
“The killer gang had looted the houses of the victims and every article of value
had vanished “, said Asghar Ali Khan.
Witnesses said that the Awami League demagogues, in their harangues to the
Bengali millhands, told them that the unemployed Bengalis would get factory
jobs if the non-Bengali employees were liquidated. The non-Bengali employees
were known by the generic name of Biharis.
“Four armed thugs dragged two captive non-Bengali teenage girls into an empty
bus and violated their chastity before gunning them to death“, said Gulzar

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
40
Hussain, 38, who witnessed the massacre of 22 non-Bengali men, women and
children on March 21, 1971, close to a bus stand in Narayanganj. Repatriated to
Karachi in November 1973, Gulzar Hussain reported:
“I was engaged in the Jute Trade in Narayanganj and I lived in a rented
house not far from the commercial hub of the town. Since the first week of
March 1971, the Awami Leaguers were trying to stir up trouble in
Narayanganj and their goal was to wipe out the non-Bengali population.
“On March 21, our Dacca-bound bus was stopped on the way, soon after
it left the heart of the city. I was seated in the front portion of the bus and I
saw that the killer gang had guns, scythes and daggers. The gunmen
raised ‘Joi Bangla’ and anti-Pakistan slogans. The bus driver obeyed their
signal to stop and the thugs motioned to the passengers to get down. A
jingo barked out the order that Bengalis and non-Bengalis should fall into
separate lines. As I spoke Bengali with a perfect Dacca accent and could
easily pass for a Bengali, I joined the Bengali group of passengers. The
killer gang asked us to utter a few sentences in Bengali which we did. I
passed the test and our tormentors instructed the Bengalis to scatter. The
thugs then gunned all the male non-Bengalis. It was a horrible scene. Four
of the gunmen took for their loot two young non-Bengali women and
raped them inside the empty bus. After they had ravished the girls, the
killers shot them and half a dozen other women and children. Some shops,
owned by non-Bengalis in Narayanganj, were looted by riotous mobs on
that day“.
Nasima Khatoon, 25, lived in a rented house in the Pancho Boti locality in
Narayanganj. Her husband, Mohammed Qamrul Hasan, was employed in a
Vegetable Oil manufacturing factory. Repatriated to Karachi in January 1974,
along with her 4 year old orphaned daughter, from a Red Cross Camp in Dacca,
Nasima gave this hair-raising account of her travail in 1971:
“Since March 3, there was tension in Narayanganj. The Awami Leaguers
were inciting the Bengali labourers to kill the non Bengalis. In the night of
March 25, a Bengali mob, led by Awami League militants, tried to loot the
houses of non-Bengalis in our locality but the cowards melted away when
the news of the Army’s action against the rebels reached them.
“On December 16, when the surrender decision of the Pakistan Army in
Dacca to the Indian Army was announced, violent crowds of Bengali
militants went on the rampage against the non-Bengalis in Narayanganj.
A killer gang attacked my house and stole all my ornaments, my clothes,
crockery and the furniture. The thugs did not spare even the kitchenware

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
41
and house hold linen. My husband was away in Dacca when the killer
gang came to my house.
“At gun-point, our captors made us leave our house and marched us to
an open square where more than 500 non-Bengali old men, women and
children were detained. Some 30 Bengali gunmen led us through swampy
ground towards a deserted school building. On the way, the 3-year-old
child of a hapless captive Woman died in her arms. She asked her captors
to allow her to dig a small grave and bury the child. The tough man in the
lead snorted a sharp ‘No’, snatched the body of the dead child from her
wailing mother and tossed it into a river along whose bank we dragged
our feet in physical exhaustion. The killers pushed all their captives into
the school building. I wanted water to slake my parched throat; the
gunman, who headed our group, slapped me, struck me in the arm with
his rifle-butt and pushed me inside the jam-packed hall.
“For a week, we lived in what was virtually a hell. Every night, we heard
threats and abuses from our captors. One of the captive women feigned
acute stomach ache and begged her captors to let her go to a hospital in
Dacca for treatment. She was old and looked a saintly woman. The
Bengali captors allowed her to go to Dacca. A very intelligent woman, she
raced to Mohammedpur where she told the Red Cross Officials about the
plight of the 500 Bihari captive women and children. Two teams of
officials of the International Red Cross came to our rescue and took us to
their Camp in Mirpur. Twice our Camp was attacked by the Mukti Bahini
gunmen, and some of the inmates, including two ailing young women,
were killed by gunfire. By April, 1972, there was some improvement in the
situation and the nocturnal kidnapping of its Bihari inmates by the
Bengali marauders lessened. The Red Cross Officials tried their best to
trace out my missing husband but he was not found. Like many
thousands of other non-Bengalis, he was, it is presumed, done to death by
rampaging killer gangs, inebriated with the victory of the Indian Army
and the Mukti Bahini“.
“I saw the rebels burning dozens of jute godowns in Narayanganj and throwing
the dead bodies of murdered non-Bengalis into the flames “, said 52-year-old
Allah Rakha, who worked as a jute broker in Narayanganj. He lived in a rented
house in the Patuatoly locality of Dacca. Repatriated to Karachi in March 1974, he
said:
“After the mid-1960’s, most of the non-Bengali traders in Narayanganj
and Dacca were apprehensive that some day it would become difficult for
them to do business in East Pakistan. The Awami League leaders were

