Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
162
was delirious; I raved day and night. The women wailed and the children cried
with hunger and thirst. Some women and children died; there were hardly any
teenage girls left; the thugs had kidnapped them for lust. On the fourth day of
our incarceration, a contingent of the Pakistan Army rescued us. I was taken to a
Relief Camp in Dacca from where I was taken by my father to his home in
Chittagong. I was repatriated from Chittagong to Karachi in February 1971. “
Sixty-year-old Sheikh Habibullah, who owned and drove an auto-rickshaw
(pedicab) and lived in House No. 14 on Daulatmunshi Road in the Kishtopur
locality in Shankipara in Mymensingh, broke down in sobs when he narrated in
Karachi, in February 1974, the slaughter of his four grown-up sons by the Awami
League militants late in March 1971. He said he and his sons spoke Bengali
exceedingly well but they were dubbed as Biharis because he had migrated from
the Indian State of Bihar to East Pakistan shortly after Partition in August 1947,
(He had forgotten the Urdu script and he signed his testimony for this book in
Bengali). Nervous and haggard, Habibullah said:
“Tension gripped Mymensingh town in mid-March, 1971. The non-Bengali
population was subjected to intimidation and insults and there were rumours
that the Awami League militants would attack them with the arms they had
looted from the police armoury and also smuggled from India. The first raid by
the Awami League hoodlums on the Bihari-inhabited Shankipara colony took
place on March 23. All through the last week of March and the first half of April,
armed gangs of Awami Leaguers and rebel Bengali soldiers looted and burnt the
homes of non-Bengalis and murdered them by the thousands. Early in April, a
yelling mob of 50 armed rebels broke into my house. My grown-up sons,
Sanaullah, Shafi Ahmed, Ali Ahmed and Ali Akhtcr, resisted the attackers but
they had no weapons to defend themselves. I lunged at one of the gunmen who
had raised his gun to kill my eldest son. He struck me on the head and I
collapsed. Just before I lost consciousness, there was a burst of machine gunfire
and my four sons fell down in a pool of blood. I saw the crying wives of
Sanaullah and Shafi Ahmed rushing into the room where their husbands were
being butchered. I passed out and the killers thought I was dead. The next
morning when I regained consciousness, I saw the dead bodies of my four sons; I
was nearly mad. I kissed their blood-spattered faces; I looked for their heartbeats;
they were lifeless. There was no trace of my two daughters-in-law. My house
was looted and every valuable was gone. I was too scared to take the dead
bodies of my sons to the graveyard. There was not a soul in the houses in my
neighbourhood; in the distance I heard occasionally the echo of rifle shots and
gunfire. The whine and whimper of dogs was the only sign of life in this ghost
colony; dead bodies littered the rough road near my house.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
163
“Some unfortunate Biharis sought refuge in a Mosque in the neighbourhood
which was given the nickname of “TheBihari Mosque “ by the Bengalis. A large
gang of armed killers smashed the doors of the Mosque and killed 175 non-
Bengalis right inside this House of God. About 300 non-Bengalis had left their
homes in Shankipara and they took refuge in the building of a primary school.
They had no weapons with them. Early in April, they were liquidated by the
rebels. After the Pakistan Army captured Mymensingh, I buried my four sons in
the graveyard. I visited the nearby Bihari residential localities of Chalisbari,
Chattisbari, Islamabad and Ikya. Except for a few aged stragglers like myself, all
traces of human habitation had vanished from these once populous colonies. The
stench of rotting dead pervaded the entire neighbourhood. Scores of houses had
been burnt and reduced to a shambles. I was told that the insurgents had
kidnapped and raped more than 1,500 Bihari young women from the Shankipara
Colony during the period of their accursed control over Mymensingh. Some
Bihari women had jumped into wells to escape the clutches of their rapists.
“An angel was the Bengali Pesh Imam (Muslim Priest) of the big Mosque near
the Police Station who gave shelter to more than 500 Bihari survivors of the
carnage in Shankipara. He pleaded for their lives with the Bengali mutineers
who were after their blood. With the help of a Bengali Moazzin (the man who
calls Muslims to prayers), the Pesh Imsm collected boiled rice from God-fearing
Bengalis in other localities and fed the terror-stricken non-Bengali men, women
and children in the Mosque. The Awami League hoodlums were planning his
murder but the timely arrival of the Pakistan Army on April 21 saved him and
the Biharis sheltered in the Mosque. As a rickshaw driver, I knew the
Cantonment very well and had some Punjabi and Pathan friends amongst the
soldiers stationed there, before the March killing of non-Bengalis. When I visited
it three days after it had been re-occupied by the Pakistan Army, I learnt of the
terrible massacre of the non-Bengali military personnel and their families by the
rebels of the East Bengal Regiment in a midnight swoop on the Cantonment on
March 26/27. There was no trace of my West Pakistani soldier friends. I came to
Karachi in February 1974. “
Anwar Hussain, 31, who was employed in a trading firm in Mymensingh, and
whose life was saved by a Bengali friend, said:
“On March 24, 1971, the Awami League took out a large procession in
Mymensingh. They yelled slogans against the non-Bengalis. Many of the
processionists were armed with rifles, spears, axes, daggers and staves. My local
Bengali friends told me that quite a few amongst the processionists were not the
inhabitants of Mymensingh. The procession passed through my locality and
shouted slogans against the Biharis. The Awami League militants, who were
leading the procession, announced through a megaphone that all the non-

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
164
Bengalis should surrender their weapons voluntarily, otherwise a search would
be conducted and those found with weapons would be shot dead. The Bihari
residents of our locality surrendered their weapons which included a few guns,
knives and spears. The non-Bengalis, who went to surrender their weapons to
the Bengali processionists were ordered to march to an open ground some
distance away. There they were massacred. After a few hours the processionists
returned to our locality and looted and burnt scores of non-Bengali houses. Most
of the menfolk in these unfortunate homes were slaughtered, and the wailing
women, many with babies in their arms, were marched at gunpoint to a school
building. Right from the middle of March, I had a premonition that the Bengali
crackdown of the Biharis was in the offing. I had sought the help of a good-
natured, Islam-loving Bengali friend. A few hours before the Awami League
killers went on the rampage in our locality, I moved my family to his house and I
escaped the massacre just in the nick of time. In the third week of April, when
the Pakistan Army re-occupied Mymensingh, we went back to our house. A part
of it was burnt and it had been looted. I saw very few non-Bengali survivors in
what was before the carnage a populous, smiling township. “
Anwar Hussain and his family moved to Dacca in the autumn of 1971. After
India’s occupation of East Pakistan in December 1971, they lived a terrorised life
in Mohammedpur in Dacca. In January 1974, the United Nations airlift wafted
them to Pakistan.
Fahim Siddiqi, 35, who was employed in a commercial firm in Mymensingh and
lived in a rented house in the Sitarampur locality with his two brothers, said in
Karachi in March, 1971:
“When I left Chittagong on board a Russian ship late in February 1974 for
Karachi, I had made up my mind that I would forget the nightmare of the past
two and a quarter years. I had spent the best part of my life in Mymensingh; I
loved the town and I had very good friends, Bengalis as well as non-Bengalis. I
spoke excellent Bengali. Late in March, 1971, a riotous mob of Awami League-led
Bengalis, armed with guns and scythes, stormed the houses of non-Bengalis in
my locality. “Loot, burn and kill the menfolk “ was their mode of savagery. The
killer gangs looted my house and butchered my two grown-up brothers in a
nearby field which was the execution ground. I slipped away from my house
minutes after the gunmen forayed into our locality. I sought refuge in a
dilapidated, abandoned building and lived in it until the Pakistan Army freed
Mymensingh from the rebels’ control in the third week of April. I saw very few
survivors of the massacre of non-Bengalis in my locality. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
165
Anweri Begum, 35, who lived in Quarter No. T/56 in the Railway Colony in
Mymensingh and who saw her husband slaughtered by a Bengali killer gang,
gave the following account of her misfortune:
“In the second week of April, when the town was under the control of the
Bengali insurgents, half a dozen Bengalis came to our house and told my
husband that our lives would be spared if we gave them all the cash and
ornaments we had. I readily parted with all my jewellery; we scraped some cash
and handed it to the Bengali visitors. We passed the night in fear. I suggested to
my husband that we should leave the house and seek refuge in the home of a
Bengali friend in another part of the town. He disagreed with my suggestion
because of the assurance of safety which had been given to him by the miscreants
who had taken away our cash and ornaments. In the evening of the next day, a
dozen armed rebels broke into our house. Three of them had visited us on the
previous day. Seme of them wore red caps and appeared to be Hindus. When my
husband remonstrated with them, they shot him in the chest and he was bathed
in blood. A non-Bengali friend of my husband and his teenage son, who tried to
rescue him, were riddled with bullets.
The killers locked for my 16-year-old son; I had concealed him under a pile of
mats on the roof. The rebels had imposed a post-sunset blackout in Mymensingh.
There was no light in my house. I heard the groan of my husband in the veranda
and I tiptoed to him. I gave him some water; I washed his bleeding wounds.
Speaking very faintly —he was fearful of the Bengali killers who prowled in the
locality — he asked me not to lose heart. “Have faith in God; He will look after
you “, my husband said. He kissed our ten-month-old son; he spoke to our
second son, aged 9, who had hid himself beneath a cot during the murderous
visit of the killers. My husband was in the agony of death; blood seeped from his
wounds but he was courageous. He asked me to feel the pulse of his friend and
of his son; they were cold and dead. In the early hours of the morning, he
breathed his last. I could not control myself; I cried aloud. The killers rushed into
my house; they aimed their guns at me and asked me to go with them. They said
they would bury my dead husband. I covered my husband’s dead body with a
blanket and followed my captors. With me were my two sons; the eldest lay
hidden on the roof.
“Hundreds of dead bodies littered our path and the sidewalks. Many houses
were burnt. Roving bands of armed insurgents searched houses for survivors
who were immediately liquidated. They poked some dead bodies with burning
cigarettes; the slightest reaction evoked a burst of gunshots. We were; taken to
the big Mosque in the city. On the way, our captors told us that our lives were
being spared because after a few days they would make us their domestic
servants. Inside the Mosque, it was a terrifying scene. There were hundreds of

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
166
wailing women and crying children. There was no water, no food. I tore a part of
my sari and my suckling son lay on it. I begged a Bengali attendant in the
Mosque to get us some water; he obliged. For two days we had no food. On the
third day, the Imam (priest) of the Mosque gave us some food to eat. Although a
Bengai he was an angel to us. I was harried day and night by the fear that the
killers had perhaps killed my eldest son. On the fourth day, my prayers for his
safety were answered when he joined us in the Mosque. A Bengali neighbour, he
said, had taken pity on him and smuggled him into the Mosque. On April 21, the
Pakistan.
Army occupied Mymensingh and rescued us. It took many days to bury the
rotting dead bodies of slain non-Bengalis. I went back to my house to look for the
dead body of my husband; there was no trace of it. Deep and large bloodstains
on the floor were reminders of his gruesome murder. The Pakistan Army moved
us to a Relief Camp in Dacca where we lived in peace. On December 17, 1971 our
travail began afresh when the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini seized East
Pakistan. We had become so inured to torture and misery that we were prepared
for the worst; we had only our bare bodies to lose. In March, 1974, my three
children aud I were flown to Karachi from Dacca “.
Fifty-year-old Qamrunnissa, whose husband, Mohammed Qasim and her eldest
son, were killed by the insurgents late in March 1971, in Shankipara in
Mymensingh, broke down in sobs as she gave an account of her woes:
“It was the last week of March 1971. Our hearts were chilled by rumours that the
Awami Leaguers and the rebel soldiers were planning the massacre of all the
Urdu-speaking people in Mymensingh. In some localities, killings of non-
Bengalis had taken place. Every day, processionists, shouting “Joi Bangla “ and
armed with lethal weapons, used to parade in the non-Bengali localities. In the
evening, some Bengali boys knocked at our door and asked to see my husband.
He opened the door and a group of armed men burst in. At the point of a gun,
they ordered my husband and my grown-up son to go with them. I appealed to
them for mercy and to spare the lives of my dear ones but they were heartless
brutes. I never saw my husband and my son again; the killers murdered them.
Poking a bayonet in my arm, they double-marched me to a nearby school where
hundreds of crying women and children were held in captivity. On the way, we
had seen the blood-soaked dead bodies of their unfortunate husbands and
fathers, lying on the roads and the wayside. I saw one of our captors touching
with a burning cigarette a dead body which he thought showed signs of lifc. He
was dead as a doornail. The next day, the women and children, who were lodged
in the school for the night, were marched to a big mosque where hundreds of
other widows and orphans, bemoaning the recent loss of their male kith and kin,
were interned. The Bengali imam (priest) of the Mosque was kind and helpful,

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
167
and he brought us some water and food. He did his best to dissuade our captors
from killing us. On April 21, we were saved from the jaws of death by the timely
arrival of the Pakistan Army. They rescued us and transported us to a Relief
Camp in Dacca. After the Indian troops and the Mukti Bahini captured Dacca on
December 17, 1971, I underwent more physical and mental suffering. In January
1974, I was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi. “
Sixty-year-old Ghaffurunnissa’s account of her woes and suffering in March-
April 1971 in a suburban locality of Mymensingh, which had a sprinkling of non-
Bengalis, was heart-rending;
“In the last week of March 1971, killer gangs of Awami Leaguers and rebel
soldiers of the East Bengal Regiment went on the rampage in our locality.
Initially, their victims were the Punjabi residents of our locality. All the young
and middle-aged men of the nearly 70 Punjabi families in our neighbourhood
were taken at gunpoint to a far away place which, we learnt, was the rebels’
slaughter-house for the non-Bengalis. Early in the second fortnight of April, these
killer gangs attacked all the other non-Bengalis in our locality — looting, burning
and killing. They broke into our house and dragged my husband and my
married son to an open field half a furlong away.
“I spotted in this crowd of hostages my brother and his teenage son. Their
captors lined up their non-Bengali captives and asked them to salute a flag which
they said was of Bangladesh. Many of the non-Bengalis ignored the guns pointed
at them and refused to salute this flag. A fusillade of bullets burst forth from the
cruel guns of the rebels and hundreds of innocent men were killed. After the
killers had made sure that there were no men survivors — they pumped bullets
into the hearts of those who took time to give up the ghost — they returned to
the non-Bengali houses where the sorrowing women rent the skies with their
wailing. I heard the leader of a killer gang tell his accomplices that the non-
Bengali women should be spared so that they could be made domestic servants.
With me was my widowed daughter-in-law and her one-year-old son. We were
marched to a school; the next day we were taken to a big Mosque. For six days
we lived inside this House of God in agony and suffering; most of us prayed
most of the time for our husbands and our sons and for our deliverance. On
April 21, the Pakistan Army entered Mymensingh and rescued us. We were
moved to a Relief Camp in Dacca. After the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini
seized East Pakistan on December 17, 1971, we lived in terror in a Camp for
Biharis in Mohammedpur in Dacca. Our travail ended in December 1973 when
the United Nations repatriated me and my daughter-in-law and her little son to
Karachi. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
168
Thirty-year-old Zaibunnissa, whose husband, Mohammed Ibraheem, was a
Railway
employee
in
Mymensingh,
narrated
the
pathetic
story
of
her
widowhood in these words:
“We had lived in peace with our Bengali neighbours for years. My husband was
a quiet and hardworking man who had no interest in politics. In the last week of
March 1971, a score of yelling and armed Bengalis, whom I had never seen before
in our locality, broke the door of our house and overpowered my husband. I
begged them to spare my husband and my three little children. They slapped me
and kicked my crying children and pushed my husband outside the house.
Another mob of angry Bengalis lynched him and dragged him to the execution
ground. The killer gang looted my home and marched me and my little children
at gunpoint to a small building which, I learnt, was an old jail. We lived in that
hell for more than three weeks. The suffering had become so acute and
unbearable that I prayed for death. On April 21, the Pakistan Army delivered us
from this inferno. For three days, I wandered all over Mymensingh in search of
my husband but there was no trace of him. Our soldiers consoled me. I and my
orphaned children were moved to Dacca in mid-1971. The nightmare ended for
us in February 1974 when the United Nations transported us to safety and
freedom in Karachi. “
Shahzadi Begum, 24, whose husband, Akhter Hussain, worked as a postman in
Mymensirgh, gave a harrowing description of the carnage in which her husband,
her father-in-law and her brother-in-law were executed by a gang of rebels in the
first half of April 1971:
“We owned a small house in a suburban colony in Mymensingh. Since the
middle of March 1971, we lived in terror because of alarming reports that the
Awami League militants were planning to kill all the Punjabis. On March 23, my
husband returned home in panic and said that a lot of his Punjabi friends had
been butchered by Awami League militants, rebel soldiers and policemen. In the
second week of April, a mob of Bengalis, many armed with guns, forayed into
our house and dragged away my husband, my father-in-law and my teenage
brother-in-law. At gunpoint, they ordered the women to stay indoors. The non-
Bengali men, including my husband and my in-laws, were marched to an open
field where they were shot dead.
“Our tormentors forced me and my two little daughters to go with them. We
passed through a green field and we saw a ghastly scene. Scattered on the
ground were the dead bodies of hundreds of non-Bengalis who had been
executed by firing squads. Some, it seemed, had been killed with daggers and
butcher’s knives. One of our Bengali captors, who saw a body move, promptly
stilled it with a gunshot. I closed my eyes in sheer horror and fright; my two little

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
169
daughters shrieked in fear. The angry looks of our captors and a gleaming
bayonet left us no choice but to continue marching under the scorching sun. As
we moved on to a road, we saw scores of bleeding dead bodies sprawled all over
the roadside. Some were being dumped in a truck. Subsequently, I learnt that
many of the non-Bengali dead were tossed into the nearby Brahmaputra river.
On the way, we saw hundreds of burnt houses and mat huts.
“We stayed for an hour in a school building, a part of which had been
apparently used as a slaughter-house for non-Bengalis. Dead bodies lay in heaps.
We were marched to another school building where hundreds of grieving
women and children were herded. I saw one of the women holding in her hands
the Holy Quran. In the name of the Holy Book, she appealed to her incarcerators
to allow her to go home to look after her orphaned, little children. A youthful
captor flung the Holy Book from her hands and struck her in the face. We were
tormented in this improvised prison for a week; many children died of thirst and
hunger. On April 21, we were rescued and freed by the Pakistan Army. Most of
the women and children were moved to Dacca. I preferred to stay back in
Mymensingh. For eight months we had peace. But after the Indian Army and the
Mukti Bahini occupied Mymensingh in the third week of December 1971, life
again became a horror for us. There was some relief when we were moved to a
Red Cross Camp for Biharis in Mymensingh early in 1972. My two small
daughters and I were repatriated to Karachi in February 1974. I am convinced
that many of those who killed the non-Bengalis in Mymensingh in March-April,
1971, were Hindu Bengali infiltrators from India. “
Amina Khatoon, 45, whose husband, Zainul Abedin, a carpenter, was slain by a
killer gang in the middle of April 1971 in a locality near Shankipara in
Mymensingh, thus spoke of the tragedy in her life:
“A group of armed rebels stormed our locality on April 15th. They looted my
house and drove me and my husband to a nearby field. The men were lined up
at some distance from the women. All the captives were non-Bengalis. All of a
sudden, a young, toughlooking Bengali gave the order to shoot and, in a jiffy,
volleys of bullets smothered more than a hundred non-Bengalis. Seared in my
memory is that gory scene. I saw my husband fall to the ground as blood spurted
from his chest; I rushed to be with him in his death agony. Before I could reach
him, a gunman bashed my head with the butt of his gun. I slumped and fainted.
Bayonet prods, a kick and abuses greeted me when I regained my senses; my
tormentors marched me to a Mosque where hundreds of widowed women and
orphaned children were jailed. It was a ghoulish life. Out of the six days of our
incarceration, for four days we lived on water; we had no food to eat. Many
children died of hunger. A couple of kind hearted Bengali attendants in the
Mosque took pity on us and got us some boiled rice which was eaten by the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
170
starving children. We were told that our rebel tormentors were planning our
massacre. But Gcd willed otherwise, and on April 21, in the forenoon, the
Pakistan Army rescued us. Earlier in the morning, our captors had vanished
from the Mosque. All the destitute women and children, whose male relatives
had been slaughtered by the Bengali insurgents, were taken to a Relief Camp in
Dacca. I was repatriated to Karachi in January, 1974. “
Thirty-two-year-old Saira, whose husband, Abdul Hamid Khan, was employed
as a driver in the Mymensingh police force and who saw him slain by a killer
gang in the second week of April 1971, had the following recollection of that
dreadful scene:
“As my husband was a non-Bengali and a Pathan, the rebel soldiers and
policemen were after his blood right from the middle of March 1971. A group of
them broke into our house in the first week of April, overpowered my husband
and dragged him to a nearby paddy field. Unmindful of the crying of my three
little children who were shocked by the plight of their father, I ran to the killer
gang in the rice field and entreated them, in the name of Allah, to spare the life of
my husband. But these ruthless men were out for a kill, and one of them slit my
husband’s throat with a large knife. I was horrified; I was speechless. As I rushed
towards him, the killers grabbed me and hurled me to the ground. I heard the
groans of my dying husband as they stabbed him in the chest and in the stomach
to hasten his end. In the mean time, four gunmen arrived on the scene and
pulled me back to my house. It had been looted. My terror-stricken children
stood at the doorstep. Our gun-toting captors marched us to a big Mosque. On
the way, we saw hundreds of dead bodies on the road and the sidewalks. Many
houses had been burnt. Life inside the Mosque was an infernal torture; more
than a thousand women and children wailed and groaned. I saw very few
teenage girls in this terrified mass of humanity. The Bengali attendants in the
Mosque got us some water from a nearby pond which enabled us to survive. The
Pakistan Army freed us from this hellish captivity on April 21, 1971. My
orphaned children and I were transported by the Army to Dacca where we lived
in a Relief Camp. In November 1973, we were flown to Karachi. “
Nasima, 27, a Bengali, whose husband, Abdul Jalil, a Bihari, owned a retail shop
in Mymensingh, gave this account of the slaying of her husband late in March
1971:
“Some of my Bengali compatriots hated me and my family because I had
married a Bihari. On March 26, 1971, a riotous crowd of miscreants went on the
rampage, looted our shop and hacked my husband to death. When the shocking
news of his murder reached me in my house, I ran to the shop to retrieve his
dead body. There was no trace of it, but fresh bloodstains were visible. I was told

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
171
that the killers had carted it away in a truck in the direction of the river which
was at some distance. Early in April 1971, the rebel soldiers drove me out of my
house and I went to live with my Bengali parents who were very religious-
minded and strongly condemned the killing of the non-Bengalis. After the Indian
Army and the Mukti Bahini seized East Pakistan on December 17, 1971, there
was a carnage of Biharis and also of Bengalis who were considered loyal to
Pakistan. On December 18, a killer gang attacked our house and killed my father
and my two grown up brothers. My third brother, aged 5, and I were in the
house of a neighbour when our house was attacked. He helped us in escaping to
a nearby village where we lived and worked in the paddy fields for more than
two years. When the United Nations started the repatriation of non-Bengalis to
Pakistan, I made a frantic effort to come to Pakistan. I had no place in Bangladesh;
every moment of my life there was a torment. On February 11, 1974, I was flown
to Karachi by the United Nations. “
The evidence of eye-witnesses indicates that Awami League militants and rebel
soldiers, who killed non-Bengalis in Mymensingh by the thousands, retreated
and fled to India in the face of the advancing Pakistan Army in the third week of
April, 1971. After the federal troops entered Mymensingh, they arranged the
mass burial of the slaughtered non-Bengalis. In his despatch of May 8, 1971, from
Mymensingh, Malcolm Browne of the New York Times, reported:
“At intervals, along streets lined with ramshackle houses, bodies have been
buried in shallow graves and covered with piles of red bricks. Bodies covered
with bricks are found even on the porches of houses which themselves are
unoccupied and closed. “
Interred in these graves were the non-Bengalis slain by the insurgents but India’s
propaganda machinery and the Awami League publicists drummed the lie that
these graves were of Bengalis killed by the Pakistan Army. Witnesses from
Mymensingh said that many non-Bengali families underwent terrible hardships
and agony in the towns of Kishoreganj, Narsingdi, Bhairab Bazar, Begunbari,
and Sarasabari. Hundreds of Bihari handloom weavers in Narsingdi were done
to death in March, 1971 by riotous mobs. In Bhairab Bazar, where many non-
Bengalis were engaged in the jute trade, a few rich businessmen were held for
ransom and their houses were looted. Awami League militants prevented many
non-Bengali families from escaping to Dacca and killed their men. A dozen non-
Bengali families were done to death in Sarasabari in the last week of March 1971.

