Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
2
For days on end all through the troubled month of March 1971, swarms of
terrorised non-Bengalis lay at the Army-controlled Dacca Airport, awaiting their
turn to be wafted to the safety of West Pakistan. But neither the world press nor
the press in West Pakistan reported the gory carnage of the innocents which had
made them fugitives from the Awami Leagues grisly terror. Caskets containing
the mutilated dead bodies of West Pakistani military personnel and civilians
reached Karachi with the planeloads of non-Bengali refugees from Dacca and
their bereaved families milled and wailed at the Karachi Airport. But these heart-
rending scenes went unreported in the West Pakistan news-papers because of the
federal government’s order to the Press not to mention the slaughter of the non-
Bengalis in East Pakistan.
The Bengali Secretary, who headed the federal Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting at Islamabad, threatened to punish those newspapers which at one
time felt impelled to violate his Ministry’s fiat. Responding to my plea, retired
Justice Z. H. Lari, a Karachi leader of the Council Muslim League, who had
migrated to Pakistan from India in the 1947 Partition and whose party was
toying with the idea of a political alliance with the Awami League in the
National Assembly, issued a mildly-worded press statement, in the second week
of March 1971, in which he appealed to Sheikh Mujibur Rahman to protect the
non-Bengalis in East Pakistan.
Looking at the tragic events of March, 1971 in retrospect, I must confess that even
I, although my press service commanded a sizeable network of district
correspondents in the interior of East Pakistan, was not fully aware of the scale,
ferocity and dimension of the province-wide massacre of the non-Bengalis. Dacca
and Chittagong were the only two cities from where sketchy reports of the
slayings of non-Bengalis had trickled to me in Karachi, mostly through the
escapees I met at the Karachi Airport on their arrival from East Pakistan. I had
practically no news of the mass butchery which was being conducted by the
Awami League militants and their accomplices from the East Pakistan Rifles and
the East Bengal Regiment in many scores of other cities and towns which were
caught in the sweep of a cyclone of fire and death.
In my dispatch on the deepening East Pakistan crises published in the Daily
Christian Science Monitor and reprinted in the Daily Milwaukee Journal of
March 14, 1971, I wrote:
“Dacca reports say widespread mob violence, arson, looting and murders
mushroomed in the wake of the Awami League’s protest strike call.
Destruction by Bengali militants of property owned by West Pakistanis in
some East Pakistan towns has been heavy “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
3
“....The telephone link between East and West Pakistan remains nearly
unusable and only a skeleton air service is being operated between
Karachi and Dacca “
Skimpy references to the blood-letting of untold proportions, undergone by the
non-Bengalis during the Awami League’s March 1971 uprising in East Pakistan,
percolated into the columns of some newspapers in Western Europe and India in
the first week of April 1971. The Times of London reported on April 6th, 1971:
The Daily Statesman of New Delhi reported in its issue of April 4, 1971:
“The millions of non-Bengali Muslims now trapped in the Eastern Wing
have always felt the repercussions of the East-West tensions, and it is now
feared that the Bengalis have turned on this vast minority community to
take their revenge.“
The hundreds of eye-witnesses from nearly three score towns and cities of East
Pakistan, whose testimonies are documented in this book, are unanimous in
reporting that the slaughter of West Pakistanis, Biharis and other non-Bengalis
and of some pro-Pakistan Bengalis had begun in the early days of the murderous
month of March 1971. There were some 35 foreign newsmen on the prowl in
Dacca right up to March 26, 1971. But strangely their newspapers and news
agencies reported barely a word or two about the spiralling pogrom against the
non-Bengalis all over East Pakistan. Many of the American journalists in this
motley crowd of foreign reporters (whose souls were saturated with compassion
for the Bengali victims of the November 1970 cyclone tragedy) were so charmed
by the public relations operatives of the Awami League that they were just not
prepared to believe that their darlings in this fascist organization could commit
or instigate the murder of the non-Bengalis.
Peggy Durdin, a writer for the Magazine Section of the New York Times and her
husband, also a reporter for the NYT, were attached in the first week of March
1971 by Bengali demonstrators “with iron bars and long poles“ in the heart of
Dacca when Sheikh Mujibur Rahman had just triggered the Awami League’s
rebellion. But she wrote not a word about their manhandling by the Bengalis in
any issue of her great newspaper either in March or April 1971. It was in her
article of May 2, 1971, in the Magazine section of the New York Times, about the
Pakistan Army’s alleged atrocities on the Bengali rebels that Peggy Durdin
referred to the xenophobia unloosed by the Awami League’s agitation and
admitted for the first time that she and her husband were attacked by Bengali
demonstrators in Dacca in the first few days of March 1971.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
4
Some Biharis in Dacca, whose relatives had been murdered in the city and at
other places in the province, tried to contact foreign press reporters based at the
Hotel Intercontinental. Awami League toughs who controlled all the access
routes to the Hotel prevented their meeting. Conversation over the telephone
had become a hazard for the non-Bengalis because of the Awami League’s
seizure of the Telephone Exchange and the tapping of telephone lines. A British
press correspondent, who was in Dacca in March 1971, told me that a Bengali
telephone operator cut off his long-distance conversation with his newspaper
colleague in New Delhi in the third week of the month the moment he made
mention of the blood-chilling massacre of non-Bengalis all over the province.
The Pakistan Government paid very dearly for its folly of banishing from Dacca
some 35 foreign newsmen on March 26, 1971, a day after the federal Army had
gone into action against the Awami League militants and other Bengali rebels.
Amongst them were quite a few American journalists of eminence and influence.
They bore a deep grouse against the military regime in Pakistan, and all through
1971, no good word about Pakistan flowed from their powerful pens. They
inundated the American press with grisly, highly exaggerated accounts of the
Army’s toughness towards the rebels and ignored the virtual annihilation of a
massive segment of the non-Bengali population by the Bengali rebels in March-
April, 1971.
For millions of gullible Americans and West Europeans the printed word in the
daily press is like gospel truth and they readily believed the many fibs about the
Pakistan Army’s conduct in East Pakistan which surged across the columns of
their newspapers.
The forced exit of the foreign news corps from Dacca, the ire and anger of these
articulate newsmen over their banishment from East Pakistan and the reluctance
of the American and the British newspapers to give credence to the censored
dispatches from Karachi on the military operations in the eastern half of the
country prevented, to a great extent, the world-wide publication of the
harrowing details of the bloodbath undergone by the non-Bengali population in
the Awami League’s March 1971 uprising. Thus one of the bloodiest slaughters
of modern times went largely unreported in the international press.
Late in the first week of April 1971, the federal Information Ministry took a
group of Pakistani press correspondents on a conducted tour of the rebel-
devastated parts of East Pakistan. I was invited to go with the group but just then
I was busy completing the Report of the Sind Government’s Social Welfare
Evaluation Committee (of which I was the Chairman). As I was keen to submit it
to the provincial administration before the deadline of April, 12, 1971, I politely
declined the invitation.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
5
One of the Pakistani newsmen who went on this tour of East Pakistan was
Anthony Mascarenhas, Assistant Editor of Karachi’s English Daily Morning
News and Pakistan Correspondent of the Sunday Times of London. On May 2,
1971, the Sunday Times published, though belatedly, his write-up on the Awami
League’s March-April, 1971 revolt and the trail of devastation it left behind. It
shed at least a kink of light on the vast dimension of the widespread and sadistic
massacre of some 100,000 non-Bengalis in East Pakistan by the Bengali rebels.
But a month later, its impact was neutralized and its authenticity was eroded by
his second article entitled “Why the Refugees Fled?“, which was prominently
displayed in the Sunday Times of June 13, 1971 and reproduced, through Indian
manipulation, in many newspapers in the United States and Canada. Seduced
and tempted by the Indians, Mascarenhas and his family arrived in London early
in June from Karachi and the Sunday Times published in a score of columns his
venomous blast at the Pakistan Army for its alleged genocide against the Hindus
of East Pakistan.
In a bid to give his June 13 article the veneer of objectivity, Mascarenhas made
this cursory reference to the slaughter of the non-Bengalis by the Bengali rebels:
“Thousands of families of unfortunate Muslims, many of them refugees
from Bihar who chose Pakistan at the time of the partition riots in 1947,
were mercilessly wiped out. Women were raped or had their breasts torn
out with specially fashioned knives. Children did not escape the horror:
the lucky ones were killed with their parents; but many thousands of
others must go through what life remains for them with eyes gouged out
and limbs roughly amputated. More than 20,000 bodies of the non-
Bengalis have been found in the main towns such as Chittagong, Khulna
and Jessore. The real toll, I was told every-where in East Bengal, may have
been as high as 100,000; for thousands of non-Bengalis have vanished
without a trace“.
The reportage of the Pakistani newsmen, who toured East Pakistan in the first
fortnight of April 1971, as published in the West Pakistan press, bared no details
of the gruesome extermination of a large segment of the non-Bengali population
in the Awami League’s genocide. The reason was the federal Government’s
anxiety to prevent retributive reprisals against the Bengali populace in West
Pakistan.
I was stupefied when I heard blood-chilling accounts of the butchery practised
by the Awami League rebels on their non-Bengali victims in Chittagong from
friends who escaped to Karachi in mid-April. I was shocked beyond words
because I rather like the Bengalis for their gentle and artistic traits and it was

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
6
very hard for me to believe that any Bengali would indulge in the savagery
which my informants from Chittagong attributed to the Awami League militants
such as M. R. Siddiki, a high-ranking member of the party’s hierarchy. I counted
amongst my esteemed Bengali friends his illustrious father-in-law, Mr. Abul
Kasem Khan, a former federal Minister and legislator, and was impressed by his
sartorial perfection and his amiable manners. As I browsed last month in the
heaps of harrowing eye-witness accounts from Chittagong of the rebels’ savagery
in March 2971, I became aware of the reasons which made the non-Bengali
victims nickname M. R. Siddiki as the “Butcher of Chittagong “. He gave a new
dimension of cold-blooded violence to the Awami League’s terror apparatus.
In the third week of April, the federal Information Ministry (whose Bengali head
had been replaced by a West Pakistani) requested me to proceed post haste to the
United States on deputation to the Embassy of Pakistan in Washington D. C. and
to project before the American public the rationale for the federal military
intervention in East Pakistan. India’s well-organized propaganda machinery and
the liberally-financed India Lobby in the United States were working in top gear
to malign Pakistan and to smear the name of the Pakistan Army by purveying
yarns of its alleged brutality in East Pakistan.
Pakistan’s Public Relations difficulties in the United States were compounded by
the unremitting hostility of the American press correspondent who were
bundled out of Dacca on March 26. When I spoke to a friendly Senator at Capitol
Hill about the massive burst of violence let loose all over East Pakistan by the
Awami Leaguers on West Pakistanis, Biharis and other non-Bengalis during the
murderous month of March 1971 and told him that more than 100,000 non-
Bengalis had perished in this dreadful carnage, he looked at me in disbelief,
“Why was not the massacre reported in the press in March?“ was his logical
query.
Late in April, 1971, the Pakistan Embassy in Washington published a booklet
containing a chronology of the federal intervention in East Pakistan. It
highlighted the Awami League’s pogrom against West Pakistanis, Biharis and
other non-Bengalis which was waged in March 1971. The immediate impact of its
mass
distribution
in
the
United
States
was
that
many
legislators
and
academicians sought information from the Embassy about the genesis of the
word Bihari and the ethnic background of the Biharis.
On May 6, 1971, a group of six foreign correspondents representing the New
York Times, Reuters, Associated Press of America, TIME Magazine, the Financial
Times of London and the New China News Agency (Xinhua) flew to Dacca and
made a fairly comprehensive tour of the rebellion-damaged areas of the province.
Their uncensored despatches from East Pakistan spoke of the widespread killing

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
7
of the Biharis by the Bengali rebels in March-April 1971 and gave harrowing
accounts of the rebels’ brutality narrated by eye-witnesses and victims of the
pogrom. The Embassy of Pakistan promptly published and widely distributed a
booklet containing excerpts from “on-the-spot despatches“ of the foreign
newsmen who had toured East Pakistan in the second week of May, 1971.
American, Indian and Bengali protagonists of the secessionist cause cast
aspersions on the integrity of these foreign newsmen by charging that they were
duped into believing that the mass graves they were shown were of non-Bengalis
although, according to the phony claim of the secessionists, they were of Bengalis
liquidated
by
the
Army.
Indian
propagandists
dished
out
to
foreign
correspondents in New Delhi pictures of burnt houses and razed market places
as evidence of the devastation caused by the Pakistan Army in East Pakistan
although in reality most of the destruction was caused by the well-armed Bengali
rebels when they went on the rampage against the non-Bengalis in a bloody and
flaming spree of loot, arson and murder. Some pictures were claimed to be of the
Bengali female victims of the Pakistan Army’s alleged atrocity; a close look at the
physical features and dresses of the pictured females disclosed that they were
West Pakistanis, not Bengalis.
India’s official propaganda outfit and its front organizations in the United States
and Western Europe unleashed a spate of books and pamphlets in which the
Pakistan Army was accused of the wanton slaughter of millions of Bengalis, of
waging genocide against the Bengali Hindus and of ravishing 200,000 Bengali
girls. West Pakistanis were branded in these Indian propaganda books as worse
than the Huns and the Nazis. This miasma of lies and fibs, innovated by Indian
publicists, was so ingeniously purveyed and sustained that the massive
abridgement of the non-Bengali population by the Bengali rebels in March-April
1971 faded into the background and lay on the dust-heap of forgotten history.
The White Paper on the East Pakistan crisis, published by the Government of
Pakistan in August 1971, failed to make any significant international impact. It
was inordinately delayed and gave a disappointingly sketchy account of the
massacres of the non-Bengalis by the Awami Leaguers and other rebels. Dozens
of places where, it now appears, non-Bengalis were slaughtered by the
thousands in March-April 1971 were not mentioned in the White Paper.
The Government failed to give this belated post mortem report of the Awami
League’s genocidal campaign against the Biharis adequate and effective
international publicity. The White Paper -would have made more impact, in spite
of its inadequacy of details, and its foreign readers would have reacted in horror
over the Awami League’s racist pogrom if it had been published before the end
of April 1971.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
8
In psychological warfare, the element of time is often of crucial importance,
especially when one is pitted against an unscrupulous enemy with scant regard
for truth and ethics. By August 1971, India had so virulently poisoned a large
segment of public opinion in the West by blatantly magnifying the refugee influx
and blaming the Pakistan Army for this exodus that our White Paper neither set
the record straight nor did it counter the many scores of books and pamphlets
with which India flooded the world to malign Pakistan and its Army.
The federal Information Ministry’s film documentary on the restoration of
normalcy in East Pakistan was a timely effort. Although shot in the second half
of April 1971 and despatched to Pakistan’s overseas missions in May, it was
viewed by small audiences abroad. If adequate funds were available, it could
have been shown on important television networks in the United States by
buying time. It showed the rubble of homes and shopping blocks shot up or put
to the torch by the rebels but it gave very little evidence of the infernal slaughter-
houses and torture chambers set up by the rebels in March 1971 to liquidate
many thousands of their non-Bengali victims. The blood-chilling savagery of the
Awami League’s genocide and the colossal wreckage of human lives it had left in
its trail were not fully exposed.
“The Great Tragedy“, written by Mr. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, Chairman of the
Pakistan People’s Party and published in September 1971, shed revealing light on
the genesis of the East Pakistan crisis, the secessionist ambitions of the Awami
League’s leadership. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s obdurate and uncompromising
stance in the constitutional talks in Dacca in the third week of March 1971 and
the Pakistan People’s Party’s efforts for forging
“a Grand Coalition of the
majority parties of the two Wings“ within the framework of a single, united
Pakistan. Mr. Bhutto’s vindication of the constitutional stand and role of his
Party was forceful and logical. “The Great Tragedy“ deserved global circulation
on a mass scale which, to our loss, was then denied to it.
After my return to Pakistan from the United States late in November 1971, I
spoke to one of the ruling Generals at Islamabad about the urgent need for the
publication and mass distribution of a book based on eyewitness accounts of the
survivors of the Awami League’s holocaust of March-April 1971. I learnt that
some reliable evidence had been collected from eye-witnesses but the Generals
were then too busy with India’s virtual invasion of East Pakistan and the
preparations for a full-scale military showdown with India.
Early in 1972, I met a number of non-Bengali war-displaced persons from East
Pakistan who had taken up abode in shacks in the shanty township of Orangi in
Karachi. I was horrified by the accounts they narrated of their suffering in East

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
9
Pakistan during the Awami League’s bloody rebellion and the gaping vacuum
this genocide had caused in the non-Bengali population in the country’s eastern
half. Their testimony showed that the Awami Leaguers and the rebels from the
East Pakistan Rifles and the East Bengal Regiment were the first to massacre the
non-Bengali innocents and that the tornado of violence and death which swept
the province in March-April 1971 stemmed from the Awami League’s lust for
power. I thought of writing a book based on their testimony but I did not have
eye-witnesses from all of the many scores of towns in East Pakistan where non-
Bengali communities were wholly or partially exterminated.
In the meantime, I started work on
“Mission to Washington“ which was an
expose
of
India’s
intrigues
in
the
United
States
to
bring
about
the
dismemberment of Pakistan. On the basis of my personal knowledge and
experiences, I detailed in this book the diabolic work of the India Lobby in the
United States and its collaborators to turn American public opinion against
Pakistan and to block American military supplies to Pakistan’s Armed forces
preparatory to India’s armed grab of East Pakistan in December 1971. It was
published in January 1973.
In “The East Pakistan Tragedy “, written by Prof. Rushbrook Williams, a well-
known British journalist and author, and published in 1973, the political aspect of
the East Pakistan crisis was lucidly discussed and Pakistan’s case was cogently
explained.
Major-General Fazal Muqeem’s book,
“Leadership in Crisis“, which also
appeared in 1973, dealt at length with the politico-military aspect of the East
Pakistan crisis, India’s military and financial help to the Bengali secessionist
rebels and the disastrous war with India in December 1971.
Pakistan’s rejoinder to the flood of anti-Pakistan literature which has gushed
from India’s propaganda mills since the Ides of March 1971 has been tragically
weak and inadequate. In the summer and autumn of 1973, when I travelled
extensively in the Middle East, Western Europe and the United States, I saw a
number of books derogatory to Pakistan and its fine army in bookshops,
especially those which sell foreign publications. Two books which I read and
which provoked my ire are Indian Major-General D.K. Palit’s “The Lightning
Campaign “ in which he has heaped invectives and abuses on the Pakistan Army
units stationed in East Pakistan, and Olga Olson’s “Doktor “ in which she has
exaggerated the suffering of the Bengali population during the Army operations
in 1971. I also glanced over two fat volumes of the Bangladesh documents, mass
distributed by the Indian Government in the United States, in which India is
projected as an angel of peace who showed Job-like patience in the face of
Pakistan’s alleged villainy and barbarity in East Pakistan. I did not see in these

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
10
overseas bookstalls a single book about the gruesome atrocities perpetrated by
the Bengali rebels on the hapless Biharis and other non-Bengalis in East Pakistan
in March 1971.
The general impression in the United States and Western Europe, at least until
the autumn of 1973, was that the Biharis had joined hands with the Pakistan
Army in its 1971 operations in East Pakistan and that after the defeat of the
Pakistan Army in the third week of December 1971, the Bengalis had a lawful
right to inflict retributive justice and violence on the Biharis.
In the Middle East, some politicians and journalists, although sincere in their
friendship for Pakistan, asked me whether the stories they had read about the
Pakistan Army’s alleged brutality in East Pakistan were correct and whether
ruthlessness was an ingrained quality in the Pakistani psyche and temperament.
I was appalled by the doubts which India’s smear campaign against Pakistan had
created about us as a nation even in the minds of our brothers-in-faith and
friends.
Late in September 1973, the exchange of Bengalis in Pakistan with Pakistanis in
Bangladesh and the repatriation of the Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian
internees from India was commenced under the previous month’s New Delhi
Agreement. As the Chairman of an official Committee for the relief and
rehabilitation of war-displaced persons from East Pakistan in the Orangi
township in Karachi, I met many hundreds of non-Bengali repatriates—men,
women and children. Their evidence gave me the impression that the non-
Bengali death toll in the murderous period of March-April 1971 was in the
vicinity of 500,000. I was profoundly touched and moved by their heart-rending
accounts of the terrible suffering they had undergone during the Awami
League’s insurrection in March 1971 and in the months after India’s armed
seizure of East Pakistan in December 1971. It was then that I decided that the full
story of this horrifying pogrom and the atrocities committed on the hapless non-
Bengalis and other patriotic Pakistanis in East Pakistan (breakaway Bangladesh)
should be unravelled before the world. Hence this book.
The 170 eye-witnesses, whose testimonies or interviews are contained in this
book in abridged form have been chosen from a universe of more than 5,000
repatriated non-Bengali families. I had identified, after some considerable
research, 55 towns and cities in East Pakistan where the abridgement of the non-
Bengali population in March and early April 1971 was conspicuously heavy. The
collection and compilation of these eyewitness accounts was started in January
1974 and completed in twelve weeks. A team of four reporters, commissioned for
interviewing the witnesses from all these 55 towns and cities of East Pakistan,
worked with intense devotion to secure their testimony. Many of the interviews

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
11
were prolonged because the witnesses broke down in a flurry of sobs and tears
as they related the agonising stories of their wrecked lives. I had issued in
February 1974 an appeal in the newspapers for such eye-witness accounts, and I
am grateful to the many hundreds of witnesses who promptly responded to my
call.
The statements and interviews of the witnesses were recorded on a fairly
comprehensive proforma, along with their signatures. In selecting a witness, I
exercised utmost care in assessing his background, his reliability and his
suitability for narrating faithfully the details of the massacre he had witnessed or
the suffering he had borne in March-April 1971. I have also pored over mounds
of records, documents and foreign and Pakistani press clippings of that period.
Although the eye-witness accounts contained in this book put the focus on the
largely-unreported horror and bestiality of the murderous months of March and
April 1971, I have, in many a case, incorporated the brutality suffered by the
witnesses after India’s occupation of East Pakistan and the unleashing of the
Mukti Bahini’s campaign of terror and death against the helpless non-Bengalis
and pro-Pakistan Bengalis from the third week of December 1971 onwards. For
their full exposure, another book is needed.
I regret that it was not possible for me to accommodate in this book the many
hundreds of other testimonies that I received. Aside from the overriding
consideration of space, another reason was my keenness that the witnesses,
whose evidence is recorded in this book, should be the parents who saw their
children slaughtered, the wives who were forced to see the ruthless slaying of
their husbands, the girls who were kidnapped and raped by their captors and the
escapees from the fiendish human slaughter-houses operated by the rebels. I was
also anxious that the witnesses I select should have no relatives left in
Bangladesh.
I have incorporated in this book the acts of heroism and courage of those brave
and patriotic Bengalis who sheltered and protected, at great peril to themselves,
their terror-stricken non-Bengali friends and neighbours. On the basis of the
heaps of eye-witness accounts, which I have carefully read, sifted and analysed, I
do make bold to say that the vast majority of Bengalis disapproved of and was
not a party to the barbaric atrocities inflicted on the hapless non-Bengalis by the
Awami League’s terror machine and the Frankenstein’s and vampires it
unloosed. This silent majority, it seemed, was awed, immobilised and neutralised
by the terrifying power, weapons and ruthlessness of a misguided minority hell
bent on accomplishing the secession of East Pakistan.

