Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
12
I must stress, with all the force and sincerity at my command, that this bock is
not intended to be a racist indictment of the Bengalis as a nation. In writing and
publishing this book, I am not motivated by any revanchist obsession or a wish
to condemn my erstwhile Bengali compatriots as a nation. Even today there are
vast numbers of them who are braving the pain and agony of endless
incarceration in hundreds of jails in Bangladesh because of their loyalty to
Pakistan — a country in whose creation their noble forebears played a leading
role. Just as it is stupid to condemn the great German people for the sins of the
Nazis, it would be foolish to blame the Bengali people as a whole for the dark
deeds of the Awami League militants and their accomplices.
As a people, I hold the Bengalis in high esteem. In the winter of 1970-71, I had
dedicatedly laboured for months, as the Secretary of the Sind Government’s
Relief Committee for the Cyclone sufferers of East Pakistan, to rush succour of
more than ten million rupees, in cash and kind, to the victims of this cataclysmic
tragedy.
Time is a great healer of wounds and I hope and pray that God, in his benign
mercy, will reunite the Muslims of Pakistan and Bangladesh, if not physically, at
least in mind and soul. Knowing a little of the Bengali Muslims’ psyche and
social milieu, I devoutly believe that no power on earth can snap permanently
their Islamic moorings and that, in spite of the trauma of 1971 and its painful
aftermath, they remain an inseparable part of the mainstream of the globe-
girdling Muslim fraternity.
“Blood and Tears “ is being published at a time
when all the Bengalis in Pakistan who opted for Bangladesh have been
repatriated to that country and the danger of any reprisal against them has been
totally eliminated.
The succour and rehabilitation of the multitudes of Biharis and other non-
Bengalis, now repatriated to Pakistan, is our moral and social responsibility.
They have suffered because they and their parents or children were devoted to
the ideology of Pakistan and many shed their blood for it. Even as the victims of
a catastrophe, not of their own making, they are entitled to the fullest measure of
our sympathy, empathy and support in restoring the splintered planks of their
tragedy-stricken lives. In projecting their suffering and of those who are sadly no
more and in depicting the poignance and pain of their scarred memories in
“Blood and Tears “, I have been motivated by humane considerations and by a
humanitarian impulse. Theirs is, indeed, a very sad story, largely untold, and
this book mirrors, in part, the agony and trauma they suffered in the not-too-
distant past, and the raw wounds they still carry in their tormented hearts.
“Blood and Tears“ is the story of the rivers of blood that flowed in East Pakistan
in the infernal month of March 1971, when the Awami League’s genocide against
the non-Bengalis was unleashed, and also of the tears that we shall shed for

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
13
many a year to come over the massacre of the innocents and India’s amputation
of our eastern wing.
May 30, 1974 Qutubuddin Aziz
Karachi

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
14
CHAPTER ONE
The Ides of March in Dacca
The Awami League held East Pakistan’s capital city of Dacca in its ruthless grip
from March 1 to 25, 1971. During this dark period of loot, arson and murder,
more than 5,000 non-Bengalis were done to death by the Awami League
militants and their supporters. For months, before the Ides of March 1971, the
hardcore leadership of the Awami League had primed its terror machine for
confrontation with the authority of the federal government. Fire-breathing
demagogues of the Awami League had saturated the consciousness of their
volatile followers with hatred for the West Pakistanis, the Biharis and other non-
Bengalis. They propagated a racist and obscurantist brand of Bengali nationalism.
Secession from the Pakistani nationhood was undoubtedly their camouflaged
goal.
On March 1, 1971, within an hour of General Yahya Khan’s forenoon
announcement of the temporary postponement of the March 3 session of the
Constitution-framing National Assembly, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman fired the first
broadside of revolt against the federal government. At a hurriedly summoned
press conference in Dacca, he ordered a general strike in the provincial capital to
paralyse the administration and to usurp the authority of the lawfully-
established Government in East Pakistan.
As he gave the “Go Ahead “ signal to his party’s storm troopers, the Awami
League militants went on the rampage all over the city, looting, burning and
killing. They looted arms and ammunition from the Rifle Club in the nearby
industrial township of Narayanganj. They turned two dormitory blocks of the
Dacca University, the Iqbal Hall and the Jagannath Hall, into operational bases
for their regime of terror.
On March 2, armed Awami League jingoes looted guns and ammunition from
arms shops in the New Market and Baitul Mukarram localities of central Dacca.
They trucked the looted weapons to the Dacca University Campus where student
storm troopers practised shooting on an improvised firing range.
Frenzied mobs, armed with guns, knives, iron rods and staves, roamed at will
and looted business houses, shops and cinemas owned by non-Bengalis. The
lawlessness and terror which the Awami League had unleashed in Dacca
compelled the provincial administration to summon the help of the Army units
garrisoned in the Dacca cantonment.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
15
The Awami League’s militants incited the Bengali populace to defy the dusk-to-
dawn curfew. Six persons were killed when a riotous mob attacked an army unit
in the Sadarghat locality of Dacca. A posse of troops saved the Dacca television
station from being wrecked by a violent mob.
On March 3, the general strike ordered by the Awami League all over the
province, paralysed life in Dacca. Rampaging mobs, led by gun brandishing
Awami League militants, carried fire, terror and death into the homes of
thousands of non-Bengalis in the populous localities of Dacca, such as Nawabpur,
Islampur and Patuakhali Bazar. Many shops and stores in the posh Jinnah
Avenue shopping centre, owned by non-Bengalis, were looted. Fifty non-Bengali
huts in a shanty suburban locality were put to the torch and many of their
inmates were roasted alive. Thugs started kidnapping prosperous non-Bengalis
and extorted ransom money from their relatives.
Under the orders of the Awami League High Command, the Radio and
Television stations in Dacca gave up playing Pakistan’s National Anthem and
replaced it by the “Bangladesh Anthem “. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman announced
in Dacca the launching of a Civil Disobedience Movement, an euphemism for
rebellion, throughout East Pakistan, Thus, in three days, the Awami League
succeeded in establishing a full-blown terror regime whose principal goal was to
liquidate the authority of the federal government and to abridge the population
of the non-Bengalis, preparatory to the armed seizure of the entire province. The
telecommunications and air links between East Pakistan and West Pakistan were
snapped under the orders of the Awami League High Command.
From March 4 to 10, violent mobs, led by Awami League jingoes, looted and
burnt many non-Bengali houses and shops and kidnapped rich West Pakistani
businessmen for ransom. In a jail-break at the Central Prison in Dacca on March 6,
some 341 prisoners escaped and joined hands with Awami League militants and
student activists in parading the main streets of Dacca. Gun-swinging Awami
League cadres and activists of the East Pakistan Students League stole explosive
chemicals from Dacca’s Government Science Laboratory and the Polytechnic
Institute to make Molotov Cocktails and other incendiary bombs. Defiant
students of the Salimullah Muslim Hall of the Dacca University tried to burn the
British Council office in Dacca but the troops arrived in time and the jingoes
escaped. Awami League militants and student activists took away at gunpoint
jeeps, cars and microbuses owned by non-Bengalis. They erected
“check
posts“ at nerve centres in the city and outside the Dacca Airport where they
frisked the persons of non-Bengalis fleeing Dacca and seized their cash and
jewellery, watches, radio sets and every other article of value.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
16
On March 7, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman announced his long-range action
programme against the federal government at a mass meeting on the Ramna
Race Course ground. Unfurled on the speakers’ platform was the new flag of
Bangladesh—a map of the province set in a red circle against a dark green
background. The crowd yelled ‘Joi Bangla’ (Long Live Bengal) and ‘Bangladesh
Shadheen’ (Independent Bengal). Prompted by Awami League volunteers, the
crowd shouted slogans against Pakistan, its President, the new Governor of East
Pakistan, General Tikka Khan and the Chairman of the Pakistan People’s Party,
Mr. Z. A. Bhutto. The multitude sang Tagore’s old song: “Bengal, my Golden
Bengal“.
While ordering the continuance of indefinite strikes in Government offices,
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman set up a parallel government directed by the Awami
League. He instructed the people of East Pakistan not to pay Central
Government taxes but to make payments to the provincial coffers. He asked his
storm troopers to set up road blocks against military movements and to prevent
the military from making use of railways and ports. The Awami League took
over the radio and television stations, telecommunications, foreign trade and the
banking system, including the control of money transfers from East to West
Pakistan. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman called for the organization of Revolutionary
Action Groups in labour unions, villages and urban neighbourhoods to buttress
the Awami League’s defiance of federal authority. In effect, the Awami League
leadership had on that day chosen the path of secession and loosed forces whose
goal was an independent,
racist
Bengali state.
In a
despatch from its
correspondent, Kenneth Clarke, London’s Daily Telegraph reported on March 9,
1971: “Reports said that Dacca collapsed into complete lawlessness on Sunday
night (March 7) as Sheikh Mujib took the province to the edge of secession “.
From March 11 to 15, the day on which General Yahya Khan flew into Dacca for
constitutional
talks
with
Sheikh
Mujihur
Rahman,
the
Awami
League
consolidated the parallel administration it had set up in Dacca. More non-Bengali
businessmen were shanghaied and their houses looted.
Non-Bengali passengers were intimidated and detained for questioning by
Awami League militants at the Dacca Railway Station.
A Government office near Kakrail in Dacca was set on fire. Non-Bengalis fleeing
Dacca by air were frisked by Awami League cadres at their
“Search and
Loot“ check post close to the entrance to the Dacca airport. Bottles of acid,
pilfered from the science laboratories in closed educational institutions in Dacca,
were flung into Government offices where some conscientious employees dared

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
17
work. Armed thugs, claiming links with the Revolutionary Action Groups set up
by the Awami League, extorted money from affluent non-Bengalis.
From March 16 to 23, while General Yahya and Sheikh Mujib engaged in ding-
dong constitutional negotiations, the Awami League continued to operate its
parallel administration and trained its cadres in the use of automatic weapons at
a number of training centres in Dacca and its suburbs. The incidence of raids on
the homes of non-Bengalis mounted sharply. A riotous mob ambushed an Army
jeep in Dacca and hijacked the six soldiers riding in it. Guns were looted from the
Police armoury in the town. Awami League gunmen clamped a ban on the
supply of food grains to the Pakistani military in the Dacca cantonment.
March 23, Pakistan’s national festival day, was designated as
“Resistance
Day“ by the Awami League High Command. Instead of the Pakistan flag, the
Awami League militants hoisted the new Bangladesh flag atop all public and
private buildings in Dacca. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman took the salute at an armed
March Past at his residence on which the Bangladesh flag was ceremoniously
unfurled. The Awami League held displays of its strength, and bellicose mobs,
shouting ‘Joi Bangla’, went on the rampage in localities where non-Bengalis were
concentrated.
More West Pakistani businessmen were kidnapped and their Bengali captors
demanded huge sums of money from their relatives as ransom. Violent mobs,
waving guns and other lethal weapons, brick-batted Karachi-bound passengers
near Dacca Airport. Awami League demonstrators marched past the Presidential
Mansion in Dacca where General Yahya was staying and shouted obscenities
against him and the federal Army. Young thugs, enriched by the ransom money
extorted in the Awami League’s name from non-Bengali businessmen and
showing off the cars they had hijacked from their West Pakistani and other non-
Bengali owners, milled in the evenings outside the Dhanmandi residence of
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and yelled “Shadheen Bangla“ (Independent Bengal).
Awami League cadres tangled with the staff of the Chinese Consulate in Dacca
on March 23 when they insisted on hoisting the Bangladesh flag atop the
Consulate and the Chinese refused to allow them to do so. Awami League
demonstrators, at many places, tore up Pakistan’s national flag and trampled
under their feet photographs of Quaid-i-Azam Mohammed Ali Jinnah, the
founder of Pakistan.
All through this week, the Awami League militants were beefing up their
strength with the defectors from the East Pakistan Rifles and the paramilitary
Ansar force. Gunrunning from India proceeded at a frenzied pace and many

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
18
Indian agents infiltrated into East Pakistan for sabotage. Hutments of non-
Bengalis in Dacca’s shanty townships were set ablaze by the hundreds.
The Dacca University Campus served as the operational base of the Awami
League militants and its laboratories were used for manufacturing different
varieties of explosives. A portion of the Jagannath Hall was used for torturing
and murdering kidnapped non-Bengalis. Reports of a forest-fire of loot, arson
and murder in almost every town of East Pakistan worried the federal
government and the Army’s Eastern Command in Dacca. Cyclostyled posters,
issued by the Awami League student and labour groups in Dacca and other
places in the province, seemed like military orders of the day. These posters
incited the people to “resort to a bloody war of resistance“ for the
“national
liberation of East Bengal“.
Some 15,000 fully-loaded Rifles at the Dacca Police headquarters were seized by
the Awami Leaguers and their supporters. More arms shops in Dacca were
looted by the Awami League terrorists. In the morning of March 25, barricades
and road blocks appeared all over Dacca city. Petrol bombs and other hand-
made bombs, manufactured from chemicals stolen from the Science laboratories
of educational institutions in the past few weeks, exploded at some places.
The federal Army’s intelligence service had become privy to the Awami League’s
plan for an armed uprising all over the province in the early hours of March 26,
1971. Late in the night of March 25, hours before the zero hour set by the Awami
League for its armed insurrection, the federal army units fanned out from the
Dacca cantonment and conducted, with lightning speed, a series of pre-emptive
strikes which squelched the Awami League’s uprising, at least in the provincial
capital, in a matter of hours. The federal Army’s crackdown on the Bengali
insurgents in Dacca showed that the Awami Leaguers, while engaged in talks
with General Yahya, were collecting guns and ammunition and making
explosives for the anticipated showdown with the federal army.
In their bargaining with General Yahya Khan, the Awami League leaders wanted
him to agree to a constitutional arrangement that would make East and West
Pakistan two separate sovereign states with a very loose, nebulous confederal
link — a link so weak that Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s virtually independent
Bangladesh could have snapped it any time he wished to do so. A posse of
federal troops arrested him at his residence in Dhanmandi in Dacca at about 1-30
a.m. on March 26. He was lodged for the night in the Dacca Cantonment under
military guard and flown the next day to West Pakistan and interned.
The federal Army’s operations against the rebels in Dacca were so swift and
effective that by the dawn of March 26 it was in full control of the city. The

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
19
Army’s strength in Dacca was adequate to enable it to scotch the Awami
League’s rebellion but in the rest of the province the federal troops were thinly
spread out. It took them from three days to three weeks to rout the more than
176,000 Awami League-led rebels who conducted
“Operation Loot, Kill and
Burn“ with savage ferocity against the non-Bengali element in the population.
Even in some suburbs of Dacca, armed hotheads of the Awami League murdered
non-Bengalis by the hundreds in the night of March 25/26, 1971.
There is evidence to warrant the belief that the Awami League rebels were using
a transmitter in the Indian diplomatic Mission in Dacca for round-the-clock
contact with the Indian authorities who were giving support to the rebels,
especially in the border belt. The “Free Bengal Radio “, which went on the air on
March 26 and which broadcast news of the phantom victories of the rebels, was
undoubtedly an Indian innovation, installed on Indian soil. The Niagra of lies,
which surged across the columns of India’s Press and the air-waves of All India
Radio, (such as the cock-and-bull story of the imaginary slaying of General Tikka
Khan by a Bengali rebel), originated from the fertile imagination of a group of
Indian propagandists and Bengali rebels who operated a psychological warfare
outfit in Calcutta.
Many of the rifles which the federal troops captured from the rebels were
manufactured at the Rifle Factory in Ishapur in India while the ammunition
stocks bore the marking of the ordinance factory at Kirkee in India. India threw
some eight battalions of its Border Security Force in aid of the Awami League
rebels in the last week of March 1971 in vital border areas. In the Nawabganj area
in Dacca, the federal army seized a secret letter from an Awami League leader to
an Indian agent, seeking a meeting across the border to discuss the “supply of
heavy arms“ from India to the Awami League-led rebels.
In Dacca, the rebels burnt a predominantly Bihari settlement of shacks in the Old
city, but the Awami League informants of foreign newsmen told them in the
morning of March 26 that the Army had set the shanty township on fire. In the
twin industrial city of Narayanganj, non-Bengalis, who were kidnapped and
murdered by the rebels, were thrown into the Buriganga river or incinerated in
houses set ablaze.
Peggy Durdin, an American journalist, who, with her husband, also a journalist,
had gone to Dacca to cover the National Assembly’s session scheduled for March
3, gave this account of the mass hysteria whipped up by the Awami League
leadership in the Bengali populace in the city since the beginning of the month in
an article in the New York Times Magazine of May 2, 1971:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
20
“Almost within minutes of the broadcast announcement (General Yahya’s
March 1, postponement of the National Assembly session) and for weeks
afterward, the volatile, bitter, angry Bengalis, from every walk of life, and
including
women,
surged
in
enormous,
shouting
processions
and
demonstrations through the streets to show their resentment and assert their
claim to self-determination .
“As Dacca erupted with angry demonstrators shouting slogans against the
President and Mr. Bhutto and chanting ‘Joi Bangk’ (Hail Bengal) and ‘Sadhin
Bangla’ (Independent Bengal), Sheikh Mujib, on March 2, proclaimed a five-day
province-wide general strike; it stopped work everywhere, including all
Government offices, closed every shop and halted all mechanical transport,
including bicycles. Dacca became a city of eerie quiet except for the mass
meetings held day after day in open places and the parades of chanting
demonstrators. Since the only way to get around was on foot, my, husband and I
daily walked 10 to 20 miles through the wide, trafficless streets, past the
shuttered shops and empty markets.
“The high-pitched fervour sometimes turned xenophobic not only against West
Pakistanis—who in some cases were killed on the streets and in their homes and
often had their shops looted —but against Europeans. At the Intercontinental
Hotel, Awami League gangs tore down all English signs, including the name of
the hotel in electric lettering high up on one side of the building. A shot was fired
through a lobby window and such hostility was shown for some days towards
foreigners that the Swiss Manager of the Hotel closed the swimming pool and
asked all guests to stay in their rooms except for meals. These, because the strike
and transport difficulties had depleted
staff, became self-service repasts
consisting chiefly of rice and several kinds of curries. “
The xenophobic aspect of the agitation unleashed by the Awami League on
March 1 was writ large in the manhandling of Peggy Durdin and her husband,
also a Correspondent of the New York Times, in the heart of Dacca by a group of
Bengali demonstrators. She wrote of it in the New York Times of May 2, 1972:
“On the first day of the general strike particularly, emotional groups of
demonstrating, shouting teenagers near the great (Baitul) Mokarram Mosque
started to attack my husband and me with iron bars and long poles.
Miraculously, an Awami Youth patrol spotted us and in the nick of time, pushed
in quickly between us and the assailants, beating them off with their own poles
and deftly herding us down narrow alley ways to safety in a local Awami
League headquarter.“

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
21
Malcolm Browne of the New York Times, who visited East Pakistan early in May,
wrote in a Dacca despatch in the NYT on May 6, 1971:
“General Tikka Khan, the Military Governor of East Pakistan, said today that his
staff estimated that 150 persons were killed in Dacca on the night of March 25
when the Army moved to re-assert control over this province.
“The sprawling city of Dacca, situated on a flood plain, criss-crossed by
countless streams and rivers making up the Ganges River Delta, appeared
peaceful.
“We are accused of massacring students“, he (General Tikka Khan) said, “but
we did not attack students or any other single group. When we were fired on we
fired back.“
“The University was closed and any one in there had no business being there “,
the General continued. “We ordered those inside to come out and were met with
fire. Naturally, we fired back “
Maurice Quaintance of the Reuters News Agency, who also toured East Pakistan
early in May 1971, said in a May 6 despatch from Dacca:
“Lt. General Tikka Khan, the Military Governor, told newsmen at a reception
that the military situation throughout East Pakistan was completely under
control.
“The General said massacres had taken place in East Pakistan but they were not
committed by the Army. After soldiers moved out of their cantonments on
March 25, they discovered the widespread slaughter of innocent people. He cited
one in stance in which he said 500 people were herded into a building which was
then set on fire. There were no survivors. He said the West Pakistan people had
not been told of such things for fear of reprisals. Tikka Khan said the Army did
not attack anyone unless first fired on and even dissidents in two Dacca
University strongpoints, who were armed with automatic weapons and crude
bombs, were given the chance to leave the building. The General said that the
entire Dacca action was over by the first light of day on March 26.
“Close to Dacca airport is a group of shattered homes, uninhabited and in some
cases roofless. Official Pakistan sources say that the people who lived there were
struck by the communal violence in the period before the Army restored law and
order in the country’s eastern wing. “

