Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
172
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
Pogrom in Rajshahi, Natore
The murderous frenzy of the Awami League militants and the rebels of the East
Pakistan Rifles against the non-Bengalis in Rajshahi erupted in the last week of
March I971. Across the three-mile-wide river Padma lies the Indian border. The
Bengali mutineers, who were in control of the city during the Awami League’s
rebellion, were supplied with military equipment from India. Armed infiltrators
from India also moved into Rajshahi ard its neighbouring towns for sabotage and
for aiding the Bengali rebcls. They abetted in the mass murder of thousands of
innocent non-Bengali men, women and children. In their resistance to the
advancing Pakistan Army, the rebels used Indian-supplied bazookas and rocket
launchers. Indian artillery shelled the outworks of Rajshahi as the federal troops
closed in and the Bengali rebels fled in disarray to the sanctuary of the Indian
border across the river. The federal troops regained control over Rajshahi on
April 15, I971. Three weeks later, a group of six foreign newsmen visited
Rajshahi.
Maurice Quaintance of the Reuters News Agency, in a despatch from Rajshahi,
dated May 9, 1971, reported:
“An eye-witness said the man defending this section included deserters from the
East Pakistan Rifles, reinforced by what he described as ‘Indian Military’.
Another claimed that Bangla Desh (Land of Bengal) dissidents burned and
looted stores in the market which are largely-owned by non-Bengalis. Villagers
close by showed the journalists a well where bodies were seen rotting below.
They said the bodies were thrown there in a massacre before the Army took over
the area and claimed that 700 were killed by secessionist Bengalis in the villages
of non-Bengalis. “
Malcolm Browne of the New York Times reported in a despatch from Rajshahi,
dated May 9, 1971:
“The impression based on the testimony of hundreds of witnesses is that when it
seemed that the Awami League was about to come to power, Bengalis in some
communities looted and burnt Bihari houses and slaughtered their occupants. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
173
Mohammed Amin, 24, who lived near the Jinnah Hall in the Campus of the
Rajshahi University, reported that on March 2, 1971, a mob of more than 3,000
Awami League-led secessionists stormed the offices of,the Deputy Commissioner
and the District Judge and ceremoniously burnt the Pakistan flag and destroyed
the office records. The mob, which yelled “Joi Bangla “, shouted threats at the
non-Bengalis and looted some shops owned by them. At night, Mohammed
Amin saw lurid tongues of fire lightning the sky as killer gangs went on the
rampage, burning, looting and killing the non-Bengalis. On March 3, when the
Awami League ordered a general strike, killer gangs ignored the curfew and
roamed at will in the city, preventing Government employees from going to their
offices and forcing traders to close down their shops. The conscientious Bengali
District Judge succeeded in reaching his office; a killer gang yelled death at him
and burnt his office after sprinkling petrol on the woodwork. A bloodthirsty mob
prevented the Bengali Deputy Commissioner, Mr. Rashidul Hassan, from going
to his office. On March 26, the police force in Rajshahi revolted and threatened to
slaughter all the non-Bengalis in the city. On March 29, the small Pakistan Army
contingent in Rajshahi attacked the rebel policemen in their Police Lines
strongpoint after a West Pakistani soldier was shot at and wounded by a rebel
sniper. In barely an hour, the rebel policemen were routed and they fled in
disarray to neighbouring India. Indian-supplied machine-guns and bazookas
were found in the police stronghold. Seme policemen who surrendered said that
Indian military personnel had sneaked across the border to help the rebels.
Amin said that on March 31, a posse of Bengali rebels from the East Pakistan
Rifles kidnapped the Deputy Commissioner to Nawabganj, 30 miles from
Rajshahi and lodged him in the local jail. In the night of April 15, a gang of 20
armed rebels slaughtered some 175 non-Bengalis, including women and children,
who were detained in the jail. Their dead bodies were dumped at the human
abattoir by the riverside. As the federal troops reoccupied Nawabganj, the
fleeing rebels kidnapped the Bengali Deputy Commissioner of Rajshahi to their
sanctuary of Maldah in India where the Indian Border Security Force welcomed
them and jailed the Deputy Commissioner. On May 6, he made a daring escape
bid and reached East Pakistan by swimming across the Padma river. The non
Bengali teachers of the Rajshahi University were terrorised by the armed rebels
and their houses were ransacked but their Bengali colleagues, at great risk to
themselves, shielded them in the Campus all through the insurgency period.
Very fluent in Bengali, Amin dodged the killer gangs by posing as a Bengali.
Afsar Ali, 35, whose brother was employed in the Rajshahi Unit of Radio
Pakistan, said that the Broadcasting House was shelled and wrecked by the
rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles in the first week of April, 1971. “I learnt from
my brother “, said Afsar Ali, “that on April 7, armed personnel from the East
Pakistan Rifles caught hold of the Bengali Regional Director of Radio Pakistan

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
174
and asked him to begin transmissions in the name of ‘Joi Bangla Radio’. He said
the broadcasting equipment was damaged in the shelling and a new crystal was
needed. The next day, an engineer of All India Radio from Calcutta arrived with
the crystal but it did not fit and the transmitter could not be operated. The Indian
engineer took back with him details of the transmitter and promised to send a set
of crystals from Calcutta. But the crystal did not arrive and the Pakistan Army
gained full control over Rajshahi on April 14, 1971. “
Afsar Ali, who lived in the neighbourhood of Sahib Bazar in Rajshahi and was
sheltered by a Bengali friend, claimed that during the period of the rebels’ rule in
April 1971, he saw a number of Indian Army personnel in the town. They spoke
Hindi and they carried sten guns. Two of them directed the firing squad which
shot dead hundreds of non-Bengalis and some pro-Pakistan Bengalis, including
the local Superintendent of Police. Working with the rebels of the East Pakistan
Rifles, they gave instructions to the Indian Border Security Force, operating from
across the Padma river, to shell the Pakistan Army positions in the area. The
armed Awami League militants, according to Afsar Ali, looted all the shops and
houses owned by non-Bengalis and butchered the non-Bengali menfolk by the
hundreds along the riverside slaughter-houses. The Awami League cadres used
to pay Rs. 20 to any informant who disclosed the whereabouts of a non-Bengali
in hiding. Many pro-Pakistan Bengalis, who sheltered their non-Bengali friends,
were abused and beaten up by the rebels. The wife of the Bengali Deputy
Commissioner was threatened with death because she sheltered a dozen non-
Bengali families whose menfolk were murdered by Awami League-led killer
gangs.
Afsar Ali said that in Natore, the Bengali Sub-Divisional Officer joined the rebels
and organized the mass slaughter of non-Bengalis. “Kill all the Biharis “, were
his orders. Another organizer of the butchery in Natore was a local Hindu,
Gommasa Choudhry, who hated the non-Bengali Muslims, especially the Biharis.
He and his men murdered scores of Biharis in the Natore Jail and in the Allahpur
Jamia Mosque. Some 500 Bihari survivors, mostly women and children, who
were about to be killed by the rebels, were rescued in the nick of time by the
Pakistan Army in Natore.
The pogrom against the non-Bengalis was conducted with savagery by the
insurgents and their Awami League instigators in other towns of Rajshahi
district such as Sarda and Nawabganj. Estimates of the number of non-Bengalis
who lost their lives in the Rajshahi district in March-April 1971, before it was
liberated by the Pakistan Army, range from 5,000 to 10,000. The Bengali
mutineers floated many hundreds of corpses into the Padma river which laps
Rajshahi; many were dumped into derelict wells and tanks.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
175
Thirty-year-old Abdul Bari, who was employed in a trading firm in Natore, lost
six members of his family, including his young wife and his aged father, in the
carnage of non-Bengalis late in March 1971. His story of woe is as follows:
“In 1950, my father left Patna in Bihar state with all his family and migrated to
East Pakistan. I was very young. We lived for four years in Jessore and then we
shifted to Natore. We built our own house in the Birganj locality where many
non-Bengalis resided. We had cordial relations with the Bengalis in the
neighbourhood of our colony. On March 25, the Awami Leaguers held a public
meeting in our colony, abused the non-Bengalis and incited the Bengalis to
exterminate us. Some sober Bengalis appealed to these jingoes not to incite
people to violence but their plaintive words had no effect on these cut-throats.
The Awami League militants, many of whom were armed, blared out over a
megaphone a long list of the names of non-Bengalis who, they said, would be
punished for exploiting and maltreating the Bengalis. In this list were many
highly-respected and God-fearing Biharis. Some of them showed great courage
by walking up to the Bengali crowd and they offered their defence. The killer
gang had no time for arguments; the vampires were out to kill. In a matter of
minute, Bengali gunmen slayed all the non-Bengalis who had appeared before
this kangaroo court.
“After half an hour, the blood-thirsty mob went on the rampage and slaughtered
more than a thousand non-Bengalis. In my house, they killed my 57-year-old
father, my wife, my two brothers, my brother-in-law and my aged aunt. They
tortured my father before gunning him to death because he had appealed to
them, in the name of Allah, to spare women and children. The slayers kidnapped
most of the teenage girls in our locality; many of them were strangled after they
had been raped by groups of rebels. I was severely wounded in the back by the
killer gang and the rebels thought I was dead. I hid myself for some days in a
nearby dilapidated house. I buried the dead bodies of my kith and kin after the
Pakistan Army had re-occupied Natore in mid-April 1971. I was shifted to Dacca
in mid-1971, and I was flown to Karachi in February, 1974. “
The massacre of non-Bengalis in Sarda took place late in March and the first
week of April, 1971. More than five hundred innocent persons perished in this
blood-bath. In Nawabganj, Awami League jingoes, rebels from the East Pakistan
Rifles and Indian infiltrators stormed the local jail in the third week of March and
enrolled the freed criminals in their ranks. One of their torture methods was to
overpower non-Bengali young men on the streets and make them shout
“Joi
Bangla “. Those who refused were lynched. A non-Bengali accounts clerk who
refused to yell out the Awami League slogan was buried up to his waist in a
ditch and was brained to death with sticks. More than a thousand non-Bengalis
were, murdered in March-April, 1971, in Nawabganj.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
176
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
Bloodshed in Pabna, Serajganj
Although the non-Bengali population in Pabna town was not large, the Awami
League militants made life insecure for non-Bengalis since the first week of
March 1971. Street manifestations of the Awami League’s power — rallies,
meetings and demonstrations — were organized almost everyday all through the
month. The houses of the non-Bengalis were marked for the impending pogrom.
Non-Bengali young men were manhandled on the streets and retailers were
urged by the Bengali militants not to sell food to the Biharis and other non-
Bengalis.
The momentum of the Awami League’s anti-Pakistan agitation in Pabna reached
its fever-heat pitch on March 23 when killer gangs, observing the “Resistance
Day “ ordered by the Awami League High Command, went on the rampage and
looted and burnt many non-Bengali houses and shops. They burnt the Pakistan
flag and hoisted the Bangladesh flag atop all the Government and private
buildings. Those who refused to fly the flag of the rebels were shot or maimed
with daggers. In the last days of March and the first week of April, when the
Awami League rebels ruled the town, fire and death were carried to many more
non-Bengali homes by killer gangs. The telephone exchange and the public
telegraph were controlled by the rebels between the third week of March and the
first week of April. Witnesses estimate the death toll of non-Bengalis in Pabna
town at 2,000.
A number of non-Bengali young women were kidnapped by the rebels and
ravished before being murdered. When Pabna town was freed by the Army from
rebel control on April 10, dead bodies of non-Bengalis were found in many
ransacked houses. The rebels had herded many women and children in deserted
buildings and put them to the torch before the Army came. The rebels blocked
escape routes for the terrorised non-Bengalis. Some non-Bengali dead bodies, it is
reported, were stacked in trucks and dumped into the nearby Padma river. Some
God-fearing non-Bengalis, who tried to persuade the killer gangs not to kill the
non-Bengali innocents, were intimidated and manhandled.
Violence against non-Bengalis also occurred in Dulai, Sujanagar, Santhia, Kismat,
Dera and Shahzadpur.
SERAJGANJ

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
177
In the first week of March 1971, the Awami League militants terrorised the non-
Bengali populace and ordered them to hand over their firearms. A few affluent
West Pakistani and Bihari traders were kidnapped for ransom. The Awami
League storm troopers stole guns from the police armoury. In the second week of
the month, the Awami League militants became more daring and bellicose, and
committed sporadic acts of violence against the non-Bengalis whose houses and
shops were red-marked in the preceding week. In the third week of March, the
Bengali rebels launched a full-blast campaign of terror and violence against the
small non-Bengali population. In the night of March 23, which was observed by
the Awami League as ‘Resistance Day’ to hurl defiance at the federal
Government, killer mobs, led by the armed Awami League militants, ransacked
non-Bengali houses and indulged in wanton slaughter of the non-Bengali men.
The pogrom continued with savage ferocity all through the last week of March
and right up to April 27, 1971, when the Army recovered Serajganj from the
insurgents.
The most gruesome orgy of violence against the non-Bengalis was the burning of
350 hapless old man, women and children who were herded in a school building
by the rebels late in March 1971. Killer gangs, blazing guns, broke into the houses
of non-Bengalis and gunned all the male inmates to death. The bereaved women
and children were marched at gunpoint to this improvised prison house. Before
the Army re-occupied Serajganj on April 27, the rebels set fire to this building
and all the non-Bengalis trapped in it were burnt to death. No survivors
remained to tell the full story of this beastly act.
The exact death toll of the non-Bengalis in Serajganj in the March-April 1971
massacre will never be known because their dead bodies were tossed by the
hundreds into the Brahmaputra River. Many of the non-Bengali victims were
executed by their captors on the bank of the river and their bodies were thrown
into the water. After the federal troops re captured Serajganj, heaps of mutilated
and burnt dead bodies of the non-Bengali victims of the Awami Leagues terror
were found in houses which had been looted and burnt. Many destitute and
orphaned non-Bengali children and their widowed mothers were taken to Dacca
and lodged in camps. Some were sent to Khulna where the non-Bengalis had
made arrangements to rehabilitate them.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
178
CHAPTER THIRTY
Woes of Comilla
In the middle of March 1971, tension between the Bengalis and the non-Bengalis
in Comilla reached an alarming pitch. Fibs and yarns invented by the Awami
League activists and the hostile broadcasts of All India Radio were a major factor
in the creation of tension. Mutineers from the East Bengal Regiment and the East
Pakistan Rifles worked in concert with the Awami League cadres. Roving bands
of armed Awami League militants had marked the houses occupied by non-
Bengalis. In the third week of March, the insurgents went on the rampage,
looting the homes of non-Bengalis and slaying those who resisted. Eye-wimcsses
said that at least 4,000 non-Bengalis were butchered by the insurrectionists and
their supporters before the Pakistan Army regained control over Comilla early in
April.
Abu Saeed, 29, who lived with his brother, Qamruddin, in his well-furnished
house on Kazi Nazrul Islam Road in Comilla, gave the following heart-rending
account of the murder of five members of his family in the third week of March
1971:
“My elder brother, Qamruddin, was a well-to-do businessman. We had
migrated to East Pakistan from India early in 1948. All of us had learnt the
Bengali language and we were fluent in it. Our relations with our Bengali
neighbours were excellent. Political developments in Dacca had their impact on
Comilla, and the non-Bengalis felt uneasy. Qamruddin’s family consisted of his
wife, his two College-going sons and his teenage daughter. Our aged mother also
lived with us. On March 23, we were startled by the sound of gunfire. We saw in
the distance a group of armed men advancing towards our house. Some houses
and shops were on fire. The Bengali gunmen yelled outside our house. My
brother, Qamruddin, spoke to them in Bengali and appealed for mercy. A burst
of bullets was their response. They broke the front door and again opened fire.
My brother collapsed in a pool of blood. My two nephews grappled with the
intruders and lost their lives. As their wailing mother leaned over their lifeless,
blood-splashed bodies, a bullet from a guman’s rifle killed her. While the Bengali
raiders were busy in looting the house, I escaped into the backyard through a
window and lay still in the bushes. I heard the shrieks of my young niece who
was still in the house but I was too scared to go to her help. I heard the report of
gunshots. Around midnight I tiptoed into the house; it was a ghasdy sight. The
only survivor was my aged mother who had fainted. In the early hours of the
morning she regained consciousness. In my brother’s bedroom lay the dead body
of my niece; her hands were tied with a rope and her clothes were torn. I learnt

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
179
from my mother that the girl had resisted her violaters who had taken turns to
rape her. Before leaving, the killers had strangled her to death.
“Comilla experienced a reign of terror all through March 1971. Non-Bengalis
were liquidated by the thousands; many pro-Pakistan Bengalis, who were
known to have voted against the Awami League in the December 1970 general
election, were singled out for torture by the insurgents. Peace and order returned
to Comilla after the Pakistan Army re-establishcd its audiority early in April. But
in December, after the victory of the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini, many of
the non-Bengali survivors of the March, 1971 slaughter were murdered. Late in
1972, I escaped to Nepal after bribing the Mukti Bahini. In April 1973, I
succeeded in reaching Karachi. “
Equally harrowing was the account which 23-year-old Akhter Rashid gave of the
March 1971 killing of non-Bengalis in Comilla:
“My father, Abdur Rashid, had a contract for the supply of food to the Pakistan
Army garrison in Comilla. We lived in New Market and I was a student. Most of
our neighbours were non-Bengalis. Our relations with the Bengalis were friendly.
Tension in Comilla exploded on March 22 when a blood-thirsty mob of yelling
Awami Leaguers and insurgents of the East Pakistan Rifles went on a killing
spree shortly after sunset. They ransacked all the houses occupied by non-
Bengalis in our locality and killed the menfolk, almost without exception. My
father was out of town on the day of the massacre. I did not go home and hid
myself for the evening in a dilapidated house. Around midnight when I reached
my home, I was shocked to find that my teenage sister, Shirin, had disappeared
and our house had been looted. There was not a soul in the neighbourhood. I
saw dead bodies lying in pools of blood at some places. I was terrified. My father
returned to Comilla after our troops had regained control over it. The
kidnapping of my sister, Shirin, was a severe blow to him. We scoured the whole
of Comilla district in April and May, 1971 in search of Shirin. Late in 1972, I
decided to leave East Pakistan and persuaded my father to accompany me. But
he refused and said that he would continue the search for his missing daughter
until his last breath. I escaped to Nepal, and in June 1973, I came to Karachi. In
Kathmandu, I was told that the Bengali insurgents, who had kidnapped non-
Bengali girls in Comilla district, had taken them to India where most of them
were sold to brothels for prostitution. The fear that this might have been Shirin’s
tragic fate is gnawing my soul. “
The two eye-witnesses from Comilla reported that a sizable element among the
Awami League militants was of Bengali Hindus. As soon as Pakistan Army
reinforcements reached Comilla early in April, the Awami League activists and
the para-military Bengali insurgents fled to neighbouring India. They carried

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
180
with them the loot which they had collected from the homes of non-Bengalis and
the Government Treasury. The federal troops conducted the mass burial of
hundreds of rotting dead bodies of non-Bengalis who were murdered by the
Bengali insurgents in March 1971. Indian propagandists and Awami League
fibsters, who were ensconced in India, duped the world by fabricating the yarn
that these graves were of Bengalis killed by the federal troops. Comilla was the
headquarters of the 9th Division of the Pakistan Army; its officers and men were
disciplined soldiers who had instructions not to shoot unless they were shot at.
Many of the Bengali rebels, who had plundered and killed the non-Bengalis in
Comilla, retreated to Feni. An Army brigade, sent from Comilla, mopped up the
insurgents at Feni. Some escaped with their weapons, across the border, to India.
Witnesses from Comilla said that the Awami League rebels had occupied the
Comilla Telephone Exchange on March 3, 1971 and snapped Comilla telephone
links with the rest of the province. The same day, a train from Bhairab to
Laksham was stopped by a mob at Comilla and the rebels tried to burn it but the
presence of mind and courage of the Railway staff on duty saved it from disaster.
Some 300 prisoners lodged in the Jail in Comilla town tried to escape on March
12 and loyal prison guards opened fire on them to prevent the jail-break. An
armed mob raided a field unit of the Pakistan Army at Feni, near Comilla, but
the troops repulsed the attack.
In the middle of March 1971, rioting spread to a number of tea gardens in the
Comilla district. Incited by the Awami League militants, many Bengali labourers
in the tea gardens attacked the West Pakistani, Bihari and other non-Bengali staff
and their families.
An Awami League gang burnt Pakistan’s national flag at Shamshernagar on
March 13. A section of the police, which was loyal until then, arrested the
culprits. The Aawmi League leaders tried to smash their way into the prison to
free the detained men.
AKHAURA
Heavy loss of non-Bengali lives was reported from Akhaura, an important
railway station. In the last week of March 1971, a killer gang raided the Railway
station and the quarters of the non-Bengali employees and slaughtered a number
of non-Bengali men. One of the non-Bengalis killed by the Awami League
militants and rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles was the Station Master of
Akhaura, Mr. Laiq Akhtar who had kept the Railway station functioning all
through the troubled month of March 1971. Witnesses said they had heard that
the Station Master had courageously resisted the attackers and put up a brave
fight. The Awami League rebels also murdered a number of well-to-do non-
Bengali businessmen in Akhaura. The rebels kidnapped many non-Bengali girls

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
181
and ravished them. As Akhaura is close to the Indian border, the Bengali rebels
and thcir Awami League confederates escaped to India after the federal Army re-
established its authority over it. The non-Bengali population in Akhaura was so
heavily abridged in March 1971 that there were not many non-Bengalis left to tell
the full story of the massacre there.

