Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
72
CHAPTER FIVE
Fire and Death in Khulna
The Awami League’s rebellion triggered a rash of disturbances and lawlessness
in Khulna, the hub of East Pakistan’s jute trade and industry, in the first week of
March 1971.
On March 4, a riotous crowd, led by armed Awami Leaguers, raided the local
Telephone Exchange, wrecked a part of the equipment and slayed a number of
employees, mostly non-Bengalis. The next day, a large killer gang, brandishing
rifles, sickles, spears and knives, looted four shops and burnt a hotel in the heart
of the city. Another mob, armed with explosives, guns, spears and bamboo poles,
attacked non-Bengali shops and homes in the neighbouring townships of
Daulatpur and Khalispur and murdered 57 persons. Their mutilated dead bodies
were found after some days.
On March 6, Bengali militants took out a big procession to frighten the non-
Bengalis in Khulna. Some of the armed processionists tried to loot arms and
ammunition shops and in the fracas there were quite a few casualties. The civic
administration in the town was paralysed; the police became ineffective and the
Awami League militants whipped up mass hysteria against the non-Bengalis and
the federal government. Federal and provincial officials, who did not side with
the rebels, were terrorised.
In the second week of March, the Awami League’s rebellious movement gained
momentum in Khulna and the non-Bengalis were singled out for terrorisation
and abridgement. In the third week of the month, the Awami League’s regime of
violence and terror held Khulna and its neighbouring towns under its full sway.
The Khulna-Jessore Road was blocked and barricaded by the rebels at various
points. The survivors of the March 5 killing of the non-Bengalis in Khulna were
subjected to fresh attacks and intimidatory pressure by the Awami League
militants and the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles.
On March 23, the Awami League-led rebels in Khulna launched a full-blast
attack on the settlements of the non-Bengalis in the town and its neighbourhood
and butchered at least five thousand innocent people. All through the last week
of March, until the federal army moved in, the Bengali rebels staged the
bloodbath of non-Bengalis. They had set-up ghoulish slaughter-houses where
non-Bengali men women, children were done to death in a gruesome manner.
The rebels flung many of the dead bodies into the rivers in Khulna and its

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
73
neighbouring townships. Before being guillotined, the non-Bengali and some
pro-federal Bengali victims were tortured.
Eye-witnesses saw many dead bodies with slit throats and ripped stomachs
floating in the rivers. The rebels looted and wrecked a number of jute mills and
other industrial establishments in Khulna and its vicinity. Killer gangs tossed
non-Bengali millhands into steaming boilers. In the non-Bengali residential areas
in Khalispur and Daulatpur, killer gangs gunned the innocents with wanton
savagery. Their houses and shanties were put to the torch. All through the last
week of March, this dreadful pogrom against the non-Bengalis was conducted by
the rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles, the police, the Ansar Volunteer Force and
the armed militants of the Awami League with ruthless ferocity.
The Awami League had established pars-military training camps in Khulna in
the second week of March where the party’s volunteers trained with guns and
ammunition for
“Operation Loot, Burn and Kill “. In the industrial and
commercial parts of Khulna city, scores of West Pakistani businessmen and
factory executives and their families were kidnapped and held for ransom. Some
of them were slaughtered by their captors even after their relatives had paid the
ransom money.
Some Bengalis who sheltered their non-Bengali friends were also done to death
by the rebel gangs. Survivors of the genocidal fury of March 1971 report that on
March 29, a day before the federal army re-established its control over the city,
Khulna looked like a wrecked town on the morrow of a nuclear attack. Estimates
of the death toll in Khulna and its neighbouring townships during the Awami
League’s rebellion of March 1971 are at considerable variance. Foreign and
Pakistani newsmen who visited Khulna in April-May 1971 were told by army
officers that at least 9,000 persons were killed by the Awami League militants
and their supporters. But eye-witnesses interviewed for this book believe that
nearly 50,000 non-Bengalis perished in Khulna during the Ides of March 1971.
Aside from the murder of tens of thousands of non-Bengalis resident in Khulna
and its neighbourhood, they assert, many hundreds of non-Bengali families who
fled from rebel terror in other towns of Khulna district were done to death on the
access roads to the city which were under rebel control.
According to witnesses from Khulna, the non-Bengali death toll in the savage
attack on the People’s Jute Mill and the Crescent Jute Mill by a huge mob of
armed Bengalis on March 28, 1971, exceeded 5,000, including women and
children. In the pogrom in the Railway Colony in Khulna, most of its 6,000 non-
Bengali residents were butchered by the Bengali rebels. Hundreds of non-Bengali
young women were marched by their captors to neighbouring villages where
they were assaulted and raped in cordoned off huts. Many were killed by their

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
74
captors. Some escaped to Barisal and were brought by the Pakistan Army to
Dacca and lodged in Relief Camps in Mohammedpur and Mirpur.
The New York Times, in a despatch from its correspondent, Malcolm W. Browne,
who toured East Pakistan in the first week of May, reported in its issue of May 9,
1971:
“At Khulna, newsmen were shown facilities where frames were said to have
been set up to hold prisoners for decapitation. Fragments of bloody clothing and
tresses of women’s hair were strewn about. The place was said to have been used
by the Bengali insurgents for the execution of thousands of non-Bengali residents.
“
A more horrifying description of the slaughter of Khulna’s non-Bengalis
appeared in the Washington Sunday Star on May 9, 1971:
“In Khulna, newsmen on an army-conducted tour yesterday saw what a non-
Bengali resident described as a human slaughter-house. Sheds were said to have
been used by East Pakistan’s dominant Bengalis in mass killings of Bihari
immigrants from India, West Pakistanis and other non-Bengalis during March
and early April at the height of the secessionist uprising....
“Reporters were shown a wooden frame with chains affixed on top where
women and children reportedly were beheaded with knives.
“There was a form of a garrotte attached to a tree where the residents said
victims were choked to death. Cords attached to one tree were described as
hanging nooses. Bodies were said to have been thrown over a low wall into the
river running alongside.
“Long rows of shops and homes in the non-Bengali sector of Khulna were badly
burned, apparently by Bengalis.
“The evidence of eye-witnesses shows that after the federal troops drove out the
insurgents from Khulna and its nearby townships, the rebels headed straight for
India where the Indian authorities welcomed them as heroes and gave them
sanctuary. Many amongst the killers in Khulna were Bengali Hindus who hated
the non-Bengalis, especially the immigrants from Bihar in India. The majority of
the Bengali population in Khulna was so terrorised by the hardcore Awami
Leaguers that it dared not protest against the reign of terror unleashed on the
non-Bengalis.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
75
Nisar Ahmed Khan, 37, who was the headmaster of a high school in the
Khalispur industrial township in Khulna, had this grim recollection of the
Awami League’s terror regime in March 1971:
“On March 23, armed bands of Awami League volunteers and rebels from the
East Pakistan Rifles and the police desecrated the Pakistani flag in Khalispur and
hoisted their Bangla Desh flag atop buildings and factories in our township.
Since the middle of March, the Bengali rebels were on the warpath against the
non-Bengalis and we heard rumours that elaborate preparations were being
made for our slaughter.
“I lived in a rented house in the G-10 sector in the Satellite Town in Khalispur
locality. My school was located in the vicinity of the People’s Jute Mill. Close to it
lived some 15,000 non-Bengalis, many in shanties. They were assured by the
local Awami Leaguers early in the first week of March that they would not be
disturbed or harmed. In fact, local Awami League leaders and some Bengali
police officers met the representatives of the non-Bengalis in the main Mosque in
this locality. In the presence of the non-Bengali Imam (Priest), they took an oath
that no non-Bengali would be harmed. This assurance dissuaded the non-
Bengalis from taking any self-defence measures or moving to Dacca for safety.
“In the night of March 23 and all through the next day, the Bengali rebels went
on the rampage against the non-Bengalis in this locality. The rebels blocked all
the access roads and sealed off the routes of escape for the non-Bengalis. Armed
with rifles, sten guns, hand grenades, knives and spears, a huge killer mob fell
upon the hapless non-Bengali men, women and children. The rebels burned and
blasted the entire neighbourhood; they looted the homes of non-Bengalis and as
the victims ran out of their houses, a hail of gunfire mowed them down. Many
women and children sought refuge in the main Mosque and in my school
building. The killers murdered the Imam (Priest) who begged them in the name
of Allah to spare the innocents. The word mercy had become alien to the rebels.
“Teenage girls and young women, kidnapped by the Bengali rebels, were
lodged in the school building. At night, they were raped by their captors. Those
who resisted were immediately shot. Some hapless women jumped from the roof
of the sex assault chambers to escape their violators.
“Some old men, women and children were marched by the rebels to the river-
side human abattoir where they were slaughtered and dumped into the river.
The killers trucked away many dead bodies from the town to the river bank
where they were flung into the water.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
76
“Near my school was the house of a dear friend, Saghir Ahmed Khan. The killer
gang smashed into his house and machine gunned every inmate. His house was
looted and partly burnt.
“I did not go to my school on March 24, the day of the massacre. The next day, a
Bengali attendant came to my house in Satellite Town and gave me the grisly
details of the killing. Hundreds of dead bodies, many of young women, he said,
lay in heaps in the school building.
On March 30, when the federal troops entered Khulna and the rebels retreated, I
went to my school. It was a horrifying spectacle. Bloated, decomposed dead
bodies lay in hundreds and the stench of rotting dead was nauseating. It took me
almost a whole month to bury the dead, to clean up the bloodstains and to
eliminate the stink. “
In few hours, the entire colony was turned into an inferno of fire, blood and
death. Many non-Bengalis were mowed down by the rebels’ gunfire when they
tried to escape the slaughter in the locality. The killers had blocked all the escape
routes and their gunmen did the sniping. My wife, my children and I hid
ourselves on the roof of our house and we escaped the killing. After the federal
troops secured Khulna on March 30, it took many days before the heaps of dead
bodies of non-Bengalis killed by the rebels could be buried. “
A. S. Saifullah, 34, who witnessed the massacre of non-Bengalis in the
Crescent Jute Mill in Khalispur in Khulna in March 1971, said:
B.
“The massacre of the non-Bengali employees of the jute mill and their families
and of other non-Bengali residents of the locality was conducted from March 23
to 29. In the first two days of this period, there was a general slaughter of the
non-Bengali population by armed Awami Leaguers and rebels of the East
Pakistan Rifles and the police. Later on, groups of non-Bengalis, kidnapped by
the rebels, were tortured in slaughter houses and done to death. In the
compound of the Crescent Jute Mill was a block of three rooms. The rebels had
turned it into a human abattoir. Hundreds of non-Bengali men, women and
children were herded in this slaughter-house for two days without water and
food and then done to death with unimaginable savagery. After the federal
troops had regained control over Khulna, I saw this slaughter-house. The dead
had been taken away for burial but there was blood all over the place. In a vessel
I saw the corneas of human beings; these were the remnants of those unfortunate
people whose eyes had been gouged out. I have often wondered what sadistic
pleasure the rebels derived from eye-gouging. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
77
Saifullah escaped from Khulna after the Mukti Bahini gave it a second bloodbath
late in December 1971 and early in January 1972. Through a tortuous route, he
came to Pakistan in 1972.
Shahjahan Khan, 50, who was employed in the Star Jute Mill in Chandi Mahal in
Khulna, had this pathetic recollection of the massacre of the non-Bengalis in
March 1971:
“I had migrated to East Pakistan from Calcutta in 1970 and I settled in Khulna. I
joined the Star Jute Mill when it was started and I rose to the position of Weaving
Master in the Mill. On March 28, a large killer gang, armed with machine guns,
rifles and spears attacked the non-Bengali employees of the Jute Mill and their
families. The attackers overpowered some of the non-Bengali millhands and
flung them alive into the steaming boilers in the Mill. Many of the non-Bengali
workers who tried to escape were sprayed with machine gunfire.
“I escaped from the Mill and ran towards my home. A pursuer’s bullet hit me in
the arm but I continued sprinting towards my house. Just on the doorstep, a
sniper’s bullet hit me in the leg and I fell down. The killers had ransacked my
house and killed my wife and my three children earlier in the day. I lost
consciousness. After three days, I found myself in the Khulna hospital. The
federal troops had entered the city and the injured persons were taken to
hospital. The death toll of the non-Bengalis in my locality ran into thousands.
The Bengali rebels kidnapped hundreds of non-Bengali young women and
teenage girls and killed them by the riverside after ravishing them. Their usual
practice was to dump the dead bodies into the river. I was repatriated to Pakistan
in November 1973 “.
Shakoor Ahmed, 69, who lived in his son’s house on Khan Jahan Ali Road in
Khulna, recalled the murder of his only offspring in the March 1971 massacre in
these words:
“I had lived and worked in East Pakistan long before the Partition of the sub-
continent. I hailed from Monghyr but most of my life was spent in East Pakistan.
My son was born in Khulna. We spoke Bengali very well. But the local Bengalis
called us Biharis.
“Since the first week of March 1971, armed gangs of Awami Leaguers used to
parade in our locality to intimidate the non-Bengalis. In the second week of the
month, violence against non-Bengalis openly erupted. On March 23, a killer gang
attacked our house, slaughtered my son and his wife. They spared me and his
two small sons. They are now my life, my hope. We were repatriated to Karachi
in February 1974.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
78
Shakoor Ahmed thinks that a typhoon of madness had gripped a large segment
of the Bengali population in Khulna in March 1971. “Most Bengalis are a gentle
people; a hardcore minority misled great numbers of Bengalis and incited them
to commit violence on the Biharis “, he said.
Sixty-year-old Nabi Baksh, whose three sons were slaughtered by a killer gang in
the compound of the Platinum Jubilee Jute Mills, Khulna, in the last week of
March 1971, testified:
“I was employed in the Jute Mill for the past ten years. My three grown up sons
wore also employed in it. We lived in a small house on Khan Jahan Ali Road in
Khulna.
“On March 24, a killer gang of Bengali rebels attacked the non-Bengalis
employed in the Jute Mill. I grappled with some of the killers when they started
shooting in the direction of my three sons. The killers overpowered me and
gunned my sons before my helpless eyes. I was hit on the head and I fainted.
After the killers had gone, a Bengali co-worker dragged me to the store room
where my wounds were bandaged and I stayed there until the federal Army
freed Khulna from the terror rule of the Bengali rebels “.
Nabi Baksh was repatriated to Pakistan in the autumn of 1973 and he has settled
in Karachi.
Twenty-eight year-old Rabia Begum, whose husband, Rustam Ali, was a federal
government employee in Khulna, gave this account of the looting of her house
and the killing of her husband in March 1971:
“Since the second week of March 1971, life had become a night mare for the non-
Bengalis. Every day we heard rumours that the Bengali rebels would raid our
colony and kill us.
“The dreaded time arrived on March 23 when a killer gang of armed rebels
raided our locality. My husband was away on a Government errand in Darsana;
my aged mother-in-law and I were the only two adults in my house. When I
heard the echo of gunshots, I decided to leave the house by the backdoor and
seek refuge in the house of a trusted Bengali woman in another locality. I tried to
persuade my mother-in-law to go with me but she refused, saying that the
raiders would spare her because of her old age. I slipped out of my house with
my two children and reached my hideout safely. After the federal troops entered
Khulna, I went back to my house. I was shocked; a part of it was burnt and every
article of value was stolen. My mother-in-law was beaten and injured by the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
79
rebels. I took her to the hospital where she was treated for her wounds. The
raiders were angry that there were no ornaments in the house; they tortured my
mother-in-law to get clues to our wealth. We had none left.
“After the federal Army took over Khulna, I took up a job and earned some
money to feed myself, my children and my mother-in-law. I had no news of my
husband. Subsequently, I learnt that the killers slayed him in Darsana.
“My ordeals began afresh after the Mukti Bahini captured Khulna in the third
week of December, 1971. There was again a carnage of non-Bengalis in the city.
Luckily, we escaped it. In January 1974 we were repatriated to Karachi from
Dacca “.
Rabia’s view is that there were many God-fearing Bengalis who strongly
condemned the killing of the non-Bengalis but they were utterly helpless. “The
guns were with the Awami Leaguers and other rebels and not with these good-
hearted Bengalis “, she said. She had also heard of the slaughter-houses set up by
the Bengali rebels to torture and murder their non-Bengali victims.
PHOLTALA
Firdous Alam, 65, who lived in the Liaquatabad Colony in Pholtala town near
Khulna, had this tearful recollection of the March 1971 killing of the non-Bengalis:
“Pakistan’s first Prime Minister, Mr. Liaquat Ali Khan, was the founder of the
Liaquatabad colony in Pholtala. Four hundred Muslim refugee families from
Bihar and West Bengal, who had sought refuge in East Pakistan, were sheltered
in this colony in 1948. With the passage of years, more non-Bengali families
converged here and its population reached 15,000.
“On March 23, a large procession of Awami Leaguers paraded our locality and
raised slogans against Pakistan. The elders in our locality prevailed upon our
young men not to be provoked by the Awami League militants and their anti-
Pakistan slogans. In the evening, the Awami Leaguers returned with a horde of
armed men, perhaps the rebels from the East Pakistan rifles. All of a sudden, the
killer gang started setting the hutments of the non-Bengalis ablaze. The Bengali
rebels spread the flames with dried coconut fronds which make excellent
kindling. As the terrified non-Bengalis emerged from their burning huts, the
killer gang mowed them with gunfire.
“Provoked by this wanton savagery, a score of our young men, who had guns,
engaged the killer gang in combat for four hours. But when their ammunition
was exhausted — the Bengali rebels got reinforcements and fresh supplies —
these brave defenders of non-Bengali honour were done to death with
indescribable savagery. All through the night and till the small hours of the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
80
morning, the rebels continued their orgies of killing, torture and loot. The killers
raped hundreds of non-Bengali women before slaughtering them in the
compound of a large building in the locality. The killer gang murdered my
family; I was hit by a gunman and I feigned death.
“At least half of the non-Bengali population in Liaquatabad Colony in Pholtala
was wiped out in 24 hours of fiendish massacre. “
Firdous Alam was repatriated to Karachi in December 1973.
BAGERHAT
Qazi Anwar Hussain, 35, who was a trader in the town of Bagerhat in the Khulna
District, and who saw the killing of non-Bengalis and pro-Pakistan Bengalis in
March 1971, said:
“The Awami Leaguers created tension in Bagerhat from the first week of March
1971. They spread canards about the killing of Bengalis in West Pakistan; they
incited the local Bengalis to violence against the non-Bengalis.
“Along with the non-Bengalis, Bengali Muslim Leaguers were also the target of
attack by the Awami Leaguers. Before the December 1970 general elections, the
Awami League did not command much influence in Bagerhat sub-division. But
in the 1970 polls, it emerged victorious and built up a base of strength in
Bagerhat. One of its pet themes was to incite the Bengalis against West Pakistan.
“On March 20, a riotous mob led by Awami League militants ransacked the
house of a prominent Bengali Muslim Leaguer, Mohammed Qasim. Luckily, he
was not at home when the raiders came. But they looted all the valuables in his
house and burnt it to ashes. Subsequently, the mob went on the rampage against
the non-Bengalis and burnt their houses and killed many. Some non-Bengalis
were given shelter and protection by God fearing Bengalis. The killer gangs
punished such humane Bengalis and killed the non-Bengalis they had sheltered.
I estimate that some 500 innocent people — many non-Bengalis and a few pro-
Pakistan Bengalis — were done to death in Bagerhat on that dark day.
“Many of the survivors amongst the non-Bengalis went away to Khulna for
shelter but quite a few were killed on the way by killer gangs which controlled
the highways. “
Qazi Anwar escaped the slaughter of non-Bengalis in Bagerhat with the help of a
devout Bengali Muslim who sheltered him and protected him from the killer
gangs. In February 1974, he was repatriated to Karachi by ship from Chittagong.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
81
CHAPTER SIX
Satkhira Aflame
About the same time as Khulna was aflame with the genocidal fury of the
Bengali rebels, the non-Bengali population in the town of Satkhira also became
the victim of loot, arson and murder. It is estimated that more than 2,000 non-
Bengalis perished in the massacres in Satkhira town and other places in the sub-
dvision between the second half of March and the first fortnight of April 1971.
Eye-witnesses reported that as Satkhira is close to the Indian border, the Bengali
rebels received substantial military assistance from the Indian Border Security
Force. The Sub-Divisional Officer of Satkhira, who was a West Pakistani, was
taken prisoner by the Bengali rebels and was dragged through the streets of the
town.
Thirty-two year-old Maula Bux, who worked as a Jute trader and lived in the
Kazipara locality of Satkhira, gave this account of the horrifying events in what
used to be his home town:
“I had lived for more than 10 years in Satkhira town and I spoke Bengali so well
that I was often mistaken for a genuine Bengali. As Satkhira town is barely a
couple of miles from the Indian border, it had served for years as the operational
base of Indian agents. When the Awami League launched its rebellion in Dacca
on March 1, 1971, its impact was immediately felt in Satkhira. The Awami
Leaguers organized demonstrations and protest marches and imported arms and
ammunition from India. Para-military Indian personnel infiltrated in mufti into
Satkhira and guided the Awami Leaguers in their anti-Government operations.
“The civil administration collapsed; the Bengali rebels kidnapped a number of
Government officials and set up their own regime of terror. The Police and the
East Pakistan Rifles also revolted. The rebels had taken over control of all the
access roads to Satkhira and blocked the exit of the terrorised non-Bengalis. By
the middle of March, heavily armed Bengali rebel contingents were holding
ominous displays of strength to frighten the non-Bengalis. Some shops and stores
owned by non-Bengalis were looted and burnt. A number of West Pakistanis
were
“arrested “ on the charge of “spying “ for the federal government and
were liquidated with rifle shots. On March 17 and 18, the rebels went on the
rampage and slaughtered hundreds of non-Bengalis.
“In the morning of March 18, I was striking a business deal in the jute godown
of a leading non-Bengali jute trader, Abdul Qayuum. All of a sudden, a killer
mob attacked the jute god own, gunned Mr. Qayuum and his non-Bengali staff

