Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
112
CHAPTER TWELVE
Butchery in Chuadanga
“Ninetyfive per cent of the non-Bengali population in Chuadanga in the Kushtia
district was wiped out by ruthless killer gangs of Bengali rebels in the last week
of March and first half of April 1971 “, said Mohammed Hanif, 38, who was
employed at the local Railway Station.
Hanif, whose escape from the massacre was nothing short of a miracle, had lived
for 22 years in East Pakistan. He had his house in the Murghi Patti locality of
Chuadanga and he spoke Bengali fluently. In 1972, he escaped to Nepal from
where he was repatriated to Karachi in July 1973. He gave this account of the
carnage in Chuadanga:
“I adored East Pakistan; I liked the friendliness and gentleness of my Bengali
friends. I knew every inch of Chuadanga. But in March 1971, life for the non-
Bengalis, like me, became unsafe because of the Awami League’s rebellion. Stray
incidents of manhandling and kidnapping of non-Bengalis were reported since
early March from some parts of the town. On March 25, the Bengali militants,
armed with lethal weapons, went on the rampage. They attacked the Chuadanga
Railway Station and slaughtered all the non-Bengalis they could lay their hands
on. They looted the shops owned by non-Bengalis near the Railway Station. Later
in the evening, the killer gangs stormed the houses of the non-Bengali Railway
staff and killed many-hundreds of innocent men, women and children. Some
teenage girls were kidnappad and subjected to multiple rape before being
strangled to death by their captors. The Bengali rebels raided the Hospital in this
locality; they slaughtered the non-Bengali patients. In the first week of April 1971,
the killers grabbed the West Pakistani doctor-in-charge of the Hospital, Dr. M.
Rahman, and flung him from the balcony; his skull was smashed as he struck the
ground below.
“The rebels looted every non-Bengali house with the thoroughness of vandals.
They did not bury the hundreds of dead bodies which lay in my locality; they
burnt some in blazing houses. I escaped from my house an hour before the
pillage. Posing as a Bengali farmer, I stayed in a deserted shed in the fields for
some days. “
Forty-year-old Abeda Khatoon, whose husband, Masaheb Ali, was killed in the
carnage of non-Bengalis at the Chuadanga Railway Station in the last week of
March 1971, thus narrated the story of her travail:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
113
“On March 25, a yelling band of armed Bengalis raided our locality and blasted
the door of our house. My husband, who worked as a porter at Chuadanga
Railway station, was away from the house. The raiders slapped and kicked me
when I said that my husband was away on duty. They looted my house like
thieves and took away every article of value. They said they would come back
the next day to get my husband. “
“At midnight, I was stunned when a neighbour brought me the dreadful news
that my husband was killed in the slaughter of non-Bengalis at the Railway
Station earlier in the day. He urged me not to go to the Railway Station otherwise
the killers would kidnap me. I lived in my house in terror and fear, expecting the
killers to call again in search of their quarry. But for some reason they spared me.
In mid-April, the Pakistan Army recovered Chuadanga from the rebels and they
melted away in the countryside or fled to India. The federal troops moved me to
a camp for widows and orphans in Jessore. After two months, I returned to my
old house in Chuadanga and stayed there until India’s armed grab of East
Pakistan. Subsequently, I shifted to Ishurdi and earned a living. In February 1974,
I was repatriated to Karachi “.
The eye-witnesses of the killings in Chuadanga reported that the rebels inflicted
spine-chilling tortures on the West Pakistani Sub-Divisional Officer after they
had usurped control over the town. His pregnant wife was beaten by the rebels
and his house was looted. The rebels kidnapped scores of teenage girls from non-
Bengali homes and used them for mass sex assault in a school building. Before
the rebels fled to India, they killed these unfortunate girls. Any girl who resisted
or screamed was immediately stripped naked and shot dead in order to teach a
lesson to the other captive girls. Some sadist rebels, it seemed, drew pleasure
from chopping up the breasts of teenage girls and planting the Bangladesh
flagsticks on their ruptured wombs.
Fifty-year-old Pari Begum, whose family of six was slaughtered in the
murderous attack by the Bengali rebels on the non-Bengali houses near the
Chuadanga Railway Station in the last week of March, 1971, gave this account of
that nightmare:
“My husband and my son-in-law were Railway employees. Owing to the
prevailing tension in the town, both of them stayed at home instead of going to
work at the Railway Station. We lived in a quarter given to us by the Railway. In
the evening of March 25, 1971, shortly after I had offered my evening prayers, the
roar of guns and the rat-rat of machine-guns was heard in our colony. This was
immediately followed by cue screams and groans of men, women and children.
We had locked the doors of our house. Suddenly, a killer gang of Bengali rebels

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
114
smashed it with iron bars and riddled my husband and my son-in-law with a
volley of bullets from their sten guns. My daughter and I tried to shield her three
little sons.
“Kill these Bihari snakes “, yelled one of the killers and in the
twinkling of an eye they were gunned to death. As my shrieking daughter leaned
over the writhing bodies of her loved ones, a killer shot her in the head and she
died with a groan. A bullet hit me in the leg and I lost consciousness.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
115
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Killer Gangs in Meherpur,
Zafarkandi
Abdul Aziz, 33, clerk in the Jute Mill at Meherpur, gave this harrowing account
of the massacre of non-Bengalis in his town in the last week of March 1971:
“Since the beginning of March 1971, Bengali militants conducted sporadic
attacks on the houses of non-Bengalis. Some of them were belaboured on the
streets and a few were injured.
“The Jute Mill at Meherpur had about 150 non-Bengali work men. They were a
small minority in the overall labour force at the Mill. These non-Bengalis lived in
shacks in a shanty colony not far from the Mill. In the night of March 25, the
Awami League militants and rebel Bengali soldiers unleashed death and
destruction on the houses of non-Bengalis in this locality and slaughtered them
en masse. The death toll in this incident was nearly 750. I do not think that there
were more than a dozen survivors of this dreadful massacre.
“As I was a bachelor, I lived in a small room in the Mill premises. The Mill was
not damaged by the killer gang. For four days, I lived confined in this room. I am
grateful to my Bengali colleagues who did not betray me to the rebels otherwise I
would have been dead. I stirred out of my hideout after the Pakistan Army
regained control over Meherpur. The rebels had offered strong resistance but
they were enventually routed. When I toured the devastated non-Bengali
hutments, I was appalled by the savagery with which the Bengali rebels had
liquidated the innocent non-Bengalis. Hundreds of dead bodies lay on the roads,
in tanks, inside burnt-out houses, in the fields and in deserted, spooky buildings.
The Army arranged their mass burial in view of the decomposed state of most of
the corpses. The inmates who rushed out of their blazing houses, it appeared,
were fired upon ruthlessly by the killers.
“Hundreds of blood-stained Saris and other female garments testified to the
tortures inflicted on kidnapped women by their captors. The soldiers said that
not more than a dozen non-Bengalis survived this gory killing.
“Heaps of burnt human bones, found in the debris of the gutted shacks of the
non-Bengali labourers of the Mill, gave tell-tale indications of the many human
bodies which were tossed into this inferno for in Generation by their killers “.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
116
The overall death toll of the non-Bengalis in the March 1971 massacre in
Meherpur was estimated to be more than 1,000. About 200 young women were
kidnapped and raped by the rebels; many of them were throttled or gunned to
death before the rebels retreated from the town.
The federal troops transported Abdul Aziz to Saidpur where he-was reunited
with some of his relatives late in April 1971. In January 1974, he was repatriated
from Dacca to Karachi.
ZAFARKANDI
About 600 non-Bengalis were butchered in March-April 1971 by the rebels of the
East Pakistan Rifles and the Awami league jingoes in the town of Zafarkandi in
Kushtia district.
In the last week of March, killer gangs attacked three localities where the non-
Bengalis had concentrated. Their houses were looted and some were burnt. Their
inmates were marched to execution grounds in the open verdant fields. Some
were tortured before being shot; many others were lined up and sprayed with
machine-gunfire. Amongst them were men, women and children. There were no
survivors of this carnage.
The rebels treated the kidnapped girls with bestiality. When the federal army
recovered Zafarkandi from the control of the rebels, the troops found the dead
bodies of many scores of young women whose breasts had been slashed off and
their wombs were slit open. The federal troops pieced up a picture of the
massacre by the rebels on the basis of evidence furnished by the Bengali
witnesses who had seen the killing in sheer helplessness and horror. Massive
rubbles were reminders of the existence of populous residential colonies before
the holocaust was unloosed by the Awami League rebellion.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
117
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Mass Murder in Ishurdi
Eruptions of violence against the non-Bengalis, sparked off by the Awami
League’s rebellion in the first week of March 1971, gained in intensity and
frequency in the second week of the month in the town of Ishurdi. The Awami
League militants and the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles and the Ansars
ruled the town and usurped the authority of the civil administration. They had
marked the houses of non-Bengalis in various localities of the town and trained
their jingoes in the use of firearms and for the massacre of the non-Bengalis.
About 2,000 non-Bengalis perished in the carnage.
Forty-two-year old Shamsuzzoha, who lived in a rented house in the Fateh
Mohammedpur locality of Ishurdi and was a thriving trader before the massacre,
gave this account of the harrowing March 1971 tragedy:
“In the morning of March 25, an armed band of Awami Leaguers and some
rebel soldiers attacked four non-Bengali families on the Orankhola Road and
executed them publicly in the market place. Their dead bodies — men, women
and children — were stacked in a pile on the wayside with a placard in Bengali
which read: “This is the fate of those who dislike the Bengalis “. Similar slogans
were inscribed on the walls of houses in the localities where the non-Benealis
lived.
“The next day, about 5,000 armed Bengali militants, some with sten guns and
rifles, stormed the houses of non-Bengalis in the Pachchum Tengri Colony.
Amongst the victims was my first cousin. He and his family of four were gunned
to death “.
Shamsuzzoha, his wife and bis 10-year-old son had shifted from their house and
sought refuge in the house of a Bengali friend a day before their locality was
stormed by the rebel gunmen. Subsequently, after the Pakistan Army re-
established its control over Ishurdi on April 11, 1971, they moved to Dacca from
where they were repatriated to Karachi in October 1973.
Twentyseven year old Ainul Haque, who lived in a small house in the Pachchum
Tengri locality of Ishurdi and whose family of six was slaughtered in the March
26 massacre of non-Bengalis, had this harrowing recollection of that traumatic
day in his life:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
118
“I had lived in Ishurdi for many years; I had a small shop. I liked Ishurdi; it was
a pleasant and quiet town. Our relations with the Bengalis were friendly. I spoke
Bengali well.
“On March 26, about 3,000 Bengali militants, many armed with rifles and sten
guns, made a pre-dawn attack on our locality. Although there had been some
tension in the town for the past three weeks, we had not expected such a massive
attack. We had no weapons to defend ourselves with. The killers broke into the
homes of non-Bengalis and without uttering a word, sprayed them with bullets.
The front door of my house was locked; they smashed it and entered, blazing
their guns at us. My aged mother, who was saying her morning prayer, was the
first one to be gunned in our house; she collapsed on the prayer rug and gave up
the ghost. Before I could even step out of my room, the killers machine-gunned
me, my wife and my two little children who had just woken up. I groaned in
agony and writhed in a pool of blood. Before I passed out, I saw the killers
shooting my two grown up brothers. “For two days, I lay in a state of coma. In
the morning of the third day, I regained consciousness. It was a ghastly sight; on
the floor were sprawled the blood-bathed dead bodies of all my kith and kin. I
thought I was in a delirium; I had high fever and I was terribly weak. I could
only crawl; I kissed the lifeless, cold faces of my two little children. I wish I was
also dead. The tragedy was insufferable and I again fainted. On April 11, 1971,
troops of the Pakistan Army came to my house, removed the dead bodies for
burial and took me to the Ishurdi hospital where I was treated for weeks for my
wounds. There were a few other wounded survivors of the massacre. Almost 90
per cent of the non-Bengali population in Ishurdi was exterminated by the
Awami League militants and the rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles and the Ansars.
When I went back to my locality, it was a ghost colony. Every non-Bengali house
was looted by the vandals; many were burnt. Almost all my friends were dead.
Re-visiting my ransacked house was a torture; the memory of the slaughter of
my family was unbearable. I moved to Dacca and in January 1974. I was
repatriated to Karachi “.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
119
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Persecution in Paksey
About one thousand non-Bengali families lived in Paksey, an important Railway
centre, before the Awami League’s rebellion in March 1971. Since the beginning
of the month, the Awami League militants had taken over virtual control of the
town. The police and the para-military East Pakistan Rifles and Ansars had also
revolted against the authority of the federal government. Not a day passed
without demonstrations of strength by the Awami Leaguers in the form of large
processions and meetings where firearms were brandished. Quite a few non-
Bengali young men ware manhandled and the shops owned by non-Bengalis
were looted.
In the last week of March and early in April, the xenophobia against the non-
Bengalis reached a fever-heat pitch. The non-Bengali residents of the Railway
Colony became a target of terrorisation. Almost all of them were Railway
employees and their families. The all-out massacre of the non-Bengalis in this
residential colony took place on April 9, 1971; more than 2,000 of them were
done to death. This was just before the federal troops regained control over
Paksey on April 10.
Abu Mohammed, 52, a Railway employee who lived in the Railway Colony and
whose family of seven was butchered in the carnage, related this account of the
macabre tragedy in his life:
“A killer mob of Awami League militanrs and Bengali rebels, blazing sten guns
and rifles, attacked the Paksey Railway Station and the residential colony of the
Railway employees in the last week of March. They lined up all the non-Bengali
railway employees in the Paksey Railway Yard and gunned them to death. I was
on duty at that time and I was injured in my left arm by a bullet. I fell down and
I feigned death. I bled profusely and was in acute pain. The killers withdrew
from the Railway Station in the afternoon and raided the residential colony on
“Operation Loot, Burn and Kill “. I heard prolonged bursts of machine-gunfire.
“My quarter was at some distance but a mosque, where I often prayed, was
nearby. Shortly after midnight, I succeeded in crawling to the mosque. There was
not a flicker of light anywhere. As I limped into the mosque, I saw in the
darkness the forms of women huddled on the floor. Many of them were almost
naked. “We had enough of hell; please kill us now “, said one of them, thinking
that I was one of the Bengali rapists. When I disclosed my identity in a whisper,

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
120
they sighed and sobbed out the details of the slaughter of their menfolk, of their
own kidnapping and of their rape by the Bengali rebels.
“Before being dumped in the mosque “, one of them said, “our clothes were
stripped and we were marched in the nude to a school building where our
captors ravished us. Late at night we were left in this mosque. The dead bodies
of two teenage girls who made a daring escape bid on the way here are lying in
the compound “. In this melee of weeping, ravished women were the innocent
daughters and wives of many of my colleagues in the Railway.
“The next morning, the rebels retreated and a unit of the Pakistan Army
liberated Paksey. They rescued us; I was treated in hospital. All my family
members had perished in the killing. The women and children, who survived the
slaughter of the non-Bengalis, were taken to a Relief Camp in Dacca “.
Subsequently, Abu Mohammad was transferred to Dacca. He was repatriated to
Karachi in February 1974.
Shamsuzzoha, who had witnessed the killings in Ishurdi in March 1971, also
spoke of the massacre of non-Bengalis in Paksey, eight miles from where he lived:
“My first cousin, Jamal Malik, was employed as a Guard in the East Pakistan
Railway at Paksey. His family of 12 lived in a quarter in the Railway colony.
Jamal and all his ralatives were killed in the third week of March, 1971. Some of
the men were gunned to death in the quarter itself; others, including some aged
men, young women and children, were marched to a school building with the
promise that they would be lodged there and their lives spared. On the fateful
day, the rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles riddled them with machine-gunfire in
the compound of the school. An hour before the massacre, the captive young
women were taken at gunpoint to another school building where they were
ravished by the rebels. Before the rebels retreated, they herded many of these
raped women in a mosque. They were freed by the federal Army “.
Fifteen years old, Mohammed Qayum, whose parents and elder sister were
brutally killed in the massacre of non-Bengalis in Paksey on April 9, 1971, thus
related the story of that ghastly episode in these words: “Early in the morning, a
killer mob, yelling ‘Joi Bangla’ attacked the Railway colony where we lived. They
looted our houses and at gunpoint they marched us to an old school building at
some distance from our colony. Herded in this school were hundreds of other
men, women and children from the Railway colony. Our captors had given us
the false promise that our lives would be spared.
“Late in the afternoon, our captors, brandishing guns, daggers and spears, lined
up all their adult male captives. They were driven in two’s to a corner of the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
121
compound where, before our dazed eyes, these hapless men were stabbed with
daggers (Ramdaos) and then shot. My mother and my elder sister could not
restrain
themselves
when
our
captors
dragged
my
father
towards
the
executioners. Seated in my memory is that deathly scene when two gunmen
opened fire on my mother and my elder sister and chopped up the chest of my
father before snuffing out the life in him with a rifle shot. With me stood my 8-
year-old sister. Just then there was a stampede when some of the men prisoners
attacked the captors with their bare hands.
“In front of me was a deserted house; a part of it was burnt. I picked up my
crying sister in my arms and rushed into this house. With bated breath, we hid
ourselves under a burnt mattress in a room full of debris. We stayed in this
spookish house for 24 hours. When my little sister started crying because of thirst
and hunger, we tiptoed into a nearby field, drank some water, and sought refuge
at night in the bushy woods on the far end of the paddy field. We ate wild fruits
and slept on a bed of leaves. The next day, we were rescued by the Pakistan
Army soldiers. They took us to Ishurdi where we lived with other orphaned
children in a house. I worked as a day labourer and earned enough to feed
myself and my sister. We underwent fresh travail when Ishurdi was occupied by
the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini late in December 1971. We were
repatriated to Karachi in January 1974. “

