Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
42
spreading poison against West Pakistanis in the minds of the simple
Bengali common folks of East Pakistan.
“After March 3, 1971, I found that the Awami League’s campaign to
foster hatred for non-Bengalis amongst the Bengalis had made its impact
and many of my Bengali friends in the jute trade were critical of us.
“On March 17, the volcano erupted, and a large killer gang, led by the
Awami League militants, went on the rampage in the premises of the
Ispahani Jute Company. They slaughtered many hundreds of non-
Bengalis, including women and children, living in the Ispahani Colony,
and flung the dead bodies into the Sitalakhya River. I was saved because I
went into hiding inside a closed office building to which I had access.“

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
43
CHAPTER THREE
Human Abattoirs in Chittagong
The Awami League’s rebellion of March 1971 took the heaviest toll of non-
Bengali lives in the populous port city of Chittagong. Although the Government
of Pakistan’s White Paper of August 1971 on the East Pakistan crisis estimated
the non-Bengali death toll in Chittagong and its neighbouring townships during
the Awami League’s insurrection to be a little under 15,000, the testimony of
hundreds of eye-witnesses interviewed for this book gives the impression that
more than 50,000 non-Bengalis perished in the March 1971 carnage. Thousands
of dead bodies were flung into the Karnaphuli river and the Bay of Bengal. Many
of those innocents who were tortured and killed in the seventeen slaughter-
houses set up by the Bengali rebels in the city and its vicinity were incinerated in
houses put to the torch.
The target of the Bengali rebels, it seemed, was to wipe out every non-Bengali
male above 12 years of age. Along with the massacre of the non-Bengali menfolk,
many of their women and children, spared in the first phase of the pogrom, were
done to death by the Bengali rebels in the last days of March and the first week of
April 1971. The element of savagery in the mass slaughter in Chittagong was
perhaps far more vicious than at any other place in the province, possibly with
the exception of Khulna, Jessore, Dinajpur and Mymensingh.
The volcano of fire and death erupted in this picturesque city of green hills,
rivers and luxuriant tropical vegetation on March 3 soon after the Awami
League’s high command in Dacca took to the path of rebellion. Late at night, a
violent mob, led by gun-totting Awami League storm troopers, invaded the non-
Bengali settlements in the city and looted and burnt thousands of houses and
hutments. The populous Wireless Colony and Ferozeshah Colony bore the brunt
of the rebel attack. In the latter locality alone, 700 houses were set ablaze and
most of their inmates—men, women and children—were burnt to death. Many,
who escaped from their blazing houses, were shot in their tracks by the rebel
gunmen.
Stray survivors of this wanton massacre described the gory spectacle of fire and
destruction as “hell on earth“. Affluent non-Bengalis were kidnapped for ransom
and subsequently tortured and killed in slaughter-houses. Eye-witnesses said
that a high-ranking member of the Awami League High Command, M. R.
Siddiki, master-minded and supervised the grisly massacre of the non-Bengalis
in Chittagong. After the March 3 nocturnal baptism of fire, the rebels felt

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
44
emboldened to attack other non-Bengali habitations in the city. Killer gangs
looted and burnt hundreds of non-Bengali houses in Raufabad, Halishahar,
Dotala, Kalurghat, Hamzabad, and Pahartali localities. Non-Bengali men,
kidnapped from their houses, were taken by the rebels to slaughter-houses and
done to death.
All through the first fortnight of March, the process of phased liquidation of the
non-Bengali male population was continued in Chittagong and its neighbouring
areas. The Awami League leadership trained its volunteers in the use of firearms,
some looted from arms shops and the police armoury and many smuggled from
India. The Army and Navy personnel had instructions not to shoot unless they
were attacked; the local police had become ineffective. Thus the law and order
machinery in Chittagong was totally paralysed. The civic fire fighting unit,
manned mostly by Bengalis, had lapsed into a coma; fire engines which tried to
reach the burning shanties were wrecked by the rebels.
In the third week of March, the terror regime of the rebels in Chittagong was so
firmly established that they challenged even the military personnel in the area.
Late in the night of March 18, armed killer gangs went on the rampage in every
residential colony where non-Bengalis lived. For many thousands of non-
Bengalis, it was “the night of long knives and blazing guns“. Killer gangs burst
into homes, asked no questions and sprayed gunfire on the inmates.
“Shoot
anything that moves in the house of a non-Bengali“ was the order to the killer
gangs and they observed it with sadist devotion.
On March 23, Pakistan’s National Festival Day which the Awami League
renamed as “Resistance Day “, the rebels held massive displays of their strength,
tore up the Pakistan flag at a number of places and again went on the rampage
against non-Bengalis at night. The Awami League storm troopers were
reinforced by the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles, the para-military Ansars
and the local police. The rebels were well-armed and appeared to have a surfeit
of ammunition supply. On March 25, the rebels went on the warpath against
Army and Navy personnel in Chittagong’s port area and tried to block all the
access roads leading to the city. They erected huge barricades on the highway
from the suburban locality of Agrabad to the Port area of Chittagong to prevent
the transport of military personnel and arms to the Army cantonment. They dug
trenches on the main road, and piled up burnt trucks and lorries and bitumen
drums all along the highway to block vehicular traffic. Warehoused munition in
the Port area was looted by the rebels. Bengali troops from the East Bengal
Regiment mutinied and joined the rebel force. This was the zero-hour setting for
the Awami League’s armed uprising and total seizure of the cantonments in
Chittagong and Dacca planned for March 26.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
45
In a pre-emptive strike late in the night of March 25 in Dacca and other
important towns in East Pakistan, the federal troops went into action against the
rebels. But the federal military force in the province was too inadequate to
contain swiftly the challenge and revolt of the more than 176,000 armed Bengali
rebels. At many places, it took from a week to a month for the federal army to
retrieve the rebel-controlled areas. In Chittagong, the federal troops regained
control over strategic parts of the city, such as the Port and the Airport, swiftly
but a large number of residential localities remained under the terror rule of the
rebel gunmen till April 9, 1971. In this period of hell and fire, many more
thousands
of
non-Bengalis
were
butchered
en
masse.
The
operational
headquarter of the rebels was located at the East Bengal Regimental Centre in
Chittagong and the principal human abattoir was housed in the main town office
of the Awami League. It had torture cells and a chamber of horror where blood
was drained through syringes from the bodies of non-Bengali victims before they
were killed by their inhuman captors.
The killing of the non-Bengali employees and their families in the Usmania Glass
Works, Hafiz Jute Mill, Ispahani Jute Mill and other factories in Chittagong and
the Amin Jute Mills at Bibirhat and the Karnaphuli Paper and Rayon Mills at
Chandraghona and its neighbourhood surpassed the savagery of the Huns. Most
of the massacres at these places were conducted by the rebels in the last five days
of March and some early in April 1971. In many localities, there were hardly any
non-Bengali survivors—so thorough and complete was the racist pogrom of the
rebels.
In the notorious slaughter-house in the Government Rest House in Chittagong,
about 4,000 non-Bengalis were done to death. Blood was taken out of their bodies
and corneas were extracted from their eyes by Bengali doctors who had become
the tools of the rebels. The corpses were dumped in hurriedly-dug, shallow pits.
Any victim who showed signs of life was shot in the skull.
The Awami League militants had compelled some Bengali Imams (priests) in the
Mosques to decree the killing of the Biharis as a religious duty of the Bengali
Muslims. In a mosque, near the office of the Chittagong Fire Brigade, half a
dozen non-Bengalis, who had been kidnapped from their homes by killer gangs,
were murdered.
In the Kalurghat industrial area, some 5,000 non-Bengalis, including 300 women,
were butchered by the Bengali rebels. Not more than a score of non-Bengalis
survived the Kalurghat massacre. The non-Bengali women were raped by their
captors — some on the roads in broad daylight—before being shot.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
46
Savage killings also took place in the Halishahar, Kalurghat and Pahartali
localities where the Bengali rebel soldiers poured petrol and kerosene oil around
entire blocks, igniting them with flame-throwers and petrol-soaked jute balls,
then mowed down the non-Bengali innocents trying to escape the cordons of fire.
In the wanton slaughter in the last week of March and early April, 1971, some
40,000 non-Bengalis perished in Chittagong and its neighbourhood. The exact
death toll— which could possibly be much more — will never be known because
of the practice of burning dead bodies or dumping them in the river and the sea.
Many of the rampaging rebels were Hindus who desecrated Mosques and
Muslim shrines and burnt copies of the Holy Quran.
Eye-witnesses, interviewed for this book, described M.R. Siddiki, a director of
the genocide operation against non-Bengalis, as the “Butcher of Chittagong“.
They charged that the slayings in the human abattoir in the Awami Leagued
main town office were conducted under his personal command.
“Kill the
bastards“ was his order of the day to his hatchetmen for murdering the non-
Bengali innocents. As the rebel casualties mounted in engagements with the
federal troops and the Bengali doctors asked for more blood for transfusion, M.R.
Siddiki ordered his men to drain out blood from their non-Bengali victims in the
slaughter-house before slaying them. He even suggested limb-grafting from non-
Bengali victims to disabled Bengali rebels. Piled up dead bodies in the slaughter-
houses, in the last days of March, 1971, were flung into pits and covered with
mud, rubble and foliage.
As the rebels felt the crunch of the federal army and retreated, they massacred,
with automatic weapons, many hundreds of helpless women and children who
were herded and starved for days in mosques and school buildings. Aside from
the wholesale abridgement of the male element in the non-Bengali population in
Chittagong, several thousands of non Bengali girls and young women (14 to 30
years of age) were kidnapped by the rebels and ravished, some in mass sex
assault chambers in guarded houses in the vicinity of the operational bases of the
Bengali rebels. Sadists among the rebels took pleasure in forcing captive non-
Bengali mothers to see the slaying of their sons or husbands.
After the federal army liberated Chittagong from the demonic rule of the rebels,
the non-Bengali survivors resumed the broken threads of their lives and repaired
their burnt out and devastated houses. But on December 17, 1971, their shattered
world collapsed when the victorious Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini seized
East Pakistan. Many thousands of non-Bengalis were killed, their families were
driven out of their repaired homes and the survivors were herded in Relief
Camps set up by the Red Cross.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
47
The Washington Evening Star reported on May 12, 1971 the following story from
Mort Resenblum who was one of the six foreign newsmen who toured East
Pakistan early in May 1971:
“In the port city of Chittagong, a blood-spattered doll lies in a heap of clothing
and excrement in a jute mill recreation club where Bengalis butchered 180
women and children Bengalis killed some West Pakistanis in flurries of
chauvinism. Bengali civilians and liberation troops began mass slaughter of
Mohajirs (Indian migrants) from the Indian State of Bihar and raced through
market places and settlements, stabbing, shooting and burning, sometimes
stopping to rape and loot.“
The Washington Evening Star, in its May 12, 1971 issue, also carried the
following despatch of the Associated Press of America wire service:
“Newsmen visiting this key port yesterday said there was massive shell and fire
damage and evidence of sweeping massacre of civilians by rebels.
“At the jute mills owned by the influential Ispahani family, newsmen saw the
mass graves of 152 non-Bengali women and children reportedly executed last
month by secessionist rebels in the Mills’ recreation club.
“Bloody clothing and toys were still on the floor of the bullet pocked Club.
Responsible sources said thousands of West Pakistanis and Indian migrants
(Muslims settled in East Pakistan since 1947) were put to death in Chittagong
between March 25, when the East Pakistan rebellion began to seek independence
from the Western Wing, and April 11 when the Army recaptured the city.
“Residents pointed to one burned out department building where they said
Bengalis burned to death three hundred and fifty Pathans from West Pakistan“.
In a despatch from Chittagong, Malcolm Browne of the New York Times
reported on May 10, 1971:
“But before the Army came, when Chittagong was still governed by the
secessionist Awami League and its allies, Bengali workers, apparently resentful
of the relative prosperity of Bihari immigrants from India, are said to have killed
the Biharis in large numbers.“
The Sunday Times of London published in its issue of May 2, 1971 a dispatch
from its Pakistan Correspondent, Anthony Mascarenhas, who had toured the
rebellion-hit areas of East Pakistan in the first fortnight of April, 1971. He
reported:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
48
“In Chittagong, the colonel commanding the Military Academy was killed while
his wife, eight months’ pregnant, was raped and bayoneted in the abdomen. In
another part of Chittagong, an East Pakistan Rifles Officer was flayed alive. His
two sons were beheaded and his wife was bayoneted in the abdomen and left to
die with her son’s head placed on her naked body. The bodies of many young
girls have been found with Bangladesh flagsticks protruding from their wombs
“The worst-affected towns were Chittagong and Khulna where the West
Pakistanis were concentrated.“
The “Northern Echo“ of Darlington in Durham, in its issue of April 7, 1971, said:
“Leon Lumsden, an American engineer on a U.S. aid project, said that for two
weeks before the Army moved last week, Chittagong’s predominantly Bengali
population had been but cheering West Pakistanis in the port.“
Some 5,000 non-Bengali refugees from the Awami League’s terror in Chittagong,
who arrived in Karachi on board a ship in the third week of March 1971, related
harrowing stories of the genocide launched against the non-Bengalis. The federal
government prohibited their publication in the West Pakistan Press to prevent
reprisals against the local Bengalis.
Mohammed Israil, 40, who lived in Quarter No. 28 in the Ispahani New Colony
in the Pahartali locality in Chittagong, lost his sister, his brother-in-law and his
infant nephew in the massacre of non-Bengalis on March 3, 1971. He thus spoke
of the tragedy which almost wrecked his life:
“We had lived in Chittagong for the past many years and all of us spoke Bengali.
I was engaged in business and I lived with my sister and her husband in their
house in Pahartali.
“In the afternoon of March 3, about five thousand Bengali demonstrators, led by
Awami League militants, attacked the Ispahani Colony where non-Bengalis lived
in large numbers. The raiders bore blazing torches and some had guns. Without
any provocation from our side, the killer mob went on the rampage. They
poured kerosene oil and petrol on houses and set them ablaze. As the inmates
rushed out, the killer gang mowed them with gunfire.
“A gang of ten armed rebels smashed the door of our house and burst in with
blazing guns. They shot my brother-in-law who died on the spot. I was wounded
and I feigned death. My sister, who grappled with the attackers, was bayoneted.
The killers tore her suckling child from her arms and shot him just as she lay in
her death agony. Later on, the killers looted our house and set it ablaze. I
succeeded in crawling into the compound where I stayed in hiding for some

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
49
days. The killer gang burnt every house in this colony of about 2,000 non-
Bengalis. They hurled many of the dead bodies into the blazing houses..... “
Mohammed Israil underwent fresh ordeals after December 17, 1971 when India
seized East Pakistan. In December 1973, he was repatriated to Karachi.
“Some decent Bengalis were shocked at the heinous conduct of the Awami
League gangs and their wanton murder of non-Bengalis but they were helpless.
The killers had the guns,“ said Mohammed Israil.
“The success of the Awami League gangs in their murderous spree of March 3
gave them encouragement and convinced them that they would not encounter
any opposition from the police and the army in their plan to exterminate the non-
Bengalis “, he added.
Noor Mohammed Siddiqui, 23, who lived with his patents in a rented house in
the Ferozshah Colony in Chittagong, had this poignant recollection of the March
3, 1971 massacre there:
“In the forenoon of March 3, about 5,000 armed and yelling Awami League
activists and their supporters raided the Ferozshah Colony. With them were
some armed rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles. They wore their usual on-duty
uniforms. Without any provocation from the non-Bengalis, the raiding mob went
berserk. The Awami league militants looted hundreds of houses and burnt them
by sprinkling a mixture of petrol and kerosene oil. As the inmates ran out, the
killer gangs shot them at point blank range. It was God’s mercy that I escaped
their murderous onslaught.
“I hid myself in a store room when the attackers came. When I emerged from
hiding, I saw many hundreds of burnt houses in our locality. The stench of
burning flesh pervaded the locality. Some of the victims, who were thought to be
dead by the killers, writhed in agony and relief took long to come. The police had
vanished. Killer gangs were again on the loose in our locality all through the next
day. Many non-Bengalis who tried to escape from this blazing inferno of a colony
were done to death on the roads outside. At night, the killers kidnapped many
non-Bengali girls and raped them in houses whose inmates were murdered.
Many children were tossed into houses aflame and their mothers were forced at
gunpoint to watch the gruesome scene. In two days of terror and fire, Ferozeshah
Colony looked like an atom-bombed township.“
Noor Mohammad lost most of his relatives in the March 1971 massacres in East
Pakistan. In April, 1971, he left Chittagong and came to Karachi.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
50
“The scenes of that dreadful month are scared in my memory. Whole groups of
adult people, it seemed, had gone mad with the urge to kill, burn, loot and rape.
All the victims of this bloodlust were non-Bengalis. Some pro-Pakistan Bengalis,
who tried to save their non-Bengali friends, were severely punished and even
done to death“, said Noor Mohammad.
Forty-year-old Sharifan, whose two adult sons and husband were slaughtered
before her dazed eyes on March 3, 1971, had this painful memory:
“My husband, Shamsul Haque, who was employed in a trading firm in
Chittagong, my two grown-up sons and I lived in a hut in the Latifabad locality
in Chittagong. On March 3, a violent mob of Bengalis attacked the non-Bengali
hutments and houses in our locality. They set hundreds of huts and houses
ablaze. They either shot the non-Bengali men or took them away in trucks as
captives. Some non-Bengalis, who tried to escape from their burning houses,
were mowed with rifle-fire; many perished in the conflagration.“
“A killer gang looted my hut and then set it ablaze. As we ran out, one of the
killers opened fire on us. My two sons were injured. My husband and I were
utterly helpless; I tore my Sari to bandage their wounds but in about ten minutes’
time they were cold and dead. Wailing in anguish, we sought shelter in the
mosque nearby. My husband, who was heart-broken, kneeled in prayer to the
Almighty God. I washed the stains of my sons’ blood from my torn Sari. Just
then there was a loud yelling and a killer mob swarmed into the mosque. They
said they would kill all the non-Bengali men sheltered in the mosque. I fell on my
knees and begged them to spare our menfolk as most of them were advanced in
age. One of the attackers struck me with his boot. There was a rifle shot and, to
my horror, I saw my loving husband falling to the ground as blood gushed from
his chest. I fainted and remained unconscious for some hours.
“The women in the mosque, whose dear ones had been shot and killed, moved
their dead bodies to a corner in the compound of the mosque, made sheets from
their Saris and covered up the corpses. We had no axe or shovel with which we
could dig graves for our dead. We lived in the mosque in tears, fear and terror
for more than three weeks. Late in March, the federal troops lodged us in a Relief
Camp in a school building. After the Indian occupation of East Pakistan in
December 1971, the Mukti Bahini harassed us but the Red Cross saved and
helped us. We were repatriated to Karachi in February 1974 “.
Syed Sami Ahmed, 37, the lone survivor of a family of eight members, gave this
grisly description of the slaughter in the Halishahar locality in Chittagong on
March 23, 1971:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
51
“About 4,000 Awami Leaguers, rebel soldiers and other miscreants attacked the
non-Bengali houses in Halishahar in the forenoon of March 23. I was away from
my house on work in another part of the city. The killer gangs looted my house
and killed, with machine gunfire, my wife, my four little children, my teenage
sister-in-law and my 13-year-old brother. The raiders burnt a part of my house.
Not more than 15 per cent of the non-Bengali population in this locality survived
the massacres on March 23, 25 and 27, 1971. The slaughterers used to tell their
victims that they would not leave any Bihari alive. By Bihari, they meant any
non-Bengali Muslim. Amongst the killers were many Hindus. They had plenty of
arms and ammunition.“
After the federal troops secured Chittagong, Sami Ahmed lived for some months
in his partly burnt house in Block No. I-193 in the Halishahar locality in
Chittagong. After India’s seizure of East Pakistan in the third week of December
1971, the Mukti Bahini and the Awami Leaguers slaughtered more non-Bengalis.
He was repatriated to Karachi in November 1973.
Mohammed Nabi Jan, 20, who witnessed the massacre of non-Bengalis in the
populous Wireless Colony in Chittagong on March 26, 1971, and lay wounded
for three days in a mound of dead bodies, narrated his weird, story in these
words:
“Large clusters of non-Bengali houses had existed in the Wireless Colony for
many years past. In the second week of March 1971, armed bands of Awami
leaguers marked every non-Bengali house with a red sign. As they had set up a
Peace Committee, in whose meetings they solemnly pledged that they would not
harm the non-Bengalis, we were not unduly alarmed. From time to time, the
Awami League volunteers extorted money from us. We had learnt of the Awami
Leaguers’ attacks on non-Bengalis in some other parts of the city and we were
getting worried. My father and my elder brother wanted us to leave Chittagong
but all the escape routes were blocked by the rebels, so we were resigned to our
fate. We had no guns with us; we were defenceless
“In the night of March 26, at about 9 o’clock, a huge mob of Bengalis, with
blazing guns, attacked the houses of non-Bengalis in the Wireless Colony. They
had no difficulty in identifying their houses as they were red-marked a few days
earlier. The killer mob divided itself into groups and went on the rampage. Many
of the killers were uniformed Bengali defectors from the East Bengal Regiment
and the rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles. They broke into houses, asked no
questions and sprayed gunfire on the inmates. After they had killed everything
that moved, they looted the houses and stole articles of value from even dead
bodies.

