Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
62
Salma Khatoon, 35, whose husband worked as a tailor in the Raufabad locality of
Chittagong, testified that a killer gang of rebels attacked her house at night on
March 25, 1971 and slaughtered her husband. Ali Raza, his younger brother and
her nephew. The raiders looted every article of value in her house and set it
ablaze. She said:
“The raiders were mad killers. They said they had orders to kill every male non-
Bengali. We are sparing you, they said, so that in the near future we can employ
you as a domestic servant in our homes. After two and a half years of miserable
life, my children and I were repatriated to Pakistan in February 1974 “.
Fatema Begum, 40, who lived with her husband, Abdur Rahman, a businessman,
in a house in Raufabad in Chittagong, reported that a gang of armed Bengali
rebels raided her house on March 25, 1971, and killed her husband. They looted
her house and trucked away all the loot. Fatema said:
“Murder and loot were the principal motives of the aimed rebels when they
raided the homes of non-Bengails. The killers followed a set pattern in their
“Operation Loot, Burn and Kill “ in Chittagong. The vast majority of the adult
male non-Bengalis was eliminated by the rebels in a month of ruthless killing.....
“
Fatema and her children were repatriated to Karachi from Chittagong in
February 1974. They had spent nearly two and a quarter years in a Red Cross
Relief Camp in Chittagong. She said:
“Hundreds of teenage girls were kidnapped from our locality by the Bengali
rebels. We found no trace of them after the rebels retreated. There were reports
that the killers violated their chastity, murdered them and threw their bodies into
the Karnaphuli river “.
Sayeeda Begum, 55, whose husband, Maqbool Ahmed Khan, was employed in
the East Pakistan Railway at Chittagong, lived in an apartment in “C “ Building
(Number 21) in the Ferozeshah Colony in Chittagong. After her repatriation to
Pakistan in February 1974, Sayeeda testified:
“The Bengali rebels made their first raid on our colony on March 3. They burnt
and looted a number of houses owned by non-Bengalis and kidnapped a number
of non-Bengali menfolk . “
“On March 25, a gang of armed rebels smashed the front door of our flat and
overpowered my husband. They fastened him with ropes and dragged him

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
63
outside the building. Our neighbours were helpless because their men were also
being kidnapped in a similar manner. The Bengali rebels looted my house and
carried away all the booty in a truck.
“On April 9, when the federal army came to our help, I scoured every nook and
corner of Chittagong to trace out my husband but there was no sign of him. I
learnt that the rebels had taken all their victims from our locality to a
slaughterhouse where they were done to death and their dead bodies were
thrown into the Karnaphuli river. The Mukti Bahini drove me out of my house
after its occupation of Chittagong in December 1971. My only son and I lived in a
camp set up by the Red Cross in Chittagong for two years. “
Sayeeda Khatoon, 34, whose husband, Bafati Hussain, was employed as a
Watchman at the Chittagong Port Trust, lived in Quarter No. 594 on Road No. 1
in Block A in the Halishahar locality in Chittagong. Repatriated to Karachi in
January 1974, she said:
“On March 5, a killer gang stole into our house. At gunpoint, they tied my father
and my elder brother with ropes and carted them away in a truck. They looted
my house and carried all the loot with them.
“In the afternoon, a Bengali boy, who had known our family, brought me the
shocking news that the rebels had murdered my father and my brother and
thrown their bodies into the river. When the Pakistan Army re-occupied
Chittagong, I brought my aged mother from her gutted house to our home. My
husband had survived the slaughter in the Port area.
“After the Indian victory in December 1971, the Mukti Bahini went on the
rampage against non-Bengalis, looting and killing. We survived the carnage. In
November 1972, my husband died after a short illness. We had no money left for
medicines, and proper medical treatment for the non-Bengalis in the hospitals
was difficult to get. “
Zainab Bibi, 55, who lived with her two teenage sons in Quarter No. 111 in
Raufabad in Chittagong, thus narrated the story of the murder of her dear ones
by the Bengali rebels in March 1971:
“On March 3, when the first raid on the houses of non-Bengalis was conducted
by the Bengali rebels in Chittagong, my two sons and I escaped into the nearby
woods and we spent the night there.
“On March 25, a large killer gang again raided our Colony. They came so
suddenly that we had no time to escape. I made my two sons slip under the cot

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
64
which had a mattress over it. The killers knew that I was a widow and that I had
two sons. They had made inquiries about my household before the raid. They
looted my house and took away even the rice in the kitchen. Just when they were
leaving, they remembered the mattress on my cot and one of them rushed inside
to pick it up. He spotted my two sons cowering in fear under the cot. He yelled
and the killer gang rushed in again. One of them slapped and kicked me for
hiding my two sons and said that they would be shot before me. I fell down on
their feet and begged them to spare my beloved sons. But the killers had become
savages. They lined up my two sons against the wall and shot them at point
blank range. I rushed towards them and the killers bashed my head with a rifle
butt. I lost consciousness.
“I woke up in a hospital. The federal Army had taken me there for treatment. I
refused to go back to my house; I was mentally upset. The dreadful scene of the
slaughter of my two sons haunted me day and night. I was lodged in a Relief
Camp. After the Indians and the Mukti Bahini occupied Chittagong in December
1971, the non-Bengalis were subjected to a fresh bloodbath by the vicious victors.
I have no relatives left in the world. In February 1974, I was repatriated to
Karachi. I no longer live in constant fear of the brutes who killed my loving sons
but I have lost the zest for life and I await a date with my Maker. “
Hasina Khatoon, 25, whose husband, Mohammed Yasin, was employed in the
Amin Jute Mills in Chittagong, lived in a rented house in the Sholashahar locality
in Chittagong. They had escaped the March 1971 massacre of non-Bengalis by
running off into the forest in the nick of time. After the Indian Army and the
Mukti Bahini occupied Chittagong in the third week of December 1971, a killer
gang raided their locality. They again tried to escape but her husband was hit in
the leg by bullets. As Hasina leaned over to help her husband to rise and walk,
her 4-month-old daughter slipped from her arm and hit the ground, head first.
She massaged the child’s head and heart but tile baby died on the road. While
her husband writhed in pain, she dug a shallow grave and buried her child.
Repatriated to Karachi from Chittagong in February, 1974, she said:
“A God-fearing Bengali saw our plight and came to our rescue. He took my
wounded husband to the main hospital and pleaded with the Bengali doctors to
admit him for treatment. It seemed they were reluctant to do so because he was a
Bihari. Medical treatment improved his condition. I took up employment in a
home and gave him my earnings for the purchase of medicine. On February 6,
1972, when I went to see him in the Hospital I was told that he was dead. I learnt
that some Bihari patients had died in the hospital for want of proper attention
and care. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
65
Hasina lived in a Red Cross Camp in Chittagong for two years and was
repatriated to Pakistan in February, 1974.
Batoolan, 40, whose husband was employed in the Amin Jute Mills in Chittagong
and who lived in the Bibirhat locality, said:
“On March 25, a killer gang of Bengali rebels drove us out of our house at
gunpoint. They looted it and then set it ablaze. The killers said that there was no
place for us in East Pakistan. When our house was reduced to a rubble, my
husband, Mohamed Mustafa, my little daughter and I sought refuge in a Mosque.
Another gang of killers raided this House of God. When they were grappling
with my husband in order to tie him up with ropes, I tried to snatch a gun from
one of the killers. He struck me with a bayonet and my arm bled profusely. The
killers dragged my husband to a waiting truck outside the mosque and sped
away to what I learnt was a human abattoir set up by the Bengali rebels for
murdering the non-Bengali men. My little daughter and I lived in the Mosque for
a week; we starved for days. We were rescued by the Pakistan Army. We were
later on lodged in a Relief Camp. “
Batoolan and her daughter were repatriated to Karachi in February 1974.
“March 25, 1971 was the horrible day on which I was widowed by the Bengali
rebels “, said 30-year-old Zaibunnissa who lived in the Ferozeshah Colony in
Chittagong. Her husband, Akhtar Hussain, was employed as a clerk in the
Ispahani tea company in Chittagong. Repatriated to Karachi with her three
children in February 1974, Zaibunnissa said:
“Our colony was raided intermittently by the Bengali rebels since March 3, 1971
but we had escaped the killers. On March 25, a large killer gang attacked our
locality and looted hundreds of homes and burnt many. They looted my house
and trucked away all the valuables which we had gathered over the years. They
tied up my husband with ropes and took him away in a truck. I learnt that the
Bengali rebels, in their March 25 raid, kidnapped non-Bengali men by the
hundreds. Those who tried to escape were shot. The rebels, I was told, took my
husband to a slaughter-house where he, along with the other non-Bengali
captives, was butchered. After the Pakistani troops re-occupied Chittagong, I
visited jails and the buildings where the rebels had set up the human abattoirs
but I could find no trace of my husband. The rebels usually threw the dead
bodies of their victims in the Karnaphuli river. “
“I lost consciousness as I saw, in utter helplessness, the throat of my husband
being slit by a Bengali cutthroat on March 3, 1971 “, said 40- year old Mahila
Khatoon who was repatriated from Chittagong to Karachi with her two children

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
66
in February 1974. Mahila lived in a shack in the Wireless Colony in Chittagong.
She reported:
“My husband, Sheikh Amanat, was employed in the Amin Jute Mills in
Chittagong. On March 3, 1971, a huge mob of Bengali rebels, yelling “Joi Bangla
“, invaded our predominantly non-Bengali locality. They looted hundreds of
houses and burnt many of them. As the victims tried to escape from their blazing
houses, the rebels gunned them. A killer squad stormed my house; they stole
every article of value that we had. They overpowered my husband. I lunged at
one of the killers who was brandishing a large knife, ready for the ‘kill’. He
struck me on the head and I fell down. The next moment I saw him slashing the
throat of my helpless husband. I lost my senses and was unconscious. For three
months, I had frequent attacks of delirium. The Pakistan Army removed me and
my children to a camp in the Sardar Bahadur School. In February 1974, we were
repatriated to Karachi. “
“The Bengali rebels lined up all the non-Bengali men who had sought refuge in
the main Mosque of our locality on March 24, 1971 and mowed them with
machine gunfire. I fainted when I saw my husband, Nizamuddin, slump to the
ground in a pool of blood “, said Hamida, 30, who lived in the vicinity of the
Ferozeshah Colony in Chittagong. Her husband was employed in the East
Pakistan Railway at Chittagong. She was repatriated to Karachi in January 1974.
Hamida said:
“On March 23, 1971, a violent mob raided our locality. They looted and burnt
hundreds of houses. My house was also looted and put to the torch by the rebels.
My husband and I succeeded in escaping to a nearby Mosque. There were many
other terrorised non-Bengali families sheltered in the Mosque. At night, we saw
the flames leaping from what until yesterday was a populous, smiling settlement
“On January 8, 1972, my husband was ill. He left the house in order to go to the
Hospital for treatment. On the way, he was waylaid by a Mukti Bahini gang
which gunned him to death. At night, I left my house in search of him. Some
Bengalis who had known us told me that they had seen a dead body lying in a
ditch a furlong away. I ran towards it. Inside the pit lay the bullet-riddled body
of my husband. I felt like killing myself but the thought of my children made me
live on. “
Sanjeeda Khatoon, 35, whose husband worked in the Electric Supply office in
Chittagong, lived in a small house in the Halishahar locality in Chittagong.
Repatriated to Karachi in January 1974, Sanjeeda gave this pathetic account of the
murder of her husband by the Bengali rebels in March 1971:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
67
“Panic-stricken by the gruesome slaughter conducted by the rebels in non-
Bengali settlements in Chittagong since March 3, about 250 non-Bengali men,
women and children of our locality took refuge in a large walled building. My
husband and I and our three children were in this building. Our house was
looted and burnt by the rebels in the course of raids on our locality in the past
few weeks.
“On March 27, about 500 armed rebels, some brandishing machine guns,
stormed our building. We were defenceless; we did not have even a kitchen knife.
Resistance was out of question. The killers, aiming guns at us, told the menfolk
that if they wanted their women and children to live they should line up in the
compound of the building. The men kissed their children and said goodbye to
their wives, mothers and sisters. They were lined up in the compound and in less
than ten minutes the Bengali gunmen mowed them with bullets.
“The killer gang then led us to a godown which looked like a stinking dungeon.
There was filth all over the floor. We were herded inside it. I had lost the urge to
live because of the murder of my husband by the rebels in the building. My
children were starving. In this dungeon, even water was denied to us. I heard
one of the Bengali guards say that on the morrow they would burn us to death.
The killers had brought kerosene oil tins to burn the godown. At night, I slipped
my little son out of a window and asked him to unlock the main door of the
godown, which was bolted in the middle and not locked. The Bengali guards, it
seemed, had been drafted by the rebels to block the advance of the Pakistani
troops who had gone into action against the rebels. Our escape bid was
successful and we raced towards the main Hospital which had come under the
Army’s control. Many of us were almost naked because our Saris were torn in
the escape bid. The federal troops gave us clothes to wear. Some of us were
lodged in a Relief Camp. Others went to live with their relatives who had
survived the massacre. “
Eye-witnesses gave heart-rending accounts of the murder of non-Bengali
employees in the Usmania Glass Works on March 27, and in the Hafiz Jute Mills
and the Ispahani Jute Mills in Chittagong in March and April 1971. In the
slaughter in the Amin Jute Mills at Bibirhat, some 2000 non-Bengalis—members
of the staff and their families— were slaughtered. In the Usmania Glass Works,
almost all the West Pakistani staff members were butchered. In the Hafiz Jute
Mills, a killer mob looted and burnt the house of its non-Bengali Proprietor and
killed 150 non-Bengali employees and their families. In the Ispahani Jute Mills,
there were very few survivors of the slaughter of non-Bengalis. Stacks of
mutilated dead bodies of the hapless victims, whose blood had been drained out
before they were done to death, were found by the federal troops in the
Recreation Club for Mill workers which the rebels used as a human abattoir.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
68
Many other parts of the Chittagong Division were stricken by the Awami
League-instigated civil strife in March and April 1971. Witnesses said that the
slaying of non-Bengalis and the wanton looting of their property had taken place
in Nazirhat, Anwara, Dohazari, Kumira and Hathazari. When tension was
sparked off at these places in the middle of March, 1971, many non-Bengali
families fled to Chittagong city. In their absence, vandals looted their houses. A
few non-Bengali families in Cox’s Bazar were also the victims of genocidal
violence.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
69
CHAPTER FOUR
Massacres in Chandraghona , Rangamati
Wajihunnissa,
35,
whose
husband
was
employed
in
the
Central
Excise
Department and was posted at Chandraghona, gave this account of the March
1971 slaughter of non-Bengalis in her township:
“In the second week of March 1971, Awami League gangs visited the non-
Bengalis in our locality and assured them that no harm would touch them if they
surrendered their weapons. My husband, Maqsood Alam, who was an excellent
marksman, complied with their instructions and gave up his gun.
“In the third week of March, roving bands of armed Awami Leaguers terrorised
the non-Bengalis and extorted money from them. They had blocked all the
escape routes.
“On March 26, an armed group of Awami Leaguers called at our house and
ordered my husband to go with them to his office, I knew that it was a ruse and
that they were after the blood of my husband....
“On March 27, another killer gang raided my house. They told me and the three
brothers of my husband that the Deputy Commissioner of Rangamati had
instructed that we should be taken to his office to protect us. As we prepared to
go, the killers asked me at gunpoint to stay back. They roped my brothers-in-law
together and put them in a truck.
“In the afternoon, a huge mob of Bengali rebels raided our locality and looted
the houses of non-Bengalis. Our menfolk had been kidnapped. A killer gang
ransacked my house and looted everything, except the ceiling fans and
wardrobes. They drove the non-Bengali women and children, like cattle, to a
large compound where we were ordered to stay. For fifteen days we were
starved, and we prayed to God for help. On April 13, our captors learnt that the
Pakistani troops were marching towards Chandraghona. The rebels ordered us
to fall in line and we knew that they would open fire on us. Some of us tried to
break loose and there was a melee. All of a sudden a shell fell and burst a few
yards away from the compound where we were herded by our captors. We saw
in the far distance a company of Pakistani soldiers, waving the Green and
Crescent flag, racing towards us. Our cowardly captors took fright and
scampered like mice running away from a cat. The Pakistani troops gave us

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
70
water and food. They freed 200 non-Bengali women and children who were held
captive in another camp in Chandraghona. We learnt that all the non-Bengali
men who had been kidnapped by the rebels from Chandraghona were
slaughtered and dumped into the Karnaphuli river.
“The federal Army accommodated us in a Relief Camp in Chittagong. After the
Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini captured Chittagong in the third week of
March 1971, they unleashed death and destruction on the non-Bengalis. My little
daughter caught a chill in the wintery cold; no hospital was willing to treat the
child of a Bihari. She died in my arms. I was moved to a Red Cross Camp after
some days. In February 1974, was repatriated to Karachi. “
Witnesses from Chittagong said that in April 1971, the Bengali rebels looted the
Karnaphuli Paper and Rayon Mills and slaughtered the non-Bengali staff and
their families. Not many escaped the massacre. Hundreds of teenage girls,
kidnapped after their fathers or husbands had been murdered, were ravished by
their Bengali captors in houses used for mass slaughter and sex assault. It is
estimated that more than 5,000 non-Bengalis perished in the massacre in
Chandraghona in March-April 1971. This is far in excess of the initial figure of
3,000 dead given out by the Government in its August 1971 White Paper on the
East Pakistan crisis. Rebel soldiers of the East Bengal Regiment and the East
Pakistan Rifles looted all the cash from the Karnaphuli Paper and Rayon Mills
and spared the lives of some senior staff members after they paid them huge
sums of money as ransom.
RANGAMATI
Rangamati is a picturesque town situated in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. Forty-
five miles from Chittagong, it lies on the bank of the Karnaphuli River. In March-
April 1971, the Awami League’s rebellion engulfed it in the flames of conflict and
the non-Bengalis were exterminated by the hundreds. In April 1971, all the non-
Bengalis living in Rangamati were rounded up by armed gangs of rebels and
slaughtered before the federal Army arrived. The Circuit House in Rangamati,
which attracted tourists from far and wide, was used as the operational base by
the rebels from where they directed the campaign to liquidate the non-Bengalis
in Chandaraghona and Rangamati.
Abid Hussain, 34, who was employed in the Karnaphuli Paper and Rayon Mills,
lived in a small house in Rangamati because he could not get a staff quarter in
the Mill premises. Repatriated to Karachi with his wife in February 1974, he
testified:
“The first major incident in the Karnaphuli Paper and Rayon Mills occurred on
March 18 when Awami League militants incited the Bengali millhands to kill the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
71
non-Bengali staff and their families and occupy the Mill. Realising what lay in
store for us, I rushed to my house and, along with my wife; we took shelter in the
house of a God-fearing and trustworthy Bengali friend. “
“Roving bands of Awami Leaguers had terrorised the non-Bengalis in
Rangamati all through March 1971 and kidnapped many of the non-Bengali men
for slaughter. But in April 1971, the Bengali rebels rounded up all the non-
Bengalis, herded them in school buildings and gunned them to death before the
federal Army came “, he said.
“I had shifted to a friend’s house in Chittagong after the federal Army had
beaten the rebels. When I visited Rangamati again, there was hardly any non-
Bengali left “, he added.
Some escapees from the Awami League’s terror in Rangamati sought refuge in
the shacks of Chakma tribesmen in April 1971 and they trekked back to
Rangamati after the Pakistan Army had established control over it.
Witnesses said that the rebel gangs used to dump at night truck-loads of corpses
into the Karnaphuli river. Many of these dead bodies floated into the Bay of
Bengal and the crew and passengers on board foreign ships reported sighting
many bloated human corpses in the sea.

