Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
52
“A killer gang stormed our house and broke in with blazing guns. In a jiffy, I
saw my father and my elder brother fall to the ground in a pool of blood. A
bullet hit me in the thigh and I collapsed with a groan. They kidnapped my
sister-in-law at gun-point. I remained unconscious for nearly three days. When I
awoke, I found that my father, though badly wounded, was alive. My brother
was dead. In the afternoon, the federal troops arrived and we were treated in a
hospital. “
Nabi Jan, who lived in Quarter No. L-14, G in the Wireless Colony, believes that
more than 75 per cent of the non-Bengali population in the Wireless Colony was
exterminated by the rebels during the March 1971 killings. Many of the survivors
were done to death after India’s seizure of East Pakistan in December 1971. Nabi
Jan was repatriated to Pakistan in December 1973.
Osman Ghani, 50, was employed in the Chittagong Port Trust and lived in the
Bibirhat Colony in the Hamzabad locality in Chittagong. He gave this account of
the slaughter in his locality in the night of March 26, 1971 when his only son and
his elder brother were gunned to death:
“A huge mob of Awami League storm troopers, rebel soldiers and other
cutthroats—all armed with guns and some with machine guns— attacked the
non-Bengali houses in the Bibirhat Colony at about 10 p.m. on March 26. We had
lived in terror for many days but we had not expected such a ferocious attack
and in such huge numbers. We had no weapons with us. The Awami Leaguers
had red-marked our houses in the middle of the month. The raiders, firing their
guns, smashed into the houses of non-Bengalis and riddled all the male inmates
with bullets. A killer gang broke the door of my house and gunned my elder
brother. My wife tried to shield our 11-year-old son and begged the killers for
mercy but the brutes shot him with a sten gun. They struck my wife with a rifle-
butt on the head as she leaned over the writhing body of our dear little son. That
night I was held up in the Port area and escaped death by inches. My house was
inaccessible for three days. On March 29, when I went to my house, I cried in
horror over the extermination of my family by the Bengali rebels “.
Osman Ghani was repatriated to Pakistan in December 1973. In his view, the
rebels had started piling up arms for the planned armed uprising from the first
week of March and India was a source of arms supply.
Fahmida Begum, 36, whose husband, Ghulam Nabi, was employed in a trading
firm in Chittagong, saw the horrifying slaughter of her husband, her three sons
and a little daughter in their house in Halishahar in Chittagong on March 23,
1971. In a flurry of sobs and a burst of tears, she said:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
53
“The killer gang tore off the locked door of our house in the course of their full-
scale raid on our colony in the night of March 23. They machine-gunned my
husband who collapsed with blood streaming from his chest. When the butchers
turned their attention to my three young sons I grappled with the killers and
snatched one of their guns. I did not know how to operate it. Waspishly, a rebel
hit me on the head with his rifle and I fell down. They trussed me up with ropes
and said that they would slaughter my children before me. One by one, they
beheaded my three sons and kicked their severed heads. The killers bayoneted
my little daughter and I fainted in horror. Imprinted on my memory is that
dreadful scene—the terrorised look in the innocent eyes of my pretty little child,
her desperate attempt to run towards me as the sharp gleaming edge of the
bayonet touched her throat and her stifled groan of
“Ami Bachao “ (Mother,
Save me). God will certainly punish those killers; they were not men but beasts. “
Fahmida lived in a Relief Camp in Chittagong and was repatriated to Karachi in
February 1974.
Bashir Hussain, 47, who lived in a small house in Tajpara in the Halishahar
township in Chittagong, lost his two sons in the massacre of non-Bengalis in his
locality on March 25, 1971. He was severely wounded and the killers left him as
dead. But after two days he regained consciousness and has lived to tell the
world of the tragedy in his life. He said in Karachi, after his repatriation from
Chittagong, in February 1974:
“Between March 15 and 26, Halishahar was a special target of attack by the
rebels. They conducted their genocidal operations against the non-Bengalis in
various localities of the township every day, all through this period of fire and
death.
“On March 25, they attacked my house and machine-gunned me and my two
grown-up sons. I lost consciousness as I saw my two loving sons fall to the
ground in a pool of blood. I was hit in the back and the thighs. The federal troops
rescued me on the fifth day and I was treated in a hospital. My two sons were
dead.
“The rebels, to a great extent, succeeded in their goal of exterminating the male
members of non-Bengali families in my locality. They kidnapped non-Bengali
young women by the thousands; many were ravished and some brutally killed. “
Shahid Hussain Abdi, 24, whose father worked as a Stores Officer in the Ispahani
Jute Mills in Chittagong, gave this harrowing account of the massacre of non-
Bengalis in the Mill area and its neighbourhood and the fiendish human abattoir

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
54
set up by the rebels in the Workers’ Recreation Club in the Mill premises in
March 1971:
“We lived in the staff quarters of the Ispahani Jute Mills. As Stores Officer, my
father was kind to all the Mill employees — non-Bengalis and Bengalis alike. The
number of non-Bengali employees and their families, most of whom lived in the
Mill area, was close to 3,000. Since the middle of March, the Awami League
militants and their supporters amongst the Bengali millhands were belligerently
hostile towards the non-Bengalis. Between March 23 and 28, they raided the
houses of the non-Bengalis, hijacked the men at gunpoint and butchered them in
the slaughter-house set up in the factory’s Recreation Club. Tortures of
unimaginable brutality were inflicted on the victims before they were beheaded.
There were syringes for drawing blood from the veins of the victims and for their
storage in containers. The rebels carried the blood to their hospitals for their
wounded soldiers and other jingoes. The killer gangs, a couple of days before the
Army occupied the area, slaughtered hundreds of women and children in this
human abattoir. “
Shahid Hussain was repatriated to Karachi in the middle of 1973 from Nepal. He
had escaped from Chittagong to Kathmandu in 1972. He thinks that nearly 75
per cent of the non-Bengali male population in the Ispahani Jute Mills perished
in the March 1971 massacre. Many of the non-Bengalis slaughtered in the Mill
area were buried in mass graves hours before the federal army drove out the
rebels.
Mohammed Sharfuddin, 40, who lived in House No. 673 in A Block in
Halishahar, Chittagong, and worked as a motor mechanic, lost his two brothers
in the massacre of non-Bengalis in March 1971. Repatriated to Karachi from
Chittagong in February 1974, he said:
“A little more than half of the population of some 50,000 people in Halishahar
consisted of non-Bengalis. For the past 24 years, they had lived in these
settlements. Their relations with the Bengalis were cordial. All of them spoke
Bengali fluently but in their homes they spoke Urdu. Many of the inhabitants in
this locality originally hailed from the Indian State of Bihar. But there were also
many West Pakistani families, including Punjabis and Pathans. The Bengalis
called them Biharis, too.
“In the night of March 18, a rampaging mob of Awami League militants, rebel
Bengali soldiers and thugs attacked our part of the colony and looted our houses
and slaughtered all the male members of non-Bengali families. In my house, they
gunned my two brothers and kidnapped their young wives. After the federal
army took over Chittagong, I searched every nook and corner of Chittagong to

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
55
locate my missing sisters-in-law but there was no trace of them. At least 75 per
cent of the male non-Bengali population in Halishahar was wiped out by the
rebels in March 1971. “
Mosharaf Hussain, 35, who owned a Jute Baling Press in Chittagong and lived in
the Agrabad locality, gave this account of the grisly events in March 1971:
“I had migrated from India to East Pakistan in 1950. I had transferred all my
assets worth a million rupees to Chittagong. I prospered in the Jute trade and I
bought a Jute Baling Press whose market value was two million rupees.
“On
March 21, a violent mob, led by Awami League militants, attacked my Jute
Baling Press and set it ablaze. They also burnt the jute stocks and my shop which
was located in the commercial hub of Chittagong .
“For more than two years, I lived in abject poverty. With great difficulty, I
succeeded in coming to Pakistan in December 1973 from Chittagong. It was sheer
good luck and God s mercy that my family and I escaped the massacre of the
non-Bengalis in March 1971. “
Yunus Ahmed, 28, who was employed in an Insurance Firm in Chittagong, lost
his 22-ycar-old brother in the massacre of non-Bengalis in the Ferozeshah Colony
on March 18, 1971. He said in Karachi after his repatriation in February 1974:
“I had come with my parents as a child from India to Chittagong in 1949.
Chittagong was our home town; we loved it. After the death of my father, I
brought up my two younger brothers who were students in 1971.
“In the night of March 18, a killer gang of Awami Leaguers and rebel soldiers,
armed with rifles and sten guns, raided our locality and slaughtered non-Bengali
men by the thousands. One of my two brothers was at home; the killers burst
into our house and riddled him with bullets. My other brother was away at that
time in another part of Chittagong. I was also not at home when the killers came
and killed my brother. They burnt hundreds of houses. Our Colony had borne
the brunt of their previous attack on March 3, but on March 18 the raiders came
armed with automatic weapons and explosives and the slaughter was savage.
They kidnapped hundreds of non-Bengali young women, especially teenage girls.
Many of their dead bodies were found early in April in houses used for mass
torture and as sex assault chambers “.
Twenty-five year old Rahima, the Bengali widow of Shahid Ali, who lived with
her husband and her four children in a house in the Shershah Colony in
Chittagong, said:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
56
“I am a Bengali by birth, having been born in Faridpur. My husband, Shahid Ali,
hailed from Lucknow in India and I liked him and we were married. He was a
gentle person who loved Chittagong and respected our Bengali friends.
“In a raid on our house in the Shershah Colony in the third week of March 1971,
the killer gang murdered my husband. I begged them to spare his life and even
fell at their feet. But they were mad thugs who were out for a kill. Amongst the
raiders were some Hindus whose hatred of the non-Bengalis was intense
“If the Government had swiftly crushed the violence and terror unleashed by
the Awami League militants in the first week of March 1971, the trouble may
nave been nipped in the bud. By giving the long rope to the rebels, the
Government emboldened them and they got ample time to plan and execute
their Operation “Loot, Burn and Kill “ against the non-Bengalis in Chittagong
.
“Amongst the thousands massacred in Chittagong in March, 1971, were many
Bengalis who were loyal to Pakistan. Some Bengalis, who protected non-Bengalis,
were also killed by the rebels.
“My four children are my late husband’s legacy to me. I am in Pakistan with
them because they are born Pakistanis. “
Mrs. Rahima Abbasi, 40, who worked as a teacher in the Lions’ School in
Chittagong, gave this account of the raid on her school on March 21, 1971:
“We lived in our own house on M. A. Jinnah Road. My husband was in business
and I worked as a teacher in the Lions’ School which was an English medium
school. We had students from Bengali and non-Bengali middle class families.
“On March 21, a violent mob of Bengalis, led by Awami League militants, raided
our school. They injured the School’s Chowkidar (Watchman) who had closed
the front gate. As a Bengali, he appealed to them not to cause a disturbance in the
school. One of the attackers shot him in the leg and he collapsed. The vicious
crowd then swarmed into our office and the classrooms. They molested the
female teachers and students. When we realised that they had plans to kidnap
our girls, we raised a hue and cry and our screams for help attracted the
neighbours. About 50 of them, led by a prominent pro-Pakistan Bengali leader of
our locality, came to our rescue and grappled with the raiders. In the fight that
ensued, three of the raiders were killed and the others escaped. No one amongst
the teachers and the students was injured. The school was closed for some days
after this incident. “
Mrs. Abbasi, her husband and their children were repatriated to Karachi from
Chittagong in March 1974.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
57
Rahim Afindi, who was employed in a shipping firm in Chittagong and who had
a miraculous escape from death when the Bengali insurgents murdered non-
Bengalis in the Chittagong port area, gave this account of his hair-raising
experience in March 1971:
“I was employed in the shipping firm of Messrs. Yaqub Ah and Sons in
Chittagong. The owner of the firm, Mr. Yaqub Ali, was a God-fearing Muslim,
devoted to Islam and the ideology of Pakistan. A Bengali, he was in the Pakistan
Movement in pre-Independence Bengal and knew many prominent Muslim
League Bengali leaders. He was closely related to a one-time Speaker of the
Pakistan National Assembly, Mr. Fazlul Qader Chowdhury. He had many non-
Bengali employees in his firm and he treated them as well as his Bengali
employees.
“On March 20, Mr. Yaqub Ali took me to the Chittagong harbour where a ship
whose unloading was to be done by his firm was docked. We went on board the
ship and Mr. Yaqub Ali talked to the Captain. Suddenly, we heard yells for help
and the echo of gunshots from down below. We rushed from the Captain’s cabin
to the deck and saw that killer mobs, armed with guns, were slaughtering people
on the wharf. Mr. Yaqub Ali asked me to stay on board the ship with the Captain
and he rushed down the gangway to the quay. A very brave man, he ran into the
crowd of the killers and appealed to them in the name of God not to slaughter
the innocents. Some one in the killer gang shouted that Yaqub Ali was pro-
Pakistan and a Muslim Leaguer. In a matter of minutes, the killer gang killed him
and chopped up his dead body before flinging it into the sea. Subsequently, I
learnt that Yaqub Ali Saheb shouted “Pakistan Zindabad “ (Long Live Pakistan)
as the killer gang ordered him to shout “Joy Bangla “ (Long Live Bangla) before
they killed him. “
Rahim Afindi was sheltered by the Captain of the ship for some days. He
escaped the massacre of non-Bengalis. In March 1974, he was repatriated to
Pakistan. He is certain that more than 50,000 non-Bengalis perished in the March
1971 carnage in Chittagong and its neighbouring localities.
Nasim Ahmed, 22, who lived with his father, a prominent Muslim League
activist, in their own house in Pahartali area of Chittagong, gave this narrative of
his father’s murder by the rebels:
“My father, Mr. Wasim Ahmed, was a well-known and thriving businessman in
Chittagong. He was devoted to the ideology of Pakistan and was active in the
local Muslim League. Bengalis and non-Bengalis alike respected him for his
integrity and for his courage. He helped many charitable causes.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
58
“On March 20, 1971, he was on his way to the main Community Centre of our
area in connection with a meeting of prominent citizens which had been called to
devise ways of maintaining peace in the town. On the way, a rampaging mob of
rebels overpowered him and slaughtered him. Shortly afterwards, the killer mob
went berserk and looted and burnt hundreds of non-Bengali homes. “
Nasim Ahmed and his widowed mother were sheltered by a Godfearing Bengali
family and they survived the carnage. In September, 1973. they were repatriated
to Pakistan. Nasim Ahmed thinks that more than 75,000 non-Bengalis were
butchered in the March-April, 1971 carnage in Chittagong and its neighbourhood.
Another 10,000 non-Bengalis, in his view, perished in the wake of India’s seizure
of East Pakistan on December 17, 1971. The most savage killings, he said, were
done by the Bengali rebel soldiers who had automatic weapons and the local
Hindus who hated the non-Bengalis.
Jamdad Khan, 42, who worked as a Security Guard, in the Gul Ahmed Jute Mills
in Agrabad in Chittagong, testified:
“I had joined the Gul Ahmed Jute Mills as a Security Guard in July 1971. Before
that I lived in the N.W.F.P. In Chittagong, I lived in a quarter in the Nasirabad
Housing area. I had heard from non-Bengalis about the mass slaughter which the
Bengali rebels had conducted in March 1971 in Chittagong. One day, on my way
to the Jute Mill, I spotted a small human skull lying outside a deserted house.
Through a crack in a window, I looked inside. To my horror, the skulls and
bones of many children lay in heaps inside the locked room. Some clothes were
strewn on the floor and they looked to be the ones usually worn by non-Bengali
children. With the help of some friends, I dug a grave and interred the remains of
the innocents in it. Subsequently, I learnt that in March 1971, this house was used
as a slaughter-house by the rebels and they had killed many women and children
in it.
“After India’s seizure of East Pakistan on December 17, 1971, the Mukti Bahini
and Awami League storm troopers again went on the rampage against non-
Bengalis. Amongst those killed were many hundreds of Punjabis and Pathans
who were doing business in Chittagong or were employed in the administration
and firms. The non-Bengalis were sheltered in camps put up by the Red Cross
but it was the daily practice of the Mukti Bahini and Awami league militants to
kidnap non-Bengalis by the scores. They were tortured in jails and killed. Their
dead bodies were thrown into the sea. To win the sympathy of the Indian
military officers stationed in Chittagong, the local Awami Leaguers dug up the
dead bodies of hundreds of non-Bengalis from shallow mass graves and showed
them as the skeletons of Bengalis murdered by the Pakistan Army. The Awami

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
59
League politicians also showed these skeletons to foreign newsmen, especially
Indian journalists. The Indian military, thereupon, gave a free hand to the Mukti
Bahini to pick off as many non-Bengalis as they wished from the Red Cross
camps. Living conditions in these camps were dreadful. We drank polluted
water and we ate stinking bread “.
Thirty-year-old
Zaibunnissa,
whose
husband,
Mohammed
Ahmed,
was
employed as a Postman in Chittagong, gave this account of his murder by the
Bengali rebels on March 25, 1971:
“At about 10 a.m. on March 25, a dozen armed Bengali militants entered our
house in Sholashahar in Chittagong. In the killer gang were two Hindus whose
names I heard from their accomplices. Three gunmen overpowered my husband
and shot him dead. The other raiders looted my house with the thoroughness of
trained burglars. I grappled with one of the killers when he trained his gun at
one of my small children. I snatched his gun but I did not know how to fire it. All
the thugs grabbed me and slapped and kicked me. They dragged the dead body
of my husband to a pit and dumped it there. Our Bengali neighbours watched
the raid on our house in mute silence; they said they were too scared to come to
our help. They helped me bury the body of my departed husband.
“On March 26, an armed rebel came to my house and told me that they had
orders to kill every male non-Bengali in the locality. He said that I should not
shelter any non-Bengali friends otherwise I and my children would be done to
death. We were very scared. On March 27, we left our home through a back door,
walked three miles to a place where some Burmese families lived and sought
shelter with one of them. They looked after us like angels. On April 9, after the
Pakistan Army had re-established its control over Chittagong and our locality,
we returned to our home. After India’s armed grab of East Pakistan, the Mukti
Bahini terrorised us, deprived us of our home and we lived in a Red Cross Camp.
In January 1974, my four children and I were repatriated to Pakistan.
Fifty-year-old Mujeeba Khatoon, who lived in Quarter No. 78/K in the Sagoon
Bagan locality in Chittagong, said that her eldest son died of a heart attack when
a killer gang attacked their house and looted it on March 3, 1971. The raiders
checked his body to ensure that he was dead. “They said they were sparing me
because of my old age “, Mujeeba Khatoon said. Her other son, who saw the
killings of non-Bengalis in Santahar, lost his mental balance because of the shock
of it. All her other relatives in East Pakistan perished in the carnage. In January
1974, she was repatriated to Karachi from a Red Cross Camp in Chittagong.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
60
Nabihun Bibi, 70, who lived in Quarter No. 100 in the Raufabad locality in
Chittagong, gave this account of the brutal murder of her aged husband by the
Bengali rebels in March 1971:
“A killer gang of rebels had raided our locality a number of times since their first
murderous assault on March 3. On March 25, they made a full-blast attack on our
colony. A gang of armed Bengalis broke into our house and killed my aged, sick
husband, Abdul Majid. I begged them to spare an old, ailing man but they said
they had instructions to kill every male non-Bengali. One of them said: “We arc
not killing you because one of these days you will come to work in our homes as
a domestic servant.
“After the federal army secured Chittagong, we lived in peace for nine months.
But after India’s capture of East Pakistan in December 1971, the Mukti Bahini and
Awami League volunteers staged a second bloodbath of non-Bengalis. They
drove me out of my house, saying that as a non-Bengali I had no claim to even an
inch of Bengali soil. For some two years I lived in a Relief Camp in Chittagong
and was repatriated to Pakistan in February 1974. “
Twenty-seven-year-old Tahmeena Khatoon, whose husband was employed in
the Amin Jute Mills in Chittagong, lived in the Feroze-shah Colony. She gave this
account of the murder of her husband by the Bengali rebels in March 1971:
“On March 15, a group of Bengalis knocked on our door and called out the name
of my husband, Amanatullah. He met them and they said that he was urgently
wanted at the Jute Mill. One of the callers was an employee of the Mill whom he
knew. I urged him not to go because I had heard that the Bengali rebels were
using all manner of ruses to kidnap non-Bengalis and they were subsequently
murdered. My husband ignored my plea and went with them. After an hour, one
of the callers returned and told me that my husband’s life would be spared if I
paid him Rs. 500. I scraped up all the cash I had with me and gave it to him. I ran
with him to see the place where my husband was held but the thug gave me the
slip and vanished. When I returned home, two trucks, with armed Bengalis,
arrived and they looted all the valuables in our house. They took away even the
furniture and the crockery. The next day I learnt that the rebels had murdered
my husband. I tried to go to my father’s place but his locality was under rebel
control. Two days later, I heard that he was also killed by the rebels during a raid
on his locality “.
Halima Bibi, 27, saw her husband, Mohammed Wakeel, butchered by the Bengali
rebels on March 28, 1971 in a savage attack on non-Bengali homes in the
Raufabad locality of Chittagorg. She said: “More than a dozen of my relatives
perished in the March 1971 massacres in East Pakistan “. She continued:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
61
“On March 28, a killer mob raided our locality and ransacked the houses of non-
Bengalis. They looted all the valuables in these homes and carted them away in
trucks. They also looted my house and set it ablaze. As my husband and I ran
from our burning home, two gunmen riddled my husband with bullets and he
died on the spot. I begged the killers to finish me off too because I had no
relatives left in Chittagong.
“After a while we will have you as our domestic
servant “, they replied. I buried my dead husband in a shallow pit and covered it
with mud. I sought refuge in a mosque for a day and then I went back to my
partially burnt out house. The federal troops arrived in the first week of April,
1971, and offered to shift me to a Relief Camp. I asked them to find out whether
my father who lived in Santahar was alive. They made prompt inquiries and I
was informed that the Bengali rebels had murdered him.
Halima was repatriated to Pakistan from the Red Cross Camp in Chittagong in
February 1974.
Romaisha Khatoon, 35, whose husband, Anzarul Haq, was a Railway employee,
lived in Quarter No. 763 in Block B in the Halishahar Housing Estate in
Chittagong. On March 25, a killer gang kidnapped him from his house and
murdered him in the slaughterhouse set up by the rebels in the Government Rest
House. Romaisha, who was repatriated to Pakistan from Chittagong along with
her three children in December 1973, sobbed out her woeful story in these words:
“The Bengali rebels had made a murderous attack on our locality on March 3.
But they did not break into our house. On March 23, a killer gang raided our
house and trucked away all the valuables we had, including our furniture and
crockery. They warned us not to leave our house because all the escape routes
were blocked. We were defenceless. They had carried away even the kitchen
knives in our home.
“In the night of March 25, a killer gang attacked our locality again. They blasted
the door of my house and grabbed my husband. I threw myself at the feet of the
raiders and begged them to spare my husband. They kicked me in the head. I
wailed; I screamed and I entreated but the killers forced him into a jeep and
drove away. I heard them say in Bengali that they were heading for the Rest
House. I knew that my husband was being dragged to the execution chamber
because the Rest House had become notorious as a slaughter-house set up by the
rebels. Hundreds of non-Bengali males, kidnapped from their homes in our
locality, were taken to this human abattoir for slaughter. After the federal army
captured Chittagong from the rebels, I approached the Pakistani military
personnel for help in locating the dead body of my husband. They said that the
dead bodies in the slaughter-house in the Rest House were mutilated beyond
recognition and that there was no trace of my husband’s body. “

