Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
192
1971, to accomplish India’s armed grab of East Pakistan and the establishment of
its client state of Bangladesh. India’s Bengali surrogates, who operated the
Indian-propped, Calcutta-based Government of Bangladesh, were installed in
Dacca as the new rulers of Bangladesh on December 17, 1971 by the victorious
Indian Army. On January 8, 1972, President Bhutto of Pakistan freed Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman and sent him from Rawalpindi in a PIA Boeing to London en
route to Dacca where he took over the leadership of the new Bengali state. He
made a public declaration, soon after his return to Dacca, that for the past quarter
of a century he had been working for the separation and independence of
Pakistan’s eastern wing.
The Government of Pakistan had issued, belatedly, in August 1971, a White
Paper on the East Pakistan crisis which gave a chronological synopsis of the
macabre happenings in East Pakistan during the murderous months of March
and April, 1971. It gave the following rationale for the federal military action in
East Pakistan against the Awami League secessionists and their rebel cohorts:
“On the night of March 25/26, a few hours before the Awami League plan for an
armed uprising and launching of the independent Republic of Bangladesh was to
be put into effect, the President of Pakistan called upon the Armed forces to do
their duty and fully restore the authority of the Government in East Pakistan.
“The federal army took the initiative and thwarted the Awami League plan for
the armed takeover of East Pakistan through armed infiltrators from India and
subverted elements in the East Bengal Regiment, East Pakistan Rifles, the police
and Para-military forces. “
The White Paper bared these highlights of the Awami League’s operational plan
for the armed revolt in East Pakistan which was due to be triggered full-blast in
the small hours of March 26, 1971:
a)
Troops of the East Bengal Regiment would occupy Dacca and Chittagong
to prevent the landing of Pakistan Army units by air or sea;
b)
The remaining troops of the East Bengal Regiment, with the help of the
East Pakistan Rifles, the police and the armed Razakaars (Volunteer Corps)
would swiftly move to eliminate the federal armed forces in various
cantonments and stations;
c)
The East Pakistan Rifles would occupy all the key posts of the border and
keep them open for aid from outside;
d)
Requirements of more arms and ammunition would be met with supplies
from India, and
e)
Indian troops would come to the assistance of the Awami League rebel
force once it succeeded in the first phase of occupying key centres and
paralysing the Pakistan Army.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
193
What Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his pro-India caucus in the Awami League
failed to achieve in March because of the daring, pre-emptive strike by the
federal Army was accomplished for them by their Indian benefactors in the third
week of December, 1971. The secession plan was in fact conceived in June, 1964.
when the Sheikh and his associates, according to the prosecution’s charge-sheet
in the secessionist Agartala conspiracy trial of 1968, held their first major
conspiratorial conclave in Dacca in the house of Tajuddin Ahmed — the
hardliner whom India made, in April, 1971, the Prime Minister of the Indian
sponsored
and
Indian-financed
Government
of
Bangladesh
in
Calcutta.
According to the prosecution’s charge-sheet, it was in this meeting of the
conspirators that the name of Bangladesh was coined for the independent
Bengali state that was to be established in East Pakistan with Indian funds and
arms. It was also in this meeting that the design of the flag of Bangladesh, which
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman saw ceremoniously, unfurled at a Dacca rally on March
23, 1971, was presented for approval. The Sheikh was not exonerated of the
charges of secession levelled against him in the Agartala conspiracy case; the trial
was abandoned in February 1969, by the Ayub regime under political pressure
from opposition parties. In the election year of 1970, India’s clandestine financial
support to the Awami League was a major factor in the party’s affluence and its
well-lubricated, highly efficient organizational apparatus.
The Awami League employed fascist techniques in its operations for power grab.
Its leaders and their followers used strong-arm methods to terrorise their rival
parties. All through the election year of 1970, scores of attacks by the Awami
Leaguers on their political adversaries were reported in the press. The Awami
League had won over a section of the Bengali bureaucracy in East Pakistan with
lavish promises of speedy promotions and other fringe benefits once it came to
power. Unlike its political rivals, the Awami League suffered from no shortage of
funds. Money flowed into its coffers from generous India. It also enjoyed a rich
harvest of protection money from the West Pakistani industrialists who owned
factories in East Pakistan and who thought that bribing the Awami League was
an insurance against labour tantrums. An excellent organizer, Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman had no difficulty in recruiting into his militant outfit tough young men
specially trained in breaking up meetings, manhandling opponents and in other
cloak-and-dagger tactics of political combat. The Awami League’s leadership
showed a fascist intolerance for the Opposition and had no qualms of conscience
in ruthlessly liquidating its rivals. The ouster of Mrs. Amena Begum, a one-time
President of the Awami League, from the party at the behest of Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman is one of the many examples of the Nazi-style manner in which he ran
the Awami League. Even the organizational set-up of the Awami League, during
nearly two decades of its operation, did not substantiate the party’s pretensions
to democracy. The Awami League’s public meetings were organized as massive

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
194
displays of its political strength in Dacca. The party cadres used to hire hundreds
of trucks and even charter train services for transporting villagers to Dacca to
pack the audience ranks in the public meetings and rallies of the Awami League.
The theme song of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his firebrands was invariably the
charge of exploitation of East Pakistan by West Pakistan. Typical of the highly
emotive and inflammatory speeches with which Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
injected animus against West Pakistan in the minds of his Bengali supporters
was his speech at Hazaribagh Park on March 11, 1970 when he accused West
Pakistan of looting the wealth of East Pakistan. Aside from preaching hymns of
hate against West Pakistan, the leaders of the Awami League mis-represented to
the people in East Pakistan every action of the federal authorities and distorted
facts and figures to buttress their arguments for autonomy bordering on virtual
independence. After the cyclone tragedy of November 1970 in the coastal belt of
East Pakistan, the Awami League leaders and their newspaper mouthpieces
invented countless false charges of callousness and misappropriation of aid for
the cyclone sufferers against the federal officials posted in the province.
The charge against the Awami League leaders that while they wooed the
electorate in 1970 on the platform of autonomy, after their electoral success in
East Pakistan, they shifted their position and demanded a virtually independent
Bangladesh has substance in it. The first point of the Awami League’s six-point
programme
of
autonomy
categorically
said
that
“the
character
of
the
Government shall be federal and parliamentary“, implying that Pakistan would
be a federation and not a confederation, In his election speeches in 1970, Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman assured the voters that he wanted only provincial autonomy
and not the disintegration of Pakistan or any dilution of its Islamic character. On
September 21, 1970, in a public address at Narayanganj, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
said:
“The six-point programme would be realised and at the same time neither the
integrity of Pakistan nor Islam would be jeopardised.“
After the Awami League’s electoral victory in East Pakistan in December 1970,
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s speeches betrayed signs of a shift in his autonomy
stance. He declared bluntly that his six points were not negotiable. It appeared
that he had started toying with the idea of making his Bangladesh an
independent state. The draft constitution, which his constitutional experts wrote
early in 1971 with the object of railroading it through the National Assembly
soon after its convocation, sought to whittle down the powers of the federal
government
to
such an extent
that
Pakistan would then have
been a
confederation of virtually independent states and not a federation. Two of its
well-known provisions, which militated against all canons of federalism, were
that (a) the federal government would handle foreign affairs minus foreign trade

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
195
and aid, and (b) all federal taxes would be collected by the provincial
governments and not by the federal government. Such provisions are alien to the
concept of federalism and do not exist in the constitution of any truly federal
state. The Awami League’s proposal for two separate constituent conventions
“for the purpose of framing constitutions for the state of Bangladesh and for the
states of West Pakistan “ was undoubtedly a constitutional formula for the
eventual secession of East Pakistan from the fold of the federation. Under this
constitutional formula, the Awami League demanded for Bangladesh the power
to sign treaties and agreements of foreign trade and aid in total disregard of the
federal government and to maintain trade representatives overseas. This was the
platform of independence, not of provincial autonomy. The rigid stand of the
Awami League leaders and their refusal to budge even an inch from their
demand for virtual independence for Bangladesh wrecked the constitutional
talks in Dacca in the third week of March 1971.
General Yahya Khan’s postponement of the National Assembly’s inaugural
session, scheduled for March 3, 1971, was a temporary measure. It was intended
to give more time to the political leaders to devise a consensus on the form and
shape of the proposed constitution instead of openly wrangling in the forum of
the National Assembly. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman over-reacted to the temporary
postponement of the National Assembly’s session and hastily took to the path of
rebellion against the federal government and usurped the authority of the
lawfully-established government in East Pakistan. It is a tragedy of the grimmest
dimension that because of the Awami League’s chauvinism and power lust,
millions of innocent people in East Pakistan suffered the most dreadful trauma in
sub continental history.
India’s support to the Awami League encouraged Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in his
bid to wrest the reins of power in East Pakistan from the federal government
through the majesty of force and terror. India’s rulers have not reconciled
themselves to the reality of Pakistan as a separate, sovereign state. Muslim-
majority Pakistan has been a constant eyesore for Hindu-majority India. One of
the reasons for India’s all-out support to Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his
secessionist movement was spelled out in mid-1971 by the Chairman of India’s
Institute of Public Affairs, Mr. R. R. Kapur, a retired senior officer of the Indian
Civil Service, in these words:
“Our support to Mujibur Rahman is based; let us be candid enough, on our sub-
conscious hate complex of Pakistan. Platonically, we may plead all virtue but the
harsh reality is that Pakistan was wrested from us, and its basis — the two
nations’ theory — has never been palatable to us. If something ever happens
which proves the unsoundness of that theory, it will be a matter of psychological
satisfaction to us. That is, by and large, our national psyche and it is in that

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
196
context that we have reacted to a happening which, we think, may well disrupt
Pakistan. “
There is ample evidence to prove that India was sending weapons and
ammunition and armed infiltrators into East Pakistan to help the Awami League
cadres long before the federal military intervention of March 25, 1971. India’s
rulers had massed more than 100,000 crack troops in West Bengal since early
March under the pretext of maintaining law and order during the elections in
that stare. In mid-March, more Indian army formations were moved to West
Bengal and deployed on the borders of East Pakistan to boost the morale of the
Awami League insurrectionists. Late in March, 1971, at least eight battalions of
the Indian Border Security Force gave active support to the Awami League rebels
in the border belt. It was India which organised the burlesque of installing the
government of Bangladesh in exile in the first week of April in an Indian border
village. To provide an operational base to its protégé Bangladesh Government,
the Indian authorities manipulated the seizure of Pakistan’s diplomatic and
consular mission in Calcutta by a handful of defectors and handed it over to the
secessionist fugitives from East Pakistan.
India would have attacked East Pakistan in April 1971, to establish Bangladesh
by force but the Indian Army generals counselled their Prime Minister, Mrs.
Indira Gandhi, against what then was to them a hazardous and precipitate action.
They preferred the winter for a blitz attack on East Pakistan because Pakistan’s
access routes to China would then be snowed up. They also wanted time to
mobilise their armed forces for a full-scale war with Pakistan and to train the
Bengali defectors in guerrilla warfare to soften the Pakistani defences in East
Pakistan before the actual Indian invasion. The Indian Generals, according to the
“Lightning Campaign “ by Major-General D. K. Palit, also urged the Indian
Prime Minister to eliminate the possibility of Chinese or American intervention
in support of Pakistan. In eight months of frenzied preparations, India’s rulers
succeeded in priming their war machine for the blitz attack on East Pakistan.
They signed the Indo-Soviet alliance in August 1971 to neutralise the danger of
Chinese intervention in a sub-continental war. They bamboozled American
public opinion with exaggerated accounts of the refugee influx and turned it
against Pakistan to ensure that no American weapons would flow into Pakistan.
India trained nearly 100,000 East Pakistan Bengalis in guerrilla warfare. Their
harassing
raids,
sabotage
and
a
virtual
war
of
attrition
bled
Pakistan
economically and weakened it under the strain of a costly anti-insurgency
operation. In spire of Pakistan’s repeated offers to take back all the refugees who
had gone to India, India’s rulers deliberately did not permit them to return to
East Pakistan because that would have deprived India of a deceptively

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
197
humanitarian excuse, initially, to milk the world for hundreds of millions of
dollars in compassionate aid, and subsequently, to invade East Pakistan.
The refugees gave India its most powerful weapon in psychological warfare. By
inflating their number from a million in May to more then nine million in
November 1971, India deceived world opinion and gave Pakistan a bad name all
over the world. India was allergic to Pakistan’s demand for a count of the
refugees in India by an impartial agency, such as the United Nations. It did not
accept Pakistan’s claim that only 2.02 million people had left East Pakistan due to
the civil strife.
The Indian authorities deliberately encouraged the vast hordes of unemployed
Bengalis, who swarm Calcutta and its neighbourhood, to move into the refugee
camps as inmates so that the population of these camps could be magnified to
impress and mislead foreign visitors and United Nations officials. If the Indian
Government was so overburdened with tile refugees from East Pakistan, it could
have promptly negotiated with the Pakistan Government their speedy return to
their hearths and homes in East Pakistan, especially when the Pakistan
authorities were anxious to take them back and a general amnesty had been
granted to those who looted and killed during the Awami League’s March 1971
uprising. India’s rulers uttered haughty words to tell the world that they would
allow the Bengali refugees to return to East Pakistan only when the province was
turned over to the Awami League secessionists. A Goebbels-style propaganda
machinery, which drugged the Indian people for weeks with the fiction of
Pakistani General Tikka Khan’s imaginary death in the last days of March 1971,
had no qualms of conscience in inflating the number of refugees to earn more
money and sympathy from gullible nations and individuals and to malign its
arch enemy, Pakistan.
Pakistan agreed to the United Nations Secretary-General’s proposal in the
autumn of 1971 for the stationing of monitors on the India-East Pakistan border
but the Indian Government contemptuously rejected it. The UN observers would
have bared the fact of India’s military patronage, sanctuary and logistic support
to the Bengali guerrillas and India’s massive preparations for the invasion of East
Pakistan.
India’s claim that it had maintained a complete record of the incoming refugees
was a mere fiction. After the federal army went into action against the Bengali
rebels on March 25, 1971, India opened its borders to provide sanctuary to the
hordes of fleeing rebels from East Pakistan. They were the killers who had
enacted one of the bloodiest pogroms of modem times. Subsequently India
encouraged more Bengalis in East Pakistan, especially the Hindus, to cross over
to India. In June 1971, when United Nations officials wanted to check on the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
198
veracity of the Indian figures on refugees, the Indian authorities hurriedly
fabricated some records and registers. When these fictitious documents did not
fully substantiate the Indian claim of the millions of refugees India said had
come over from East Pakistan, Indian officials blandly said that a few million
refugees had gone to live with their friends all over India. India’s rulers found it
to their immense advantage to magnify the extent of human displacement to
attract international sympathy, attention and funds and to discredit Pakistan and
its army.
In the months just before and after India and Pakistan attained independence in
August 1947, some eight million Muslims migrated from India to Pakistan and
six million Hindus migrated from Pakistan to India owing to Hindu-Muslim
religious rioting in the two countries. Involving some 14 million people, this was
the biggest trans-border migration of peoples in human history. India and
Pakistan accomplished their rehabilitation and resettlement in their respective
territories without any outside assistance. In 1971, India invented the excuse of
its refugee burden to invade and grab East Pakistan. It defies human
comprehension how all the nine million refugees India claimed it was hosting
vanished in less than a month’s time. Indian propagandists claimed that all the
Bengali refugees lodged in West Bengal, Assam and Tripura had returned and
were resettled in their hearths and homes in East Pakistan (breakaway
Bangladesh) in less than a month after India’s military seizure of the province on
December 17, 1971. The movement of nine million human beings from the
neighbouring states of India to Bangladesh, across mine-infested border tracts,
shell-scarred roads, polluted wells and rotting dead bodies in barely three weeks,
is beyond the pail of human achievement. But this is precisely what India’s
propagandists want the world to believe in order to justify their bloated figures
of the refugee influx.
Since his advent to power in Dacca, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman has drummed the
phoney charge that the Pakistan Army had killed three million of his
countrymen in 1971. In civil strife, there is undoubtedly some loss of life on both
sides. But it is unbelievable that all through the nine months of strife in East
Pakistan, the Pakistan Army’s barely three divisions, thinly spread out along
more than 1800 miles of explosive, often flaming, border with India, did no other
work except engage in the gory pastime of slaughtering 13,000-plus Bengalis
every day. A correspondent of the Daily Los Angeles Times, William J.
Drummond, who toured Bangladesh in the first quarter of 1972, exposed the
absurdity of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s charge. Similarly, the falsity of Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman oft-repeated allegation that the Pakistani troops had raped
200,000 Bengali girls in 1971 was borne out when the abortion team he
commissioned from Britain early in 1972 found that its workload involved the
termination of only a hundred or more pregnancies.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
199
THE END
In the months just before and after India and Pakistan attained independence in
August 1947, some eight million Muslims migrated from India to Pakistan and
six million Hindus migrated from Pakistan to India.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
200
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
QUTUBUDDIN AZIZ: B.A. (Hons.), MA. (Madras). Studied International
Relations at London School of Economics and trained in Journalism in Fleet
Street, London. Managing Editor, United Press of Pakistan, a news service which
he and his father founded in late 1949. Radio Commentator on International and
National Affairs since 1954. Special Correspondent in Pakistan for U.S.
International Daily, Christian Science Monitor, since 1965.
Member, Standing Committee, Council of Pakistan Newspaper Editors, and ex-
Vice-President, Karachi Union of Journalists. Co-author,
“Foreign Policy of
Pakistan- An Analysis “, published by Karachi University. Has authored many
pamphlets and articles on foreign policy aspects. Authored
“Mission to
Washington “, an expose of India’s intrigues in the U.S.A. in 1971 to dismember
Pakistan. Started writing weekly column at the age of 15 in Hyderabad Bulletin,
an English Daily of Hyderabad State, where his father, Mr. Abdul Hafiz, was
Bureau Manager of an Indian News Agency, United Press of India, and his
mother was a member of the State Legislature. Born in Lucknow in 1929, where
his maternal grandfather, Nawab Abdullah Khan, owned and edited Urdu Daily
Hamdam, Aziz was educated in New Delhi, Simla and Hyderabad Deccan. Was
Vice-President, St. George’s Grammar School Students Society and Nizam
College Students’ Union, Hyderabad (Dn.).
Participated in international Youth Conference in London in 1948. Covered many
international conferences, including U.N. General Assembly sessions in Paris and
New York, Bandung Conference of 1955, Indonesian General Elections, Lebanese
Civil War in 1958, Civil War in Congo in 1964, Indonesia’s 20th Independence
Anniversary, Islamic Foreign Ministers’ and Summit Conferences. Interviewed
many world famous personalities, including ex-President Truman, Premier Chou
en Lai, Japan’s ex-Premiers Yoshida and Hatoyama, ex-President Garcia of
Philippines. Had internationally-published cable interview with Soviet Premier
Bulganin in February 1956.
Has travelled in 60 countries, including China in 1956 as member of an Editors’
Delegation, and U.S.A. in 1957 under U.S. Government’s Leader Exchange
Programme. Had lectured in past years to PAF Staff College, Army Staff College
at Quetta, University of Karachi, U.S. Embassy in Karachi and learned bodies
and Press Clubs in U.S.A. and many ether countries. Was on a Government
assignment with Pakistan Embassy in U.S., April-November 1971. Was Awarded
Tamgha-i-Pakistan by Pakistan Government in 1971 for meritorious services to

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
201
Pakistan. Testified before 1971 War Inquiry Commission on February 9, 1972.
Member, National Council of Social Welfare. Government of Pakistan, Sindh
Social Welfare Council, Sindh Government and office bearer in many social
welfare agencies. Has authored books, pamphlets and articles on social welfare.
Was an elected member of Karachi Municipal Corporation in 1958.
This book details or refers to the atrocities committed on West Pakistanis, Biharis
and other non-Bengalis and pro-Pakistan Bengalis by the Awami League
militants and their supporters in the following 110 cities and towns of East
Pakistan in 1971:
1.
Dacca
2.
Narayanganj
3.
Chittagong
4.
Chandraghona
5.
Rangamati
6.
Khulna
7.
Daulatpur
8.
Khalispur
9.
Pholtala
10.
Bagerhat
11.
Satkhira
12.
Dinajpur
13.
Bochaganj
14.
Pirganj
15.
Ranisankhail
16.
Kaharol
17.
Biraganj
18.
Chirirbandar
19.
Parbatipur
20.
Thakurgaon
21.
Hilli
22.
Laksham
23.
Rajbari
24.
Goalundo
25.
Faridpur
26.
Kushtia
27.
Chuadanga
28.
Meherpur
29.
Zafarkandi
30.
Ishurdi

