Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
142
“The merchants—pictured here by a BBC Panorama team which reached
Jessore—were rounded up, roped together and marched off by Militia men.
Shortly after, Western reporters came across their bodies. They had been battered
and stabbed. One man still writhed in his death agony.
Malcom Browne of the New York Times, who visited Jessore a month after the
Pakistan Army had regained control over it, said in a despatch published on May
9, 1971:
“The night of special horror for Jessore was April 4, four days after the local East
Bengal Regiment had revolted against the national army.
“Jessore and Khulna are among the most heavily damaged towns in East
Pakistan. Many market areas and buildings are burned out; the streets deserted
“Throughout the tour, Government authorities and persons produced for
interview have told of thousands of non-Bengali residents, including women and
children, having been slain by the separatists, often after having been tortured. “
Mohammed Zubair, 57, a trader, who lived in Block N in the Satellite town in
Jessore, had this sad recollection of the dreadful Ides of March, 1971:
“All through March 1971, the non-Bengalis lived in panic and fear in Jessore.
The explosion came in the last days of the month when the Awami League killers
and the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles and the police went on the rampage
in the Bihari-inhabited localities of the town. The rebels had barricaded the
access road from the town to the military cantonment to prevent food supplies to
the West Pakistani soldiers. They had also blown up the main water pipeline
from the town to the cantonment.
“Some non-Bengali young men, who had friends amongst the West Pakistani
soldiers in the cantonment, stuffed food inside a truck and headed for the
cantonment. Armed with shot guns, they tried to blast their way through the
barricades and the gunfire of the Bengali rebels. But the numerically-superior
rebels wiped out the non-Bengali relief squad on the fringes of the cantonment. A
dozen non-Bengali young men perished in this desperate bid to break the
Bengali blockade of the cantonment. Their dead bodies were dumped in a nearby
stream.
“As some of these non-Bengali boys hailed from middle class families who lived
in the Satellite town of Jessore, hundreds of insurgents raided this locality on
March 28-29 and committed acts of unimaginable savagery. They looted and

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
143
burnt the houses of non-Bengalis and killed them by the thousands. Hundreds of
teenage girls were molested and kidnapped.
“They looted my house; they slaughtered my three grown up sons and they
kidnapped my two young daughters. One of the raiders stabbed me in the
shoulder and I collapsed in a pool of blood. The murderer thought I was dead. A
part of my house was burnt; I hid myself for almost a week in the backyard.
After the Pakistan Army freed Jessore from rebel control, I buried my dead sons.
I scoured every inch of Jessore in search of my young daughters. There was no
trace of them. “
Mohammed Zubair was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in January, 1974.
Twenty-one year-old Tahera Begum who was widowed in Jessore when a posse
of the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles bludgeoned her husband to death on
March 29, 1971, sobbed out her story of woe as follows:
“We lived in the Ramnagar colony of Jessore. We hailed from Calcutta.
Although Urdu was our mother tongue, my husband and I spoke Bengali very
well. Almost all the residents in the Ramnagar colony were non-Bengalis. My
husband, Amjad Ali was a well-to do businessman and an active social worker.
Since the beginning of March, when tension gripped Jessore, my husband used
to appeal to Bengalis and non-Bengalis to live in amity and accord.
“In the evening of March 29, he told me that he was going to attend a meeting of
the Peace Committee wherein representatives of Bengalis and non-Bengalis will
take an oath to protect one another like true Muslim brethren. Although I was
apprehensive, I encouraged him to go to the Union Committee Hall for the Peace
Committee’s meeting. When he arrived there, he found that the Bengali members
of the Committee were absent. He and his non-Bengali associates waited in vain
for an hour and then walked back to our house. He apprehended an attack by the
Bengali insurgents on our locality but we had no weapons. A sincere and kind-
hearted Bengali friend, Mohammed Mahmood, suggested that we shift to his
house for safety but my husband preferred to stay in our own house.
“Late in the night of March 29, about 500 Bengali insurgents and Awami
Leaguers, many blazing their automatic weapons and tossing hand grenades on
houses, raided the Ramnagar Colony on a “loot, kill and burn “ mission. They
encircled our locality and murdered every adult male. My husband appealed to
the killer gang to spare the lives of innocent people; a rebel Bengali soldier
gunned nim to death. His dead body was carted away in a truck by the killer
gang and flung into a ditch which was turned into a mass grave. I lived for some
days with a Bengali family in our neighbourhood; in mid April, I went to live

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
144
with my parents in Dacca. In January 1974, the United Nations repatriated me to
Pakistan. “
Tahera Begum said that hundreds of teenage girls were kidnapped from non-
Bengali homes by the rebels; many were raped and some were taken away to
India by their retreating Bengali captors.
Twenty-two-year-old Anjuman Begum who, along with her husband, Qaiser
Hussain, miraculously escaped the massacre of non-Bengalis on March 28, 1971,
in the Tafsidanga colony in Jessore, had this bitter memory of that nightmarish
period:
“We lived in a hut in Paikgacha in Tafsidanga. It was nick named as ‘Bihari
Para’. Most of the inhabitants in this shanty township were of the low-income
group. My husband peddled merchandise. Our relations with the Bengalis in our
neighbourhood were friendly. We never had a riot in our colony.
“Late in March 1971, a mob of Awami Leaguers and some hoodlums raided our
locality and set fire to our thatched huts. In a few minutes the entire locality was
aflame. As the inmates rushed out of their burning huts, a barrage of gunfire
mowed hundreds of innocent men, women and children. The killer gang also
burnt the only mosque in our colony.
“My husband and I escaped from our burning hut into a nearby paddy field. We
lay still there all through the night. We heard the crackle of gunfire, the groans of
dying men and the shrieks of women assaulted by their kidnappers. Just before
sunrise we crawled to a hut where an aged Bengali farmer lived. We had known
him as a kind soul. He gave us shelter and we lived with him until the Pakistan
Army freed Jessore.
“When we returned to our old locality, we saw the rubble and the decomposed
bodies of slain non-Bengalis. The Army arranged their mass burial. “
Anjuman Begum and her husband went to Dacca in the autumn of 1971. In
January 1974, they were airlifted to Karachi.
Qurban Ali, 51, who lived in Ramnagar colony of Jessore and owned a provision
store, said:
“Non-Bengalis in Jessore felt insecure after the Awami League’s victory in the
December 1970 elections. Many were subjected to taunts and insults by the
Awami Leaguers. In March 1971, the Awami Leaguers and some Hindu Bengali
infiltrators from India incited the local Bengalis against the non-Bengalis. The

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
145
Bengalis in the East Bengal Regiment, the East Pakistan Rifles, the Ansars (a
police force) and the Awami Leaguers drew up plans for liquidating the non-
Bengalis in Jessore. They blockaded the cantonment and some West Pakistani
officers and men were ambushed and killed in mid-March. Shooting incidents
took place in the localities where the non-Bengalis lived.
“On March 29, hundreds of armed miscreants raided the Ramnagar colony and
slaughtered thousands of non-Bengali men and male children. Hundreds of non-
Bengali women were assaulted, killed or kidnapped. For two days, the Bengali
insurgents staged the bloodbath of non-Bengalis in Ramnagar. I was injured and
I lay in a heap of slain men. I wriggled out of it at night and hid in a deserted
school building. My daughter was killed but my son-in-law escaped and he is
still in East Pakistan. “
In Februray 1974, Qurban Ali was repatriated by the United Nations from
Chittagong to Karachi.
A hundred non-Bengali families lived in Mobarakganj. On March 29, 1971, the
Bengali insurgents invaded the township and exterminated almost all the non-
Bengali male adults. The pogrom continued for eight days. More than 200 non-
Bengalis were killed. Nearly a hundred young women were kidnapped; many
were raped. Those who resisted the attempts of their kidnappers to take them to
India were liquidated.
The male non-Bengali population in the Kaliganj, according to the witnesses
from Jessore, was wiped out by the insurgents in the last week of March and the
first week of April 1971 before the killers fled to India. Even small children were
done to death and their young mothers were kidnapped; many were raped. After
the rebels fled to India, some dead bodies of teenage girls whose breasts had
been slashed off were found in deserted houses. The insurgents had set up
chambers where mass sex assaults on young, non-Bengali women captives were
conducted. At least 300 non-Bengalis died in the massacre in Kaliganj.
In Kotchandpur, killer gangs of rebel soldiers and Awami Leaguers slaughtered
more than 850 non-Bengali men, women and children. There were very few
survivors. In Tafsidanga, the non-Bengali death toll was in the neighbourhood of
300. In the middle of March 1971, Awami League militants and jingoes of a
Bengali front organization, ‘Sangram Parishad’, started terrorising the residents
of this colony. They marked the non-Bengali houses. The
“kill “ was
accomplished in two days of loot, arson and murder on March 30 and 31. There
were not more than two score survivors.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
146
One of the witnesses recalled the gory murder of a Punjabi lieutenant of the
Pakistan Army on March 14. He had come to town from the cantonment to visit
an ailing friend. On the way back, a group of Awami League thugs ambushed
him and shot him dead. In the last week of March, many West Pakistani soldiers
were shanghaied by the Bengali mutineers near the cantonment. In the first week
of April, scores of Punjabis, who were detained by the insurgents in prisons and
police lockups, were killed by firing squads in paddy fields which were used as
execution grounds.
KOTCHANDPUR
Ghulam Warsi, 35, who lived in the Bara Bazar in Kotchandpur in Jessore district
and whose wife was killed and teenage daughter was kidnapped by a gang of
armed Awami Leaguers in March 1971, said:
“I have become prematurely old because of the woes and misfortunes which
ruined my life in March 1971. I was a cloth merchant and we lived in some
measure of affluence. I had many Bengali friends. We had lived in Kotchandpur
for many years and I spoke Bengali very well. About a thousand non-Bengalis
lived in this small town. Many were immigrants from Bihar and Uttar Pradesh in
India; some hailed from West Pakistan.
“The non-Bengalis were aware of the fact that some ultranationalistic Bengalis
amongst the Awami Leaguers were inciting the local population against the non-
Bengalis. On March 28, when I was in my cloth shop, I got the frightening news
that a large mob of armed Awami Leaguers had attacked the residential locality
where my house and those of hundreds of other non-Bengalis were located. I
closed my shop and I ran towards my house. It was with great difficulty that I
reached it through a back lane to avoid the killer mob. My house was amongst
the score of houses that were set ablaze. Unmindful of the lurid tongues of fire, I
rushed inside and retrieved my three little sons. My wife had been shot and lay
in a pool of blood. There was no trace of my teenage daughter. My children told
me that the killers had shot dead my wife because she courageously resisted
them when they grabbed my daughter. After the Pakistan Army re-established
its control over Kotchandpur, I travelled all over Jessore district in search of my
kidnapped daughter; I could not find her. The killers wiped out a smiling colony
of more than 1,000 non-Bengalis in two days. They kidnapped some 80 teenage
girls. “
Ghulam Warsi moved to Dacca with his three small children in mid-1971 and
was repatriated to Karachi in February 1974. In his prayers, he entreats the
Almighty to reunite him with his missing daughter. “I am sure my prayer will
be answered someday “, he said hopefully.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
147
On April 4, rebel troops from the East Bengal Regiment killed Italian Priest,
Reverend Mario Veronesi, in the Christian Fatima Catholic Hospital in Jessore.
Indian propagandists and their Awami League proteges blamed the Pakistan
Army for his slaying.
When the Italian Ambassador in Pakistan visited the Roman Catholic Mission in
Jessore to investigate the circumstances of Father Veronesi’s death, the military
authorities explained and offered evidence to prove that the Italian Priest was
killed by the Bengali rebels and not by the federal Army.
Facts show that Jessore was under the control of the Bengali rebels from the East
Bengal Regiment on April 4 when two insurgent soldiers, toting stcn guns, broke
into the premises of the Roman Catholic Hospital and gunned him to death. He
was not wearing a cassock at the time of his slaying. Having lived in East
Pakistan for some 18 years, his face was slightly bronzed and he could have
passed for a Pathan from the North West Frontier of Pakistan. The Bengali rebel
soldiers obviously mistook him for a West Pakistani —he had no robes of
priesthood on—and shot him dead, just as they had been gunning to death West
Pakistanis and other non-Bengalis by the thousands in Jessore late in March and
early in April 1971.
Eye-witnesses of the March-April 1971 killings of non-Bengalis in Jessore, who
were interviewed for this book in Karachi, maintained that their information was
that the Bengali rebel soldiers had killed Father Veronesi and four others in the
Roman Catholic Hospital. The 56-year-old Italian priest was buried in the
Hospital ground.
It was also revealed by these eye-witnesses that a large number of infiltrators
from India had seeped into the Jessore district to assist the Bengali rebels in
sabotage and terrorisation. Maurice Quaintance of the Reuters News Agency
who visited Jessore on May 8, 1971, along with five other foreign newsmen,
quoted the Area Commander as having said that “in the battle for the town, the
secessionists were helped by two companies of the Indian Border Security troops
sent into the Jessore area. “ Logistically, this was easy enough because of
Jessore’s proximity to the Indian border. Indian deployment of troops along the
India-East Pakistan border at that time was in excess of 100,000 men.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
148
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
Suffering in Narail
Narail is a small town in the Jessorc district. All through March 1971 it was
rocked by the tremors of the Awami League’s uprising. Not more than a
thousand non-Bengalis lived in this town. Between March 25 and April 6, some
800 of them were liquidated by the armed Awami leaguers and the Bengali rebel
soldiers. The most gruesome massacre was of nearly seventy Pathans — men,
women and children.
Thirty-five-year-old Ghafoor Ahmed, who was employed in a trading firm in
Narail, and his wife and two children luckily, escaped the slaughter of non-
Bengalis in the town and its neighbourhood. They owed their lives to a
courageous Bengali friend who sheltered them in his house at great risk to
himself and arranged their escape to Dacca. Early in January 1974, the United
Nations airlift brought them to Karachi. Ghafoor Ahmed said:
“I had lived in Narail for 15 years. I had bought a plot of land in Molvipara and
erected a mud house on it. I liked the Bengali Muslims and I had many friends
amongst them. Close to our locality was a Hindu temple. Many Hindus lived in
its vicinity. Our relations with them were not too happy. They disliked the non-
Bengali Muslim immigrants from India.
“In the last week of March 1971, local Awami Leaguers, Hindu militants and
rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles ganged up against the non-Bengalis and
went on a genocidal spree. On March 29-31, a killer gang attacked non-Bengali
houses and killed men, women and children by the hundreds.
“Two days before the massacre started, a religious Bengali Muslim friend
persuaded me to leave my house and stay in his home. He said that the rebels
were planning the slaughter of the non-Bengalis. He hid me and my wife and my
children in his house in the outskirts of Narail. On the day of the carnage—
March 29—in our locality, the Bengali rebels looted and burnt my house. They
also killed a number of Islam-loving Bengalis who had sided with the Muslim
League and the Jamaat-e-Islami in the 1970 general elections. The killer gang
inflicted heinous tortures on a respected local leader, Mohammed Imamuddin
before murdering him and his family of ten. “
After the Pakistan Army recovered Narail from the Bengali insurgents, added
Ghafoor Ahmed, the rebels and many of the local Hindus, who had participated
in the slaughter of non-Bengalis and pro-Pakistan Bengali Muslims, fled to India.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
149
It took many days before all the rotting dead bodies were interred in mass graves.
The rebels had thrown many scores of wounded men into blazing houses; their
charred skeletons were discovered after the federal troops cleared the rubble.
Bashir Ahmed, 31, who owned a shop in the Mujgunni locality of Narail and
who escaped death because of his excellent command of Bengali language, gave
this account of the March 1971 tragedy after he was repatriated to Karachi in
January, 1974:
“I had lived for many years in Jessore. After the death of my father, my wife and
my in-laws persuaded me to shift to Narail. I spoke Bengali so well that I easily
passed for a genuine Bengali. I owned a small shop in the Mujganni locality. I
had friendly relations with my non-Bengali as well as Bengali neighbours. In the
third week of March, Narail came under the grip of tension and the non-Bengalis
felt panicky. On March 26, I went to the main Bazar and consulted a Bengali
friend who owned a bicycle shop. He told me that the Awami leaguers and some
Bengali Hindus were spreading rumours against the non-Bengalis and were
inciting the Bengalis to kill them. He suspected that Indian agents had infiltrated
into Narail from West Bengal in India. He advised me to shift my family for a
few days to the house of a common Bengali friend on the outworks of Narail. I
acted on his advice.
“On March 29, on the way to my house, I saw a frenzied Bengali mob lynching
two non-Bengali young men. They clouted their victims with spears and iron
bars and hacked them to death. Another mob of heavily armed Bengalis, some
blazing away their guns to strike fear, attacked the houses of the non-Bengalis en
masse. They mistook me for a Bengali and I escaped to the hideout in my Bengali
friend’s home. That night, the bulk of the population of non-Bengalis in my
locality was wiped out and their houses were looted and burnt. “
Abdul Sattar, 26, who, along with his wife and two children, survived the March
1971 butchery in Narail was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in January 1974.
He gave the following account of his dramatic escape and of the killings in Narail:
“I was employed in a commercial firm in Narail. We lived in the Sonadanga
locality of the town. In the middle of March 1971, my wife and my two children
went to participate in the wedding of a relative in neighbouring Jessore. In the
absence of my family, I used to eat at the house of a very dear Bengali friend.
“Around March 28, my Bengali friend rushed to my house at night and
implored me to shift to his home at once because the rebels from the East
Pakistan Rifles and the armed Awami League militants had decided to murder
all the non-Bengalis. I accompanied him to his house and lived with him until the
federal army liberated Narail. When I went back to my house, it was a burnt out

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
150
rubble. Dead bodies lay in heaps in many houses; a few dogs and cats sniffed the
dead and licked the dried blood on their bodies. I saw a few decrepit old men
and women and knee-high children rummaging in the rubble for their deceased
dear ones. There were hardly any adult survivors of this genocidal fury. “
Sattar retrieved his wife and children from Jessore in the middle of April 1971,
soon after the federal army re-established its control. A Bengali friend of Sattar
had sheltered them in his house.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
151
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
Decimation in Bejardanga, Jhenidah
The Railway Station at Bejerdanga, a small town in the Jessore district, saw the
massacre of the non-Bengali employees by a roving band of armed Awami
Leaguers and the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles on March 20-21, 1971.
Twenty-year-old Muzaffar Ali, whose father, Masroor Ali, worked as the
Assistant Station Master at Bejerdanga, gave this account of the murder of his
father:
“Since the second week of March 1971, the non-Bengali Railway employees at
Bejerdanga were subjected to threats and insults by Awami League activists.
They continued working at the Railway Station despite these threats. As their
number was small, they had sent away their families to their relatives in Jessore
and Khulna. My mother and I went to live with an uncle in Jessore. My father
was very conscientious and refused to be absent from his duty.
“On March 20, a gang of 40 armed Awami Leaguers and rebel soldiers attacked
the Bejerdanga Railway Station. They dismantled a part of the rail track; they
ransacked the Station. They lined up the non-Bengali staff and gunned them to
death.
“We got the news of his murder after the Pakistan Army recovered Jessore and
Bejerdanga. There was no trace of his dead body. Our own escape from the
rebels’ butchery in Jessore was an act of God. “
Muzaffar Ali and his mother were repatriated to Karachi from Dacca in mid-
January 1974.
JHENIDAH
Awami League gunmen and rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles carried death
and destruction to non-Bengali homes in many parts of the Jhenidah sub-division
of the Jessore district.
The killings in Jhenidah and its neighbourhood started on March 24 and
continued with unabated fury till April 14, 1971 when a column of the Pakistan
Army routed the rebels. The mode of butchery in Jhenidah was similar to the
practice of savagery followed in Jessore and Narail for liquidating the non-
Bengalis. The non-Bengali death toll in Jhenidah sub-division was estimated at

