Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
92
Forty-year-old Ladli Masroor, whose husband, Mobeen Alam, was employed in
the Watch and Ward Department at Dinajpur Railway Station, gave this
narrative of the grisly events of March 1971:
“On March 25, at about 9 p.m., a killer gang of Bengali rebels raided our locality
in Dinajpur. They smashed the locked door of our house and overpowered my
husband. They tied him with ropes, clobbered him with an iron rod and looted
my house. As my children shrieked in terror, I begged the killers to spare my
husband. The attackers laughed and took possession of every article of value in
my house. “This transistor radio is mine “, said one of the raiders after grabbing
it from the wardrobe. Another killer took my husband’s watch. Two of them
frisked me for money and jewellery and stole all my ornaments. Behaving like
thugs and cut throats, they even took away my Saris. After they had
accomplished their errand of burglary, they dragged my husband to the street
and belaboured him so hard that he bled. I again begged his captors to free him
but they struck me with an iron rod and I fell down. They lined him up with
some other non-Bengalis of our locality and marched their captives in the
direction of the river. This was the last I saw of my husband. “Have faith in God
and look after the kids “, he shouted as the killers marched him away to what I
later learnt was the slaughter-house for liquidating the non-Bengalis.
“On April 10, a large mob of armed and yelling Bengalis stormed our locality.
They gathered all the non-Bengali women and children and marched them at
gunpoint to the bank of the river where the butchering of the non-Bengalis was
being done. I cowered in mortal terror when I saw this open-air slaughterhouse
and the faces of my innocent children. The women cried and screamed in terror;
some of them had spotted their men relatives being murdered by the Bengali
executioners. Dead bodies and blood littered the bank and the water of the river.
All of a sudden, the Bengali killers started running in complete disarray. A posse
of six Pakistan Army soldiers rushed towards us like angels on a rescue mission.
We were saved from death. The federal army took us to a Relief Camp in
Saidpur. In February 1974, we were repatriated to Pakistan. “
“The gory scene of the river-side slaughter-house haunts me. I saw the wooden
frames on which the non-Bengalis were beheaded with scythes and large knives;
I saw the boiling cauldrons in which the Bengali executioners dipped their
captives to extract information about their money “. This is how 30-year-old
Khatun Nisa, whose husband was employed in the police force in Dinajpur,
described the implements of torture that were innovated by the Bengali rebels at
the river-side, open-air human abattoir in Dinajpur. Khatun and her children and
hundreds of other hapless non-Bengali women and children (whose husbands
and fathers had been slaughtered in March 1971) were awaiting their turn to be
butchered when the Pakistan Army rescued them from the Bengali hangmen.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
93
Khatoon and her three children were repatriated to Pakistan in February 1974.
Khatun said:
“Since March 2, 1971, the Awami League militants and their supporters in
Dinajpur were on the warpath against the non-Bengalis. Some shops and houses
belonging to non-Bengalis were looted. But from March 17, they started
murdering the non-Bengali men and molesting their women. We became so
panicky owing to the militancy of the Awami Leaguers that in the night of March
21, when it was rumoured that our locality would be raided, my husband, Abdul
Ghaffar, my three children and I slipped out of our house by a back door and
went into hiding in a large cluster of shady trees about a furlong from our
dwelling. We found that a score of non-Bengali men, women and children were
already ensconced in this hideout. After an hour, we heard the noise of gunfire
from our locality, the yells of the Awami League attackers and the cries of the
victims for mercy and help. We also saw tongues of fire leaping from the houses
which had been set ablaze. The killers were tipped off about our escape and there
was a burst of firing in our direction.
“Some of us were injured but we kept quiet. We crawled towards the graveyard
where the graves could afford us protection from the volleys of bullets fired on
us. Early in the morning, we moved into a deserted school building and stayed in
it unobtrusively for three days. Most of us lived on water, brought at night from
a nearby pond, and wild fruits and roots. In the afternoon of March 29, an armed
band of Bengali rebel raided our hideout and rounded up all the non-Bengali
men, including my husband. Some who resisted were ruthlessly beaten and tied
up with ropes. The women begged the rebels to spare the lives of their menfolk
but the killer gang was heartless.
“We will spare you; you will make good
maidservants in our homes “, the rebels said to us. Under a blazing sun and with
lifted guns, the killer gang marched their non-Bengali captives to what we later
on learnt was the execution ground on the bank of a river two miles away. The
next morning the killer gang returned and ordered us to accompany them post
haste.
“A shiver of fear ran down our spines when we neared the bank of the river and
saw the human slaughter-house which the rebels had established for killing the
helpless non-Bengalis. It was hell on earth. A wooden frame on which the
victims were decapitated, hanging nooses attached to trees, metallic urns with
boiling water for dipping victims to extract information and an assortment of
gleaming daggers, knives, scythes and spears gave this patch of verdant land by
the placid waters of the river a macabre setting of torture, fire and death. There
was blood all over the place. Heaps of dead bodies, awaiting a watery grave,
generated a nauseating stench. After a dozen men had been butchered before our
glazed eyes, a Bengali soldier shouted an order:
“Take these women and

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
94
children to the far end of the bank; there is too much of stink and bloody muck
here “. The ogres, who were engaged in the butchery, responded with
“Yes,
Major “ and motioned us, with their knives, to run down the bank of the river.
We had hardly any strength left in us and we dragged ourselves with difficulty
towards the water. We had become so resigned to fate and we were so terribly
weak that we had lost the zest for life and we begged our killers to finish us off
quickly. Escape was impossible; there were at least 500 hatchet-men on the spot;
many were armed with guns. Suddenly, pandemonium broke loose and our
tormentors started running for their lives. On the far end of a ridge, silhouetted
against the twilight sky, were a dozen Pakistani soldiers who were racing
towards us like angels sent for our deliverance. Their yells of “Allah is Great
“ rent the skies, and in a matter of minutes our beastly captors melted away in a
nearby forest. The Pakistani troops took us to a Relief Camp; those who were
injured were hospitalised and the dead were given a solemn burial. From the
third week of December, 1971, after India’s occupation of East Pakistan, the
Mukti Bahini and its supporters unleashed an avalanche of suffering on us. Now
that we have come to Pakistan, we feel we have been given a fresh lease of life. “
Fifty-year-old Hasina Begum lived with her husband, Kabir Ahmed Khan, an
affluent businessman, on the outskirts of Dinajpur town. She lost her husband in
the March 1971 massacre but she saved the lives of two teenage daughters of
their best friend, a lawyer. Her two sons had gone into hiding in a nearby forest.
After the federal army re-established its authority over Dinajpur, Hasina
encouraged her sons to join the Pakistan Army. In December 1971, they were
taken prisoner in an encounter with the enemy on the border. In December 1973,
Hasina was repatriated to Karachi from Dacca. “I am confident that Allah will
bring my sons to Pakistan sooner than I expect “, she said hopefully. Hasina
testified:
“Since the first week of March 1971, the Awami League militants had started
terrorising the non-Bengalis. In the middle of the month, their animus for the
non-Bengalis assumed a new dimension of cold-blooded violence, kidnapping
and murder. We started experiencing the sharp edge of terror when a few non-
Bengali men of our locality were shanghaied by killer gangs of Bengali rebels
around March 17. I sent my two teenage sons to live in hiding with a trusted
Bengali family in a nearby village. A lawyer friend of my husband, his two
daughters and his brother came to stay with us. Their house was located in the
main part of the town where violence against the non-Bengalis had mushroomed.
We heard a rumour that on March 24 the Bengali rebels would attack the non-
Bengalis in our locality. I was worried because of the reports that the Bengali
rebels were kidnapping and molesting non-Bengali young women also. With the
consent of my husband and his lawyer friend, I spread a mat on the floor of a dry,
derelict water tank in the compound of my house, made the two girls lie on it

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
95
and covered them with a heap of banana leaves. I instructed them to lie still until
they heard a code word from me. The camouflage was so perfect that even their
father could not believe that the girls lay concealed under the pile of leaves.
“As we had expected, in the night of March 24, a yelling mob of armed Bengali
rebels raided our locality. They broke into our house and overpowered my
husband, our lawyer friend and his younger brother. I tried to go with my
husband, but the raiders struck me with a stick and I writhed in pain. They
rounded up some other non-Bengalis and drove them at gunpoint towards the
river which, I learnt subsequently, was used as the butchery ground. I was
nursing my swollen ankle when there was again an ominous knock on the front
door. When I delayed opening it the raiders fired on it. I opened the door and
four of them trooped in with menacing looks.
“Where are the lawyer’s
daughters? “ barked one of them. I told the brutes that the girls were not in my
house. They ransacked the entire house; looted all our valuables and even took
away the tableware in our home. But, God be thanked, they did not eye the leaf-
covered tank where the girls lay concealed. I locked the door tightly; I barricaded
it with an almiral and two big tables to prevent swift intrusion from outside.
“At night, I crawled to the water tank and gave water and rice to the girls. They
bore the suffering patiently and lay still under the camouflage for a whole week.
On April 10, soldiers of the Pakistan Army, shouting “Allah is Great “ came to
my house and rescued us. The girls looked like ghosts as they emerged from
hiding. Just then my two sons also joined us. The Pakistani soldiers helped us in
our frantic search all over the town for my husband and the father and the uncle
of the two girls. But there was no trace of them. Obviously they were done to
death in the slaughter-house on the bank of the river by the Bengali rebels. We
gave the Pakistani troops the details of the hoodlums who had looted our house;
all these criminals had fled from Dinajpur and gone to India. “
Zaibunnissa, 30, who lost her husband, Abdul Aziz, her son and her only brother
in the March 1971 massacre of non-Bengalis in Dinajpur, has this recollection of
that tragedy:
“On March 23, the Awami League militants, who were in power in the town,
imposed a curfew in our locality and ordered all the non-Bengali men to attend a
meeting of the so-called Peace Committee. A killer squad came to our house and
forced my husband and my son to accompany the gang. We suspected that the
Peace Committee was a ruse which the killers used for kidnapping non-Bengalis
but the killer gang was well-armed and we were helpless. I never saw my
husband and my son again.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
96
“On March 26, the killers again raided my house in search of my brother. They
caught him while he was trying to escape into the woods. Before my dazed eyes,
one of the killers shot him in the chest at point blank range. As he fell down, he
asked for water. I ran to him with a glass of water; the killers hurled the glass
from my hand and plugged a second bullet into the skull of my brother. He was
dead and a torrent of blood gushed out from his lifeless body. Two old non-
Bengali women, who lived in our neighbourhood, helped me in digging a grave
in which I buried my brother.
“On March 30, the killer gang again came to my house, ransacked it and asked
me at gunpoint where I had hidden my ornaments. When I told them that I had
none left, they forced me to go with a group of non-Bengali women and children
to the bank of the river. One of the hapless women tucked a copy of the Holy
Quran in her arm; a gunman snatched it from her and threw it on the ground.
We reached the execution ground and saw hundreds of other non-Bengalis lined
up for murder. The killings were conducted till late at night; it was like a scene
from hell. It seemed that the river ran red with the blood of the innocents. The
Bengali rebels had beheaded many of their victims; we saw their severed heads
looking up from blood-soaked sods of earth. Hundreds of dead bodies lay on the
bank of the river, awaiting disposal in the water. The next day, when all was set
for the execution of our group, a posse of soldiers of the Pakistan Army suddenly
appeared on the skyline and our executors scattered in fear. God had heard our
prayers; we were saved. The Pakistani soldiers lodged us in a Relief Camp and
we were looked after very well. But after December 16, 1971, when the Mukti
Bahini ruled Dinajpur, we were again the victims of terror. Hundreds of
widowed women, like me, walked to Saidpur where we were told that the Red
Cross would set up a Relief Camp and protect us from the killer gangs. For two
and a quarter years, we lived in abject poverty and many of the hapless women
died. In January 1974, I was repatriated to Pakistan. “
Eye-witnesses of the killings in Dinajpur town reported that non-Bengalis were
almost wiped out in the neighbouring towns of Bochaganj, Pirganj, Chorkoy,
Ranisankail, Fulbaria, Kaharol, Birganj, Ponchagarh and Chirirbandar between
the second week of March and the third week of April 1971. As the federal Army
re-established its control over these towns, the Bengali militant, who conducted
“Operation Loot, Burn and Kill “ against the non-Bengalis, escaped to the
sanctuary of the neighbouring Indian State of West Bengal. There is considerable
evidence to support the view that the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles, who
spear-headed the pogrom against the non-Bengalis, received instructions and
help from India. The Times of London, in its issue of April, 6, 1971, quoted a
young British technician who had crossed the Indo-Pakistan frontier at Hilli:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
97
“He said that hundreds of non-Bengali Muslims must have died in the north-
western town of Dinajpur alone. After the soldiers left, the mobs set upon the
non-Bengali Muslims from Bihar. I don’t know how many died but I could hear
the screams throughout the night. In other parts of the region, he said. Biharis
had been rounded up and were being held as hostages..... “
Some eye-witnesses said that a few God-fearing Bengali Muslims, who sheltered
non-Bengalis and were detected, were jailed by the rebels in March 1971. After
India’s seizure of East Pakistan in the third week of December 1971, thousands of
Bengalis, who remained loyal to Pakistan, were clapped into prison and many
were tortured by the Mukti Bahini and the police force it organized.
Hundreds of non-Bengalis were murdered by the Mukti Bahini and their
supporters in Dinajpur between the second fortnight of December 1971 and the
first half of 1972. The Correspondent of the largely-circulating West German
Magazine, Stern of Hamburg, Herr Braumann, flew from Dacca to Dinajpur on
February 29, 1972, and saw 80 to 100 corpses of Biharis scattered in a shallow pit.
Although the Bengali deputy commissioner of Dinajpur claimed that they were
the bodies of the Bengalis who had been killed by the Pakistan Army, Braumann
doubted the claim because the corpses were almost fresh. In his despatch
published in the Stern magazine on March 12, 1972, Braumann reported:
“....it did not seem possible—in view of the very slight decomposition—that the
corpses in the mass grave were of Bengalis; they could only be of Biharis “.
Braumann described in his despatch how the Mukti Bahini commander of
Dinajpur, Mohammed Khurshid, procured a dozen Biharis from the Bihari
ghetto in Saidpur for being slaughtered to mark “the building of a monument in
Dinajpur for a Mukti Bahini hero who was shot by the Pakistanis “.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
98
CHAPTER EIGHT
Carnage in Parbatipur
“March 1971 was like a typhoon of fire and death for thousands of innocent non-
Bengali men, women and children in Parbatipur, “ said 42- year-old Azizullah
Ansari, a school teacher, who lost his wife and two children in the massacre.
Ansari, who taught in the Model High School in Parbatipur, said that before the
March 1971 carnage in his town, it was utterly unthinkable for him that the non-
Bengalis would be the victims of such brutality. He lived in Dacca for a year after
this tragedy in his life and was repatriated to Karachi in December 1973. He
testified:
“The Awami Leaguers had started terrorising the non-Bengalis in Parbatipur
since the early days of March 1971. As many non-Bengalis were employed in the
Railway establishment at Parbatipur, they and their families, who lived in the
Railway Colony, were one of the main targets of harassment by the rebels. Non-
Bengalis who lived in clusters of houses in other localities of the town were also
terrorised by armed Bengali miscreants.
“In the last week of March 1971— I think it was the 22nd of the month— armed
Awami League volunteers and the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles ran amok
and unleashed an orgy of murder, arson, loot and rape on the non-Bengalis. We
closed the school before the scheduled time and the children, mostly Bengalis,
left for their homes. I heard from an attendant in the school that a killer mob had
gone towards my locality and I ran in the direction of my house. There were a
dozen non-Bengali houses in my vicinity. As I neared my house, I saw it aflame.
Some other houses were also burning. Unmindful of the flames, I entered it. My
world collapsed when I saw the burnt bodies of my wife and my two little
children; they were lifeless. I pulled them outside, hoping to revive them. They
were dead as scorched mutton. I cried over my loved ones all through the night; I
was nearly insane. The fire had subsided and one of the two rooms was intact. I
put the bodies of my wife and my two children under a partly burnt mattress in
the room; their burial just then was out of the question; the killers would have
got me. I lived inside this grave of a house for more than a week until the federal
troops arrived and rescued me. A part of me is still in Parbatipur — my wife and
children who lie buried in a graveyard there. “
Eye-witnesses of the carnage in Parbatipur estimate that about 3,000 non-
Bengalis lost their lives in March-April, 1971.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
99
Forty-six-year old Abdur Rashid, a Railway employee at Parbatipur who lived in
Railway Quarter No. 153 (N), had a vivid but benumbing recollection of the
slaughter of non-Bengalis in trains in March 1971:
“On March 12, the train from Ishurdi arrived ten hours late at Parbatipur. The
reason was that a band of armed Awami League volunteers and other miscreants
had stopped it at a wayside station and slaughtered many of the non-Bengali
passengers. I was at the Railway station when the ill-fated train steamed in with
170 dead bodies of non-Bengali men, women and children. Most of the bodies
were horribly mutilated. Also on the train were some 75 wounded non-Bengalis;
many of them were in a critical condition. They were removed to the local
hospital; only a few survived. Amongst the dead bodies on the train were those
of suckling children who had been stabbed brutally along with their mothers. It
was a horrifying scene and the memory of it gives me a shiver even now. After
this episode, it became terribly dangerous for non-Bengalis to travel in trains.
Similar incidents were reported from quite a few other places... “
Abdur Rashid and his wife and children escaped the massacre in Parbatipur.
They suffered excruciating hardships after India’s conquest of East Pakistan.
They came to Karachi via Nepal in April 1973.
Abbas Ali, 45, who worked as a school teacher in Parbatipur and lived in a house
on New Road, testified:
“In the second week of March, 1971, the Awami League militants began
terrorising the non-Bengalis. On March 19, a killer gang attacked a large number
of non-Bengali houses in a locality close to where I lived. They had sten guns and
rifles. They looted the non-Bengali houses and burnt some of them. They killed a
few non Bengalis and kidnapped a number of teenage girls. I am convinced that
most of the killers who raided our locality were Bengali Hindus and some of
them spoke Bengali with an accent which resembled that of the West Bengalis in
India. The Bengali rebels conducted the liquidation of the majority of the non-
Bengali population in Parbatipur in stages. It reached its peak in the first week of
April when wholesale slaughter of the non-Bengalis became the order of the day.
I escaped the massacre with the help of a Bengali family which sheltered me “.
Abbas Ali was repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in February 1974. He thinks
that the Awami League militants had drugged a large segment of the Bengali
population in Parbatipur with lies against Pakistan, the people of West Pakistan
and the federal government. “What amazed me was the fact “, he added, “that
the killer gangs even desecrated mosques. This was extraordinary and incredible
because most of the Bengalis I had known were religious and God-fearing people
“.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
100
Another survivor of the March 1971 butchery in Parbatipur is Maimunnissa, 40,
who said:
“My husband, Shajiuddin, had retired from Railway service. He and I and our
grown up son lived in our own house in a crowded locality in Parbatipur. In the
last week of March 1971, a large gang of armed Bengali militants raided our
house and looted it. My husband and my son were luckily out of town. The
attackers asked me to leave the house and they burnt it. Utterly helpless, I
watched my house burn. A neighbour sheltered me. After the federal army re-
established its control over Parbatipur, my husband and my son returned to our
burnt home. In the middle of April, we rebuilt our house and we again lived in it.
My son, Mohammed Ali, joined the Pakistan Army and he was posted in a
border area. We were very proud of him.
“On December 17, 1971, after the surrender of the Pakistani troops to India in
Dacca, armed gangs of Bengali killers were again on the rampage in Parbatipur.
We decided to escape to Saidpur where we had some relatives. My husband put
me in a train bound for Saidpur in the evening of December 17. He said he
would come the next day. A former Railway colleague of his, a Bengali, had
promised to shelter him for the night in his house. The next day, I learnt from an
old friend of his at Saidpur Railway station that a killer mob had caught my
husband in the vicinity of the Parbatipur Railway Station and hacked him to
death. I lived in Saidpur in abject poverty and suffering for two years. I wrote to
the Red Cross about my son in the Army. To this day, I have no news of him. I
was repatriated to Karachi in February 1974 “.
Fifty-year-old Sitara Bano, whose husband. Abdul Qadir, owned a provision
store in Parbatipur, testified:
“In the March 1971 massacre in Parbatipur, my husband, my son, my teenage
daughter and I escaped from the town just before a raid on our locality. My
husband’s shop was looted; our house was burnt. We returned to the town after
the federal army regained control over it. We rebuilt our shop and our house; my
son got a clerical job in a firm. But on December 17, 1971 when the surrender of
the Pakistan Army in Dacca to the Indian Army was announced, the Mukti
Bahini supporters and other Awami Leaguers began the slaughter of the non-
Bengalis and pro-Pakistan Bengalis. In the evening, I learnt that my husband and
my son were butchered by a killer mob. My daughter and I left that very evening
for Saidpur. We took up employment in a Bengali home. But we lived haunted
lives because almost every week there were rumours that the Mukti Bahini
would kill all the surviving non-Bengali women and children. My daughter was
married in 1972 and is some where in East Pakistan. I was repatriated to Karachi
from Saidpur via Dacca in January 1974.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
101
CHAPTER NINE
Slaying in Thakurgaon, Hilli
The Awami League’s rebellion cast its dark and ominous shadow on the lives of
the non-Bengali populace in Thakurgaon, a town in the Dinajpur district, in the
middle of March 1971. Before the outburst of genocidal frenzy against the non-
Bengalis in the last week of the month, the belabouring of non-Bengali young
men by groups of Bengalis on the streets and in alleys had become a frequent
occurrence. The police had swung to the side of the Awami League rebels.
In the last week of March and the first fortnight of April 1971, armed Bengali
rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles joined the Awami Leaguers and unleashed
terror and death on the non-Bengalis. About 3,000 innocents were killed in this
barbaric slaughter. More than two-third of the non-Bengali population in
Thakurgaon was wiped out; their houses were looted and many were burnt.
Dead bodies by the hundreds were deliberately incinerated in blazing houses by
the killers. Non-Bengali teenage girls were kidnapped, ravished and tortured in
sex assault chambers; most of them were murdered by the rebels before they quit
the town. Some pregnant women were bayoneted; their still born babies were
bludgeoned. The dead bodies of some prominent non-Bengalis were dragged
through the streets and displayed in public from flagpoles. The Army regained
control over Thakurgaon on April 15, 1971.
Mohammad Sohail Tanvir, 21, an articulate student who lived with his father in
their own house in Rahmatganj in Thakurgaon town, described the murder of his
father by the Bengali rebels in these words: “My father was a prominent Muslim
Leaguer in Thakurgaon. He had served as a Basic Democrat for many years and
was respected by the Bengali and non-Bengali residents alike. We had lived in
Thakurgaon for more than 18 years and we spoke Bengali very well. My father
had done well in business and bought some property. He helped many
charitable institutions in the town.
“In the last week of March 1971, a pall of death and destruction enveloped the
non-Bengalis in Thakurgaon and several thousands of them lost their lives. My
father had gone to the main Mosque in our locality to offer his evening prayers.
With him were two non-Bengali and a Bengali friend. As they stepped out of the
Mosque, a killer gang of Bengali rebels brutally killed him and his three friends.
They threw the dead bodies inside the Mosque and wiped out other non-
Bengalis in the neighbourhood. I and some members of my family escaped the
carnage with the help of a God-fearing Bengali friend of my father. After India’s

