Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
132
The destruction brought by the rebels in Rangpur, added Mohammed Yusuf,
was premeditated and wanton. The scale and ferocity of it was beyond the
wildest imagination of the non-Bengalis.
“I learnt from a few other survivors of the massacre “, continued Mohammed
Yusuf, “that after the killer gang had slaughtered the non-Bengali menfolk and
most of their male children; the women were herded in the building of the Iqbal
High School. The young ones were stripped of their clothes at gunpoint and
marched off to a nearby building where they were assaulted and raped by the
rebels. Before the insurgents retreated from Rangpur, they murdered these
unfortunate girls and scattered their naked bodies either in the river or in the
lush green fields “.
Junaid Ahmed, 21, who was a College student in Rangpur and lived with his
parents and two brothers in a rented house on Satgumbad Road, was injured in
the massacre of non-Bengalis in his locality on March 23, 1971. Junaid, who was
repatriated from Dacca to Karachi in January 1974, had this recollection of that
horrifying scene:
“My father, Aqil Ahmed, was a clerk in the Patna High Court. In August 1947,
after Pakistan was established, my parents migrated to East Pakistan and made
Rangpur their home. I was born in Rangpur. Although we spoke excellent
Bengali, we were considered Biharis. We had no relatives left in Bihar. Rangpur
was our home.
“On March 10, peace in Rangpur was disturbed when a band of Awami
Leaguers, armed with guns, spears and daggers, attacked a cluster of non-
Bengali houses and shops. Some Biharis were killed or maimed. After this event,
the non-Bengalis lived in terror and almost every day one or two incidents of the
manhandling of non-Bengalis by thugs of the Awami League were reported.
There were widespread round-ups of non-Bengalis by the rebels.
“On March 23, about six hundred armed Awami Leaguers and rebel soldiers of
the East Pakistan Rifles stormed our locality and spread fire and death in non-
Bengali homes. We had no weapons to resist these gun-blazing cut-throats. They
machine gunned me and the other members of my family. I miraculously
survived.
“I estimate that the death toll in my locality was in the neighbourhood of 5,000.
The killers murdered 2,000 men, 700 women and 2,300 children. They kidnapped
at least 500 teenage girls; many were raped and killed and some were taken
away by the rebels to India........... “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
133
“Almost all the non-Bengalis in Kishoreganj were liquidated by the Bengali
rebels in the last week of March 1971 “, said Jamal Ahmed, 48, who lived in the
Alamnagar colony in Rangpur town. Employed in a retail store in Rangpur, he
often visited neighbouring towns on business errands. Very fluent in Bengali,
Ahmed had many Bengali and non-Bengali friends in Kishoreganj. On March 23-
24, he was in Kishoreganj when the militants in an Awami League-sponsored
procession went berserk and looted the shops and houses owned by non-
Bengalis. Over the next few days, he said, the avalanche of the Awami League’s
terror hit the non-Bengalis with catastrophic suddenness and there was a
wholesale slaughter of the non-Bengali population. The killer gangs, he added,
asked no questions from their victims; they just sprayed them with bullets. Jamal
Ahmed’s Bengali business friend in Kishoreganj protected him in his house for
more than a week. When he returned to Rangpur in the third week of April, he
found, to his utter dismay, that his house in Alamnagar had been looted and his
wife and sister-in-law were kidnapped. For months, he frantically searched for
them but they remained untraced. He was repatriated to Karachi in November
1973.
Jamal Ahmed reported that small groups of non-Bengalis, who lived in
Badarganj, Mahiganj, Pirgacha and Kaunia, were wiped out by the Bengali rebels
in the last week of March and the first fortnight of April 1971. Most of the Awami
Leaguers and their supporters, who had masterminded and executed the grisly
killings in Rangpur, he said, fled to West Bengal in India after the Pakistan Army
regained control over the area late in April 1971. He claimed that he had seen
Bengali Hindus from the Cooch Behar district of West Bengal in Kishoreganj and
they
were
well-armed.
According
to
Jamal
Ahmed,
many
non-Bengali
passengers were murdered by Awami League cadres in launches in the Tista
river and he came to know of it from a Bengali friend who was related to a
Serang (Captain of the boat).

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
134
CHAPTER TWENTY:
Gunfire Ravages Nilphamari, Saidpur
Some 5,000 non-Bengalis lived in Nilphamari town in Rangpur district before the
March 1971 disturbances. In the last week of the month— March 23 to 30—
almost half of them were decimated. The instigators of the carnage and the
executioners were the armed Awami League volunteers, aided by the rebels of
the East Pakistan Rifles.
Jamila Khatoon, 55, whose three sons, two daughters and a son-in-law perished
in the slaughter in her locality, Kopilmoni, in the night of March 24-25, 1971, thus
related her story:
“We had lived for many years in Nilphamari. All of us spoke Bengali very well.
After the death of my husband, my sons looked after me.
“Stray incidents in which non-Bengalis were the victims had taken place in some
parts of Nilphamari since the third of March 1971. We had heard rumours that
the Awami Leaguers and the rebel policemen were secretly planning the
massacre of the non-Bengalis but we had no way of escape.
“In the morning of March 24, the flames of organized violence engulfed our
locality. A large mob of armed miscreants raided non-Bengali homes and
brutally killed their inmates; their houses were looted and some were burnt. In
the night, a killer gang smashed the front door of our house and, without utterirg
a word, machinegunned the inmates. My three sons, my two daughters, my son-
in-law and I were hit and we slumped to the ground in a pool of blood. The
raiders hurriedly looted out valuables and trooped out for the next kill. I was
injured in the leg and I lost consciousness. The next morning when. I awoke I
found that all my dear ones were dead. It was a ghastly scene in the house. The
dead bodies were buried after the Pakistan Army regained control over
Nilphamari. I went to live with a relative in Chittagong late in 1971 after I had
lost my eye-sight. The tragedy in my life had made me blind. I was repatriated to
Karachi in February 1974. “
Jamila recalled that the murderous gangs had kidnapped many non-Bengali
teenage girls whose dead bodies were found in derelict tanks after the rebels
retreated from the town.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
135
SAIDPUR
“At least 5,000 non-Bengalis perished in the massacre in Saidpur, an important
Railway Centre, in the last week of March I971 “, said Nuruddin Ahmed, 42, an
employee of the East Pakistan Railway at that time.
Nuruddin Ahmed lived in Railway Quarter No. 59/A in Saidpur. Amongst those
killed was his son-in-law. His daughter was kidnapped by the rebels. His
account of the gory events in Saidpur reads:
“In 1947, I had opted for service in Pakistan and was transferred from the
Howrah Railway Station to Chittagong. Later on, I was posted to Saidpur where
I lived for 11 years. I had married my daughter, Shahla to a young Railway
employee and they lived in a separate Railway Quarter.
“On March 25, a large mob of armed Awami League volunteers and rebels from
the East Pakistan Rifles attacked the non-Bengali residential areas in Saidpur,
including those in the Railway Colony. They killed my son-in-law and his
brothers and kidnapped my daughter and her sister-in-law. When the Pakistan
Army re-establishcd its control, I did my best to locate them but to this day I am
unaware of their fate. “
Nuruddin was not in his house on the fateful day when the non-Bengali homes
were attacked and he escaped the massacre. He added:
“After the Pakistan Army re-occupied Saidpur early in April, 1971, the local
Administration set up a Peace Committee to maintain peace and to dissuade the
non-Bengalis from seeking revenge for the massacre conducted by the Bengali
rebels. After India’s military victory in East Pakistan in December 1971, we
underwent woeful suffering and many non-Bengalis were killed by the Mukti
Bahini and their supporters. With great difficulty I succeeded in escaping to
Nepal from where I was repatriated to Karachi in July 1973. “
Another eye-witness from Saidpur, Hasina Begum, whose son was a Railway
employee at Kamlapur Railway Station, reported that on March 25, 1971, her
house was looted by the Bengali rebels when they went on the rampage against
non-Bengalis. Her son escaped the March 1971 killing but late in December 1971,
he was kidnapped by the Mukti Bahini and remained untraced. Hasina, 42, came
to Karachi in December 1973.
Other eye-witnesses reported that a mob of at least 8,000 armed Bengalis staged
the bloodbath of non-Bengalis in Saidpur on March 24-25, 1971. Before starting
the pogrom, the killer mob had blueprinted the plan of slaughter and the houses
of non-Bengalis in Saidpur were marked. Prior to the raid on their homes, every

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
136
shop owned by a non-Bengali was looted and burnt. A jeep of the Pakistan Army,
which was moving on the highway on the fringes of the town, was ambushed by
an unruly mob. The five West Pakistani soldiers riding in it were overwhelmed
and done to death. The jeep was grabbed and used by a group of insurgents from
the East Pakistan Rifles for their lawless and destructive operations in Saidpur.
Witnesses from Saidpur said that by the third week of March 1971, the entire
local administration had joined the Awami League’s insurrection. On March 19,
the Deputy Commissioner of Rangpur presided over a meeting of Awami
League leaders and district officials where specially-summoned leaders of the
non-Bengalis were told that they would be wiped out if they did not support the
rebellion actively.
Late in the night of March 23, 1971, more than 1,00,000 armed Bengali rebels
attacked the non-Bengali settlements in Saidpur and Golahat and the Pakistan
Army’s garrison in Saidpur Cantonment. The siege continued for some 36 hours
during which the Bengali rebels put to the torch 94 houses and shops belonging
to non-Bengalis in Saidpur town. In the Cantonment, the Bengali troops of the
East Bengal Regiment rebelled and attacked the West Pakistani officers and
soldiers. Swiftly recovering from the initial surprise, the West Pakistani troops
overpowered the Bengali mutineers and the Awami League raiders from the
town and its neighbourhood. A daring Army officer from West Pakistan, Captain
Fateh Mohammed Shah, struck out from the Cantonment with a company of
soldiers and rescued the beleaguered non-Bengalis in Saidpur town and the
Railway Station. By the forenoon of March 29, 1971, Saidpur town and Golahat
were firmly under the control of the Pakistan Army and the Bengali rebels
retreated in disarray. For days, before the Bengali rebels attacked the Saidpur
Cantonment on March 23-25, the Awami League insurrectionists had blocked the
despatch of supplies from the Saidpur Railway Station to the Army garrison. But
as the Army was under instruction from Islamabad to show the utmost restraint,
the West Pakistani troops in Saidpur cantonment took no punitive action against
the Awami League militants. It was only after the insurrectionists, abortive
attempt to seize the cantonment that the West Pakistani troops went into action
on March 25, 1971.
The Government of Pakistan’s White Paper of August 1971 on the East Pakistan
crisis contained this account of the grisly events in Saidpur on March 25, 1971:
“In Saidpur, four violent mobs, armed with rifles, shot guns and daggers, who
had come from neighbouring villages, converged on Saidpur town and attacked
Golahat, an adjacent locality, killing three persons and injuring 17.
“Among the wounded, two had sustained bullet injuries while another seven
were hurt from shot-gun fire. The remaining persons were injured by poles and
clubs. Fifty houses were also burnt. The troops had to open fire and three

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
137
persons were injured. Later, another violent mob attacked Saidpur Cantonment.
They fired at troops with shot-guns. The soldiers had to open fire, injuring five
persons. “
Witnesses said that a violent mob, which went on the rampage in Saidpur
against non-Bengalis on March 25, was led by Awami League militants who
incited the mob to loot and burn non-Bengali houses and kill their inmates. The
killer mob indulged in orgies of violence in neighbouring Golahat also where
most of the non-Bengalis were killed or maimed. Holding up trains and picking
off the non-Bengali passengers had become a favourite pastime of the Bengali
killer gangs.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
138
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Killings in Lalmonirhat
Lalmonirhat, an important Railway Centre in the Rangpur district, felt the
repercussions of the Awami League’s rebellion from the first week of March 1971.
The local Awami Leaguers and their supporters staged frequent shows of
strength to frighten the non-Bengalis. Armed with staves, daggers and shotguns,
they led large processions through those localities where the non-Bengalis were
concentrated. On March 9, 1971, a blood-thirsty mob of armed Awami league
volunteers and rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles attacked the houses of non-
Bengalis not far from the Railway Station and caused heavy casualties. They
looted and burnt many houses and killed about 200 non-Bengalis. In the last
week of March, their genocidal campaign reached its pitch and killer gangs
liquidated another 800 non-Bengalis in the town. About 500 young non-Bengali
women were kidnapped and many were ravished by their captors.
Thirty-year-old Zohra, whose husband, Mohammed Israel, owned a provision
store and house near the Railway Station, gave this account of the gory
happenings in Lalmonirhat in March 1971:
“Although our relations with our Bengali neighbours were cordial, Awami
League volunteers from other parts of the town had held out alarming threats to
the non-Bengalis in our locality. My husband and I wanted to shift, with our
children, to Chittagong where also we owned a small house. But travel from
Lalmonirhat was hazardous because of the slaying of non-Bengalis in trains and
on the highways.
“A major flare-up occurred on March 9 when about 200 armed Bengali militants
raided our locality, looted non-Bengali homes and set many houses ablaze. They
looted and burnt our shop; they burst into my house and stole every article of
value, including my ornaments. My husband was away; they turned me and my
two children out of the house and set it on fire. Some Bengali neighbours pleaded
for our lives and the killers spared us. We watched our house burn and we
wrung our hands in despair; my ears were deafened by the rat-rat of machine-
guns and the screams and groans of the victims. The killer gang retired from this
locality late at night.
“We sat on the pavement all through the night; in the early hours of the morning,
the intensity of the fire which burnt three-fourth of our house subsided. We
slipped inside and lived a haunted life for 20 days until the federal army
liberated Lalmonirhat. The fact that most of our house was burnt saved our lives
from a killer gang which was again on the loose in our locality in the last week of

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
139
March. My husband had joined us but we had to hide him because the rebels
were murdering all the non-Bengali men.
“On March 29, when we had no water and food left in the house, the federal
troops entered Lalmonirhat and rescued us. They arranged our shifting to
Chittagong but our house there was reduced to rubble. The Awami League
terrorists had burnt it in mid-March. We lived in a rented house and my husband
hawked merchandise and earned enough to feed us.
“On December 17, 1971, when East Pakistan was seized by India and the Mukti
Bahini, our misfortunes began afresh. The Mukti Bahini looted our home and
threw us on the streets. We sought refuge in a camp for non-Bengalis in the
Sirdar Bahadur School building in Chittagong. On the night of December 18/19,
1971, a killer gang, led by the killers of the Mukti Bahini, raided this school
building and “arrested “ all the non-Bengali men and teenage boys. My husband
was one of them. I fell down at the feet of one of these gunmen; but he kicked me
in the face and my forehead bled. I was utterly helpless. My children and I lived
in this camp for two years. I made frantic efforts to get news of my husband.
There were rumours that the Mukti Bahini had murdered all the non-Bengali
men they had hijacked from our camp. In January 1974, my children and I were
repatriated to Karachi from Chittagong. My constant prayer to God is to re-unite
us with my husband. “
Thirty-year-old Zahida Khatoon, whose husband, Mohammed Ismail, was
employed at Lalmonirhat in the East Pakistan Railway.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
140
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Inferno in Jessore
Jessore, a cantonment town of strategic importance near the Indian border,
witnessed a bloodbath of thousands of non-Bengalis and some pro-Pakistan
Bengalis between the first week of March and the early days of April 1971. The
killers were the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles and police, armed Awami
League volunteers and Hindu Bengali infiltrators from India.
The strength of the beleaguered West Pakistani troops in the Jessore cantonment
was too inadequate to contain the xenophobic fury and homicidal frenzy of the
rebel soldiers and their Awami League supporters. The first gruesome incident
during this period of gunfire and gore occurred on March 4, 1971 when a train
coming from Khulna was derailed by a gang of saboteurs at Jessore. Scores of
non-Bengali passengers—men, women and children—were pulled out of the
train compartments by armed Bengali militants, looted and done to death. Their
dead bodies were strewn on the rail track. Estimates of the dcath toll of non-
Bengalis in Jessore in a month of the Awami League’s rule of terror range from
12,000 to 20,000.
In the Jhumjhumpur Colony in Jessore, rebel soldiers of the East Pakistan Rifles
killed, maimed or kidnapped more than 5,000 non-Bengalis between March 25
and April 4. Some 500 non-Bengali young women were abducted to India where
many of them were sold to brothel-operators. On March 29 and 30, a cluster of
non-Bengali hutments in the Ramnagar colony was burnt to ashes by the rebel
Bengali soldiers and Awami League hoodlums. More than 150 non-Bengalis,
including some escapees from the neighbouring Jhumjhumpur locality, perished
in the conflagration.
There were very few survivors amongst the 4,500 non-Bengali who lived in the
Taraganj colony after the rebels from the East Pakistan Rifles and the Awami
League storm troopers had made it the target of their genocide on March 30. At
least a thousand non-Bengalis were slaughtered by the Bengali rebels between
March 26 and April 5 in the Hamidpur, Ambagaon, Bachachar and Puratan
Qasba localities of Jessore town.
In the neighbouring shanty townships of Mobarakganj, Kaliganj, Kotchandpur
and Tasfidanga, non-Bengali houses were marked for attack in the first fortnight
of March by Awami League militants and the carnage of non-Bengalis were

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
141
conducted in the last days of the month. The death toll in these localities
exceeded 1,500.
Two British newsmen, Alan Hart of the BBC and Nicholas Tomalin of the
Sunday Times, London, visited Jessore early in April 1971 when the town was
under the control of the Awami League gunmen and the Bengali rebel soldiers.
With them was a Bengali photographer, Mohammed Amin. Escorted by the
armed volunteers of the Awami League, the two British newsmen accidentally
witnessed the slaying of the hapless non-Bengalis by their blood-thirsty captors
in the vicinity of the Area Headquarters of the Bengali rebels in Jessore. In a
Jessore despatch published in the Sunday Times, of April 4, 1971, Nicholas
Tomalin reported:
“I was there with Alan Hart of BBC Panorama and a Bengali speaking
photographer, Mohammed Amin. We thought the troops and local citizens were
about to attack but they then got other ideas. Among each contingent arriving at
the HQ were tall, usually bearded Punjabis. Their hands were tied and they were
being brutally pushed along by rifle-butts.
“We thought the West Pakistan soldiers were attacking and we scattered
similarly, only to discover, on a grass patch beside the road, men freshly stabbed
and bludgeoned, lying in still flowing pools of blood. Four of them were still just
alive, rolling over and waving their legs and arms. But none of them made any
noise. At this moment our Awami League guide became hysterical and tried to
rush us back. He said it was not safe, the West Pakistanis were attacking. He
tugged us away from the bodies. But suddenly, Alan Hart, myself and
Mohammed (Amin) realised who these dead and dying men were. They were
not Bengalis; they were, we are convinced, the Punjabi prisoners we had seen,
bound and under guard, an hour before.
“The victims could not have been killed by anyone but local Bengali irregulars
as these were the only people in Central Jessore that day. The terror and
behaviour of the Awami (League) politicians and the crowd is circumstantial
evidence, and our photographer, Amin, who knows his Pakistani types, is certain
the victims were Punjabis.
“Even as the locals began to threaten us and we were forced to drive away, we
saw another 40 Punjabi ‘spies’ being marched towards that same grass plot with
their hands above their heads. “
Another British newspaper, the Daily Mail of London, published the ollowing
write-up from Brian Rimmer in its issue of April 3, 1971 on the slaying of the
Punjabi traders:

