Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
152
well over 550. More than 50 non-Bengali young women were kidnapped. Some
were raped in the open in paddy fields and strangled to death.
“On March 7, 1971, more than ten thousand Bengali demonstrators forced their
way into the Jhenidah Cadet College, shouting slogans against the Pakistan
Government and non-Bengalis and demanding independence for East Pakistan “,
said 19-year-old Syed Hasan Javed, who was a student at the Jhenidah Cadet
College. Repatriated to Karachi with his parents late in 1971, Javed is currently a
B.A. (Honours) student at the Karachi University. In his testimony, Javed said:
“Tension gripped the Cadet College and its hostels soon after Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman’s broadcast speech on March 3, 1971, in which he hurled defiance at the
federal government. Out of 251 students who lived in the three hostels of the
Cadet College, Urdu-speaking students numbered 25. The Bengalis called them
Biharis. On March 7, 1971, the Awami League-led demonstrators, many armed
with guns, broke into the College premises and shouted slogans against Pakistan
and the Biharis. The Principal, sensing trouble, asked all the students to join the
processionists and not to tangle with the demonstrators. The processionists
marched to the “Shahecd Minar“ (Memorial for those killed in the Bengali
language movement in the early 1950’s) where they took the oath that they
would establish independent Bengal. The next day the situation became more
tense and the non-Bengalis in the town felt scared because of the threats of
violence from the Awami League militants. On March 9, the Principal ordered
the closure of the Cadet College and asked the hostel inmates to return to their
homes. My parents lived in Khulna, 68 miles away. I set out for Khulna; the
roads were deserted and echoes of rifle shots were sometimes heard. With great
difficulty, I reached my home in Khalispur in Khulna. My mother, who had cried
for days and lost hope of seeing me alive, embraced me and said thanksgiving
prayers to Almighty God. “
Javed, in his testimony, reported that on March 10,1971, he saw in Khalispur the
tortures inflicted on a Pathan watchman by an armed group of pro-Awami
league students on the roadside. The victim died on the spot. On March 17, 1971,
according to Javed, a group of pro-Awami League hoodlums raided the house of
his Punjabi neighbour, killed him and kidnapped his two teenage daughters.
Three days later, he spotted their dead bodies floating in a nearby water tank.
Javed recalled the attack of the Bengali rebels, particularly the defectors from the
East Bengal Regiment and the East Pakistan Rifles, on March 28, 1971, on
Khalispur and the defence put up by bands of armed non-Bengalis who had not
surrendered
their
weapons
in
response
to
the
Awami
League-propped
administration’s call in mid-March for the surrender of arms. Subsequently, the
federal troops routed the rebels.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
153
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
Bloodbath in Noapara, Darsona
Noapara, a little town in the Jcssore district, felt the repercussions of the Awami
League’s rebellion in the second week of March 1971. It had a small population
of non-Bengalis; many were employed in the local jute mill or did business with
it. As the owner of the jute mill was a non-Bengali, it became a target of the
homicidal frenzy of the Bengali rebels.
Twenty-nine-year-old Sheikh Aziz, who was employed as a Security Guard in
the Jute Mill, witnessed the massacre of the non-Bengali staff and their families in
the Mill area on March 21, 197I. His uncle was butchered but his wife and
children were spared. He made a dramatic escape with them to Dacca from
where he brought them to Karachi via Nepal in March 1973. His narrative runs
as follows:
“I was one of the six non-Bengali Security Guards in the Carpeting Jute Mill in
Noapara. The other 13 Security Guards were Bengalis. The Chief Security Officer
was a gentle-hearted and God-fearing non-Bengali, Mr. Farid Ahmed. His wife
was a Bengali. He had given employment in the mill to a number of Bengali
young men.
“On March 21, a gang of armed Awami League militants stormed the Jute mill.
They enlisted the support of some of the Bengali millhands who had a
propensity for agitation and strikes. The first victim of their insane fury was the
Security Officer, Farid Ahmed. They belaboured him in his office; they dragged
him to the lawn in the Mill. They clubbed him with staves; they hit him with iron
bars. A Bengali security guard, whom he had employed some years ago, shot
him dead. As the killers had seized control of the Mill and locked up the main
gate, there was no escape for the non-Bengali staff which was in imminent
danger of liquidation. The homicidal gang murdered almost all the non-Bengalis
in the mill premises. I hid myself in a store room for two days. My uncle was
amongst those who were slaughtered.
“The killer gang then turned on the families of the non-Bengali staff of the mill
who lived in mud-houses and huts nearby. All the male adults were butchered;
young women were raped and many were kidnapped. My slain uncle’s wife and
two children were miraculously saved and I brought them to Pakistan. “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
154
Twenty-year-old Husna Begum, highly articulate for her age whose father, Taher
Hussain, was engaged in the Jute trade in Noapara, owed her life to a Bengali
friend of her maternal uncle. He sheltered her and her mother all through the
period of turmoil in the town and helped them in moving to Chittagong after the
Pakistan Army routed the rebels. Husna, a student, and her mother were
repatriated to Karachi from Chittagong by the United Nations by sea early in
February 1974. She sobbed out the story of her father’s murder:
“My father hailed from the Indian State of Bihar and he had settled in Narail late
in the 1950’s. I was born in Narail. Although we spoke Urdu at home, I went to a
school where Bengali was the medium of instruction. I spoke Bengali like my
Bengali classmates. I was not taught Urdu at school and I don’t know how to
read or write in Urdu.
“On March 22, 1971, a killer gang of Awami League thugs raided my father’s
jute godown and set it on fire. They tossed him inside this blazing oven. They
raided our house and ran sacked it like ruthless vandals. They looked for me and
my mother but we were sheltered safely in our Bengali friend’s house. The news
of my father’s tragic death reached us the next day.
“The house of a non-Bengali businessman in the vicinity of our hideout was
attacked by a killer gang. I heard the echo of gunshots and the screams of men
and women for mercy. The attackers killed the businessman and his wife and
raped his three daughters. They marched the three girls almost in the nude
through the main Bazar of Noapara and hacked them to death in a paddy field.
A Bengali friend of my protector, who had witnessed this horrifying scene, burst
into tears as he related to him the harrowing detail. “
DARSANA
The non-Bengalis in the town of Darsana were terrorised by the Awami League
militants since the first week of March 1971. The population of non-Bengalis in
Darsana was not large but all of them were fairly affluent. Many worked in the
East Pakistan Railway. Between the 20th of March and the 19th of April 1971, the
Awami Leaguers and the rebels of the East Pakistan Rifles liquidated almost
three-fourth of the non-Bengali population in this town. Killer gangs raided non-
Bengali houses, looted them and killed all the menfolk. Non-Bengali teenage girls
were kidnapped by the rebels by the hundred; almost all of them were raped in
buildings occupied by the rebels as their operational headquarters. Before the
rebels escaped to neighbouring India, they killed many of the non-Bengali girls
they had raped; some were taken away to India.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
155
Fifty-year-old Madina Khatoon, whose husband, Abdul Hamid was a Railway
employee in Darsana, said in Karachi after her repatriation from a Bihari Camp
in Chittagong in February 1974:
“On March 25, the Bengali rebels went on the rampage against the non-Bengalis
in Darsana. A killer gang came to my house, smashed the front door and forcibly
took away my husband and my brother. I begged them to spare my dear ones;
one of them shouted back: “The Biharis have no place in Bengal; they must be
slaughtered. “ The killer gang looted every article of value—even the rice I had
kept for our meals. I learnt that the killers murdered my husband and my
brother in the slaughter-house set up by the rebels.
“The killer gangs burnt almost half the number of non-Bengali houses in
Darsana. They did not spare even disabled non-Bengali men. The rebels extorted
money from the non-Bengali businessmen by promising to get their lives spared.
They played many other frauds on the non-Bengalis. In planning the butchery
they conducted, an interesting element was the manner in which they kept track
of every non-Bengali male. The rebel command used to get very prompt
information about successful or unsuccessful escape bids by the non-Bengalis in
Darsana Between March 15 and the second week of April, the rebels staged
frequent bloodbaths of innocent non-Bengalis, and their dead bodies lay in heaps
in Mosques, school buildings and the local hospital............ “

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
156
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
Destruction in Barisal
The Awami League’s rebellion had injected a severe strain in the relations
between Bengalis and non-Bengalis in many parts of the Barisal District from the
second week of March 1971. The proliferation of baseless rumours that the
Bengalis in West Pakistan were being killed and that the Pakistan Army had
massacred Bengalis in Dacca was one of the weapons used by the Awami League
activists for inciting the Bengali population to violence against the West
Pakistanis and other non-Bengalis. In the beginning, there were stray incidents of
violence against the non-Bengalis but in the fourth week of March there was a
forest-fire of arson, loot and murder in Barisal town and in other parts of the
district. The death toll in this genocidal epidemic was in excess of 15,000.
Ahmed Alam, 23, who was repatriated to Karachi in October 1973 from Dacca,
lived in Barisal all through the period of turmoil. He gave a vivid account of the
extermination of some sixty non-Bengali families in the vicinity of the Barisal
Steamer Jetty in the night of March 25, 1971:
“The Awami League militants of the area invited the non-Bengali residents of
this locality to attend a meeting of the local Peace Committee and assured them
that their families would be protected. The meeting was held at about 9 o’clock in
the night. All of a sudden, the Awami League militants, who carried weapons,
pounced on the non-Bengalis in the meeting and killed many on the spot. Some
non-Bengali; escaped the dragnet and ran to their huts to take their families to
safety.
“Just before midnight, a frenzied mob of Awami Leaguers, police rebels and
hoodlums attacked the non-Bengali colony and burnt dozens of houses. They
murdered almost all the adult males, kidnapped some fifty women and raped
many of them. The federal troops, who reached the site after some days,
recovered 112 dead bodies from the rubble of the burnt out non-Bengali colony.
Many bodies of strangled women were discovered in a pond. No trace of other
kidnapped non-Bengali women could be found. The survivors of this pogrom
numbered barely a dozen. “
Twenty-seven-year-old Farzana Khatoon, whose husband was employed in the
Postal Department in the Ferozepur sub-division of Barisal district, narrated the

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
157
murder of her husband by an Awami League killer gang in a motor launch in the
third week of March 1971:
“We had lived for six years in the Ferozepur sub-division. Our relations with
our Bengali neighbours were cordial but after the December 1970 general
elections a little strain had crept in. From the beginning of March 1971, the non-
Bengalis in our town were apprehensive and uneasy. Some non-Bengali boys
were roughed up by Awami League militants.
“On March 20, my husband and I decided to leave Ferozepur and we boarded a
Khulna-bound passenger launch at night It was jam-packed. Amongst the
passengers were some sixty non-Bengalis— men, women and children—who
were leaving the town because of insecurity and fear. We knew some of them.
After two hours, when the launch anchored at a small jetty, a gang of fifty armed
miscreants, shouting ‘Joi Bangla’ and ‘Long Live Awami League’, greeted our
launch. A dozen of them, armed with guns and daggers, boarded our launch.
They roughed up some non-Bengalis; they pulled the Saris of young women. The
killers barked out the order that all the Bengalis should leave the launch; it
became easy for them to make mincemeat of the non-Bengalis. They slaughtered
all the non-Bengali men on board the launch; they tossed children into the river.
As their desperate mothers jumped into the water to rescue them, the killers
opened fire on these drowning women and children. The thugs kidnapped some
teenage non-Bengali girls. My husband was amongst the dead. The Serang
(Captain) of the launch, a gentle Bengali who had known my husband, took pity
on me and my little son and hid us under a bundle of mats in his cabin. He
dropped us at Khulna where I stayed with some relatives for a few months and
escaped the carnage there. I sold my ornaments and raised some cash which
enabled me and my son to travel to Nepal. It was a perilous and tortuous journey.
In July 1973, we were flown to Karachi. “
Abdul Shakoor, 50, whose Bengali wife and two sons were murdered by an
Awami League gang in Kurmitala in Jhalokathi in the Barisal district in March
1971, testified:
“I had migrated from Bihar to East Pakistan shortly after the birth of Pakistan in
1947. I had attended meetings addressed by Molvi Fazlul Haq, Mr. H. S.
Suhrawardy, Khwaja Nazimuddin, Mr. Nurul Amin and Maulana Tamizuddin
in pre-Partition Bengal, I believed in the ideology of Pakistan. Shortly after I
came to East Pakistan, I married a Bengali girl. I started a small business and I
prospered. I had excellent relations with the Bengalis and I spoke their language
nearly as well as my Bengali wife. We had two sons and a daughter who were
Bengalis by birth; their mother tongue was Bengali.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
158
“Since the first week of March 1971, our town was affected by the Awami
League’s rebellion and relations between the Bengalis and the non-Bengalis were
tense. On March 24, a mob of Awami League activists and rebels from the East
Pakistan Rifles and Ansars (a para-military force) went on the rampage in the
localities where non-Bengali families resided. They dragged my two sons from
our home, tied them with ropes to a lamp post and gunned them to death. They
kidnapped my daughter and I scoured the district for months in a fruitless search
for her. They clouted me and my wife with their rifle butts but some kind Bengali
neighbours persuaded the killers to spare us. My wife could not tear the loss of
our teenage sons and daughter and she died in April, 1971, At least 250 non-
Bengalis were massacred in March, 1971 and scores of teenage girls were
kidnapped. What madness gripped our tormentors is beyond my comprehension.
I had never seen such insanity before. I shifted to Chittagong from where the
United Nations repatriated me to Karachi in February 1974. “
Nasrin, the 24-year-old widow of Allah Rakha, had this recollection of the
massacre of non-Bengalis in Jhalokathi in the Barisal district in March 1971.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
159
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
Genocide in Mymensingh
Mymensingh witnessed a horrifying massacre of non-Bengalis by the Awami
League militants and the mutineers of the East Bengal Regiment and the East
Pakistan Rifles between the third week of March and the third week of April
1971 when the Pakistan Army freed it from the control of the insurgents.
Evidence now available shows that more than 20,000 non-Bengalis were done to
death. In the Mymensingh Cantonment, Bengali soldiers of the East Bengal
Regiment of the Pakistan Army and the para-military East Pakistan Rifles
revolted on March 26-27, 1971 and slaughtered hundreds of West Pakistani
officers and men in a midnight surprise attack on their Barracks and residential
quarters for married military personnel. They made even women and children
the victims of their bloodlust.
On April 16, a posse of the rebels from the East Bengal Regiment raided the
Mymensingh district jail and gunned to death seventeen prominent non-Bengali
citizens who were detained there by the insurgents. Violent mobs, led by Awami
League storm-troopers and the rebel Bengali soldiers, killed almost all the non-
Bengali
menfolk
in
Shankipara
and
nine
other
residential
localities
of
Mymensingh town. More than 1,500 women and some children, who were
herded like cattle in a mosque and in a school building and were to be butchered
by their Bengali captors, were saved in the nick of time by a column of the
Pakistan Army which re-occupied Mymensingh town on April 31, 1971. The
rebels killed many anti-Awami League Bengalis.
A Correspondent of the Reuters News Agency, Maurice Quaintance, who visited
Mymensingh early in May, said in a despatch published in the Ceylon Daily
News of Colombo of May 15, 1971:
“There is evidence that non-Bengalis, largely immigrants from India who sought
refuge after the 1947 Partition, were attacked, hacked to death and burnt in their
homes by mobs.
“Eye-witnesses told stories of 1,500 widows and orphans fleeing to a mosque at
Mymensingh, in the north, as armed men identified as secessionists slaughtered
their husbands and fathers. “
The New York Times reporting a Mymensingh despatch from its Pakistan
Correspondent, Malcolm Browne, said in its issue of May 7, 1971:

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
160
“Officials
also
said
that
before
the
Government
soldiers took
the
city
(Mymensingh), the Bengalis had killed at least 1,000 Bihari or non-Bengali
residents. Army officials introduced correspondents to people who said there
had been a slaughter of Bihari residents by the dominant Bengali group led by
members of the Awami League, the political party that was outlawed by the
Central Government soon after the military action began in East Pakistan on
March 25.
“There were so many bodies here, one officer said, it was impossible to identify
them or bury them. He said that they had to be thrown into the Brahamaputra
river, a tributary of the Ganges.
“The main loss of life here apparently occurred in the fields and fruit groves
outside Mymensingh and in clusters of huts that had been burned to the ground.
“
A Correspondent of the American news Service, Associated Press, who also
visited Mymensingh early in May 1971, quoted in his despatch the Assistant
Postmaster of the town as having said:
“There were 5,000 non-Bengalis where I lived and now there are 25 survivors. “
Maurice Quaintance of the Reuters News Agency said in his Mymensingh
despatch of May 7, 1971:
“Reporters flown here on the second day of a conducted tour of trouble spots
interviewed a man identified as the Assistant Postmaster of Mymensingh who
showed scars on his neck and what he said was a bayonet mark on his body. The
man said he lived in a colony of 5,000 non-Bengalis of whom only 25 survived
the massacre on April 17. The interview ended abruptly when the Assistant
Postmaster mentioned the killing and mutilation of his family and burst into
tears.
“The General commanding Mymensingh district said that the killing began in
the latter half of March and was carried out by Awami League volunteers, the
armed wing of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s sccessionsit Awami Party, plus East
Bengal Rifles and East Bengal Regiment troops who defected to secessionist
cause. “
Eye-witnesses of the carnage of non-Bengalis in Mymensingh in March-April
1971, who were interviewed in Karachi for this book have bared a macabre story
of horror and bloodshed.

Blood and Tears, Qutubuddin Aziz; Copyright © www.panhwar.com
161
Mujibur Rahman, 55, who lived in Quarter No. 8 of Block 12 in the Shankipara
colony in Mymensingh town and owned a cloth shop, said:
“It was the last week of March 1971. I was saying my afternoon prayers in the
Mosque in our locality. All of a sudden, about 200 Bengali soldiers from the East
Bengal Regiment and the East Pakistan Rifles and Awami League militants
attacked the Shankipara colony. They machine-gunned the praying non-Bengalis
in the Mosque and at least 80 of them died in the shooting. Many were injured. I
fainted, and the killers, who were heading for the houses of the non-Bengalis,
thought that I was dead. Late in the night, I regained consciousness and slipped
back to my house. The Bengali raiders had looted it; there was no trace of my son
and my daughter-in-law. Some houses were ablaze. On way to my house, I saw
scores of dead bodies on the road. Some old women were bemoaning their dead.
In the far distance, echoes of gunfire and rifle-shot frequently rent the stillness of
the night. The killers had murdered all the non-Bengali male residents of the
colony. They had marched the crying women, some with suckling children, to a
large, nearby Mosque. These women were rescued by the Pakistan Army after it
re-occupied Mymensingh in the third week of April. At least 5,000 non-Bengalis
lived in my locality; not more than 25 survived the killing. I was one of the
survivors. I had lost all my relatives. In November 1971, I left Mymensingh for
good and came to Karachi. “
Nasima Khatoon, 38, whose husband, Syed Tahir Hussain Akhter, was employed
as a clerk at the Mymensingh Railway Station had this pathetic recollection of
that terrible day when she was widowed by the Bengali insurgents:
“We owned a small house in the Shankipara Colony’s C Block. The entire
population consisted of non-Bengalis. Since the middle of March 1971, a pall of
fear and foreboding shrouded the locality. Late in March, killer gangs, armed
with rifles and machine-guns, attacked a number of houses in our locality, killed
the men and abducted their women and children. On April 17, about 15,000
blood-thirsty insurgents and miscreants, many armed with machine guns,
stormed our colony. They set fire to hundreds of houses; they dragged men and
boys from their homes and killed them on the spot. My husband and my teenage
son had locked the front door of our house. We had no way to escape. Some 50
armed miscreants smashed the door and rushed in. In the name of God, in the
name of the Holy Quran, I begged them to spare my husband and my son. A
thug hit me on the head with the butt of his rifle and I fell down. The butchers
dragged my husband and my son outside the house and shot them dead. I
wanted to wail over their dead bodies but the slaughterers, prodding me with
their bayonets, marched me to a school building where hundreds of lamenting
widows and mothers like me were lodged. Life in this inferno was a torture. I

