204 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Cities are not defended by taking positions inside or around
them. They are defended by deploying troops as far away from
them as possible, so that they are safe from enemy artillery fire.
Of course tactical considerations take priority, and last-ditch
battles are fought in and around the cities. In West Pakistan we
defended Lahore by deploying troops in Wagah, Ghavindhi, and
Kasoor areas, which are well away from Lahore. No regular troops
were left inside Lahore for its defence.
When one fights a defensive battle, one useful policy is not to
allow the enemy to use his mobility and manoeuvrability. This
can be done by putting in spoiling attacks, blocking positions,
resorting to guerrilla tactics, and by intelligent use of natural
and artificial obstacles. The enemy can be induced to wear
himself out in attacking unexpectedly strong defences, and then,
when he is tired, disorganized, and disheartened, he can be
countered with a devastating blow. The position one occupies
must be such as to permit this—particularly the final blow—so
when one is preparing defences, one must keep these
requirements and factors in view.
Tactical skill is the only insurance against loss of initiative
when on the defensive, namely, skill in employing deceptive
measures, effective fire control, rapid and reliable communt-
cations, and good plans for moving troops from one place to
another. Intelligent use of obstacles, both natural and artificial,
mobility, fire-power and communications, the fighting spirit of
the soldiers, and good leadership in all echelons are the factors
that determine the outcome in the battlefield.
I had prepared the defences in East Pakistan keeping in view
the enemy resources and intentions and the tasks allotted to me.
The tasks given to the commanders by me were not only to repel
enemy attacks but also to lure them on to strong positions and
tie them down there, thus keeping them away from each other
and from Dhaka, and in the process to inflict casualties on them.
The area around Dhaka was very suitable for defence. It was
shaped more or less like the letter U. Both its flanks and the rear
were covered by rivers. At the base of the U was the town of
Narayanganj, which provided depth and covered the rear of
Dhaka defences. On the fourth side, the northern side, there was
no big obstacle. All around the defensive area were pools, ponds,
marshy areas, and small islands. There were thick clumps of trees,