RETURN TO PAKISTAN 
247
Farman and Majid teamed up with Tikka on arrival in Pakistan,
and their role in discrediting me, their comrades, and Eastern
Command is indelible. The damage they did to their comrades,
colleagues, and commander, to save their own skins and cover
up their misdeeds, was irreparable. Farman’s subsequent career
has already been recounted. Majid was also rewarded with a good
job in the Foreign Office, while all those who had done well were
unceremoniously removed from the army.
In comparison to Farman and Majid, the other generals
displayed high standards of morality. During the PNA movement
I exposed the role of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. Infuriated, he wanted
some generals to make statements against me. General Abdul
Hameed (COAS) and General Mitha were approached through
Mumtaz Bhutto, who was holding a high position in the regime,
and were told to speak against me. Both were under a cloud and
were promised rewards, but they bluntly refused. What a contrast
between the officers! One pair selfish and intriguing, the other
so dignified, in spite of the fact that Hamid and Mitha were part
of the junta and Farman and Majid served under my command.
In fact General Peerzada told me on my return that Bhutto would
not try us. He would be opening a Pandora’s box if he touched
any of the officers of Eastern Command or the leading lights of
the junta in West Pakistan. No wonder none was tried by court
martial. Only [ and my COS were made scapegoats and were not
given a chance to defend ourselves in a court martial.
The day finally arrived. With smiles on our faces and joy in
our hearts, we moved to Jubblepur Railway Station to board the
special train for Pakistan. We were seen off by our camp staff and
senior officers of Jubblepur Cantonment. Gen. Shah Beg Singh,
when saying goodbye, told me, ‘I am sorry, your goose has been
cooked. They have planned to throw the entire blame of the
197] débacle on you and your command.’ | said, “Thank you. It
is Allah who decides man’s destiny. Man is too small to interfere
in His doings.’ The guard waved his green flag. The train slowly
started rolling towards Pakistan.
As the train went by, the lights of Jubblepur shone like
thousands of stars. Slowly they started blinking and disappeared.
Everything was engulfed in darkness, except the lights of the train,
which created an elusive pattern in the immediate vicinity of the
railway tracks. In the semi-dark atmosphere of my compartment