156 
THE BETRAYAL. OF EAST PAKISTAN
at Agartala was under our constant artillery fire after hostilities
started. 27 Brigade put up a tenacious fight, and the Indians
could not capture any positions between 21 November and 5
December 1971. For fifteen days 27 Brigade repulsed their
attacks, until we ourselves decided to withdraw to our next
defensive position of Ashuganj and then to Brahmanbaria.
On 5 December, the forward elements of 311 Indian Brigade
began the move towards Brahmanbaria. The next day 73 Brigade
also commenced its advance. 
A Mukti Bahini force under Maj.-Gen.
Gonsalves had been operating in the Akhaura area since 2]
November 1971. The Indians were given tremendous help in their
advance by the Mukti Bahini, who also provided detailed
intelligence about our dispositions, strength, weaponry, etc.
Here, as elsewhere, a horde of local inhabitants volunteered to obtain
information of enemy dispositions, whenever necessary. At great
personal risks (the Pakistanis tortured and killed any local they
suspected of gathering information for the Indian forces) they would
melt away into the night and then return with the details of location
of enemy strong points before the morning. In this way our troops
were enabled to keep moving forward, working round the enemy
positions, always forging ahead. Where guns and ammunition had to
be taken across country, there were always Bengali villagers, resistance
fighters, school boys—all ready to help.’
Sidney Schaumberg of the New York Times, who was with the
leading brigade at this stage, describes a scene where twenty
local inhabitants were ‘pushing and pulling a 5.5 inch medium
artillery gun across a boggy rice field while others ferried the
ammunition, *
The Indians sent a column towards Comilla from south of
Agartala, with the aim of confronting the strong Pakistani
garrison holding the defence in the Mainamati cantonment and
working behind it to cut the L of C, The enemy planned to
capture the bridge at Ashuganj as quickly as possible, but we
frustrated their efforts. We did not allow their division to build
up at Brahmanbaria; we damaged the bridge at Ashuganj; and
we made the bridge west of Akhaura unfit for use by heavy
vehicles. Our 27 Brigade was well dug in at Ashuganj by the time
the leading elements of 311 Indian Brigade reached the area on
9 December 1971. The Indians were allowed to advance from
wwermvweweiyew«t) 
1. 6 
N h 
/ 
ay a
WWW. Valo yC Ad Ve by if wi T Vy m Ore OM
eo