DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
189
to me as the Governor. This message clearly said (that) you should
take all necessary measures to stop the fighting and preserve the lives
of all armed forces personnel, all those from West Pakistan and all
loyal elements. The signal also says ‘you have now reached a stage
where further resistance is no longer humanly possible, nor will it
serve any useful purpose’. Hostility is still continuing and loss of life
and disaster continue. I request you to do the needful.
With regards.
' 
Yours Sincerely,
A. M. Malik
After my talk with the CGS on 14 December, I sent a signal on
15 December at 0910 hrs telling the President that my decision
to fight it out still stood. I made efforts to talk to either the
President or the COS. In the evening General Hamid contacted
me from President’s House. In the meantime, Malik had probably
talked to the President about my reluctance to implement the
orders. I asked my COS, Brigadier Baqir 
* Siddiqui, to listen to
what General Hamid had to say and 
to take notes. COS Army
emphatically ordered me that I must ‘act accordingly; stop the
war and contact somebody in Dhaka whom I know’. I argued
against this order. He repeated it three or four times and said
that West Pakistan was in danger, the situation was bad, and I was
to surrender. I asked to speak to the President. General Hamid
told me that he was in the bathroom. Actually he was not in the
athroom; he had passed out, being too drunk. Air Marshal
him Khan, who seemed drunk to me, then spoke to me and
insisted that I must obey the President's orders.
As a soldier I believed in obeying orders and it was only when
COS Army and C.-in-C. PAF had repeatedly ordered me to obey
the President and act accordingly, about eighteen hours after
receipt of the President’s orders to surrender, that I decided to
approach the American Consul-General. General Farman insisted
that I should use Russian channels but I decided otherwise. My
message to the Indian C.-in-C. conveyed my request for.a cease-
fire under the following conditions:
a. Regrouping of Pakistan Armed Forces in designated areas
to be mutually agreed upon between the commanders of
the opposing forces.
b. The safety of all military and para military forces
guaranteed.