COMMANDER EASTERN COMMAND 
53
I had only one artillery Brigadier instead of the four
authorized, no artillery advisers with battalions, and very junior
ones with brigades and divisions. [herefore, one Brigadier had
to control and organize artillery support throughout East
pakistan. The maximum range of my guns was eleven thousand
ards, while the enemy’s 130 mm had a range of thirty thousand
yards. Over and above my shortages in supporting arms, my small-
arms consisted of German, British, American, and Chinese
weapons. All these had different calibres, which created problems
in the supply of ammunition and transfer of units from one
sector to another. These points may look small and insignificant,
but they require very careful co-ordination, because on the
battlefield funny things happen.
I was authorized three medium tank regiments and one light
tank regiment. I had only one regiment and one squadron of
tanks equipped with the M24 light Chaffee tank, a Korean veteran
first brought into service in 1944 and armed with a 75 mm gun
which was ineffective against modern Indian tanks. Some tanks
had ropes instead of fan belts, and some had to be pulled by
other tanks to get started. I was authorized four medium and
one heavy regiment of artillery, but I had not a single heavy or
medium gun. I had barely half of my authorized field guns.
Maintenance of the health of troops was another big problem.
The climate was humid, which sapped the energy of the people
from West Pakistan. In the damp climate of East Pakistan soldiers
got footrot and fungus. There were only a few hospitals and a
grave shortage of medicines and doctors, particularly specialists.
Medical units were not operationally fit, due to lack of essentials
and ordnance equipment. We did not have satisfactory
arrangements for the evacuation of casualties. Many died en route
or were maimed before getting proper medical treatment. We
did not have a complete quota of first field dressings for the
wounded, which are normally carried one per man with a
hundred per cent reserve. We were also short of shell dressings
and morphia injections for the wounded. We were seventy per
cent short of trousers and boots, so a worn-out boot or torn
clothing were irreplaceable. My troops belonged to dry areas of
West Pakistan; many of them had not seen a big river before and
did not know how to wade through water above their navels.
There was a small stream or river every five or six miles, and big