APPENDIX 
293
successfully with limited resources under the worst
circumstances but our High Command faltered under
most favourable circumstances and doomed Pakistan and
East Pakistan Garrison who were fighting gallantly. To
save West Pakistan from further disintegration we had to
abandon East Pakistan and face the humiliation of laying
down our arms. All those who erred and failed in West
Pakistan got away unscathed. Many were retained in
service and promoted, while others were given lucrative
jobs. No questions asked, no queries made, but General
Niazi, who completed all his given tasks most successfully,
was penalized for the sins of others.
General Tikka Khan ex COAS had given a statement that
General Niazi could not be court-martialled because no
substantive material against him was forthcoming. 
'
The Hamoodur Rehman Report is a Top Secret docu-
ment but portions of the report have been divulged
through newspapers by politicians. Salient features of the
Report are:-
(1) Disciplinary action was recommended against many
who were responsible for the débacle of 1971 but I
was made the solitary example, the scapegoat nay
the sacrificial lamb’.
(2) The surrender was executed on the order of the
President of Pakistan for fear of a humiliating defeat
in the West.
(3) The report was shelved as biased on the advice of
the ‘PPP Committee of Seven.’
(4) The report had no legal anchorage and was not
endorsed by an executive order for implementation.
(5) The Terms of Reference of the Hamoodur Rehman
Commission were inadequate (not covering all
aspects of the disaster). 
__
(6) General Yahya Khan was dubbed ‘the Usurper’ who
was the chief architect of the crisis, ordering the
crack-down instead of handing over power to the
elected representatives of the people.
Although Gen. Yahya was blamed for the vivisection of
Pakistan he lived to enjoy two pensions (President and
C.-in-C,) and was sent abroad for treatment at Govt.
y 
@4 |. Py 
vat 
> ab 
HT?
inrarv 
com
acs 
a C5 
) 
ewyV\JAASA
Lf
www naloc