APPENDIX 
289
If the terms of reference of the Hamood Commission were
restricted...by its sponsor...the object clearly was to make the
report...{vindicate] those at the helm of power.
Yet, ironical as it is, the Commission is said to be discreetly
silent—apparently in deference to the wishes and in compliance
with the directives of the then Prime Minister—on the political
background of the military débacle and the dismemberment of
the largest Muslim State on the map of the world:
According to knowledgeable sources, the report asked for
Yahya's trial as a ‘usurper’ who had dislodged Ayub Khan and
not as the arch-criminal responsible for the premature surrender
of 1971 and the great tragedy that befell Pakistan. Nor was Yahya
put in the dock by the patriots who tried to build ‘New Pakistan’
on the ashes of the old. The question is why was the chief villain
spared? Is it because his trial would have unmasked the ‘faceless’
actors (who shoved him from behind) and opened a Pandora's
box?
Referring to the ‘major players in the grisly drama’, one of
Bhutto’s biographers significantly observes that Yahya, Mujib and
Bhutto have to share responsibility for the catastrophe of 1971.
As he puts it, ‘Many, indeed, are inclined to the view that Bhutto,
as the most sure-footed politician of the three and thus the best
equipped to assess the consequences of his actions, must accept
the lion’s share of the blame.’ (Bhutto: A Political Biography,
Salman Taseer.)
That in a way explains why the report of the Hamood
Commission, before which Bhutto also testified, was put into
cold storage. To quote his biographer again, ‘his detractors
preferred to suggest that Bhutto never dared issue the report
because he was so heavily implicated in the political chicanery
and blundering that preceded the country’s breakup’. That may
be so...Considering the circumstances in which the Commission
worked, its final report may even have erred in Bhutto’s favour.
However, if the report erred in Bhutto’s favour, and painted
his rivals or accomplices with a tarred brush, his Cabinet
colleagues would not have railed against it as they did, or voted
for its screening. The possibility is that while the Athenians of
the Commission skipped over Bhutto’s role in the final
denouement, they went the whole hog to expose Mujib and
Yahya’s chief lieutenants. Thus, Bhutto used the document for
STAAL
|
7 
:
LIDI al V.cCom
W W W . 
| 
) y ] 
| 
( VY ( Y
y v 
y 
y 
y 
) tJ St 
A 
X_ zy YQ