102 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
their normal heavy weapons and logistic support and, still worse, with
only one brave PAF squadron which had already been reduced in
size by frequent calls on it during the last eight months, were not
sufficient to fight the insurgency on their hands. The small Navy of 4
(four) gunboats, which like other services, had given a yery good
account of itself was not strong enough to control the rivers of East
Pakistan, leave alone the sea route from West Pakistan. India’s massive
invasion was looming large on the horizon and in the event of that
happening the armed forces in East Pakistan would be confronted
with an impossible task, strategically and logistically. Therefore, the
maintenance of their morale would become an acute problem unless
succour came from West Wing and the armed forces in West Pakistan
played the role according to plan, effectively and quickly. These
officers and men in East Pakistan were facing an all-out invasion.
(Pakistan’s Crisis of Leadership, Major-General Fazal Muqeem).
According to David Loshak, to combat the insurgency the
Pakistan Army required 250,000 troops. Other foreign experts
had estimated that Pakistan would need 250,000 to 300,000
trained in counter-insurgency and fully backed by socio-political
campaigners to control the situation in East Pakistan. I had only
45,000 regular and paramilitary forces from West Pakistan. I still
succeeded in evicting the guerrillas from East Pakistan in less
than two months, when the local population was against us and
helping the guerrillas. My troops had no training in anti-guerrilla
warfare and the provincial Government was not functioning.
I suggested to General Hamid that, the Bengalis being hostile
to us, the situation had changed completely, circumstances had
changed, enemy capabilities had changed, so my mission should
be changed and J should be allowed to fall back on my prepared
positions if, as, and when required. The plan of not losing any
chunk of the country and sealing the borders was based more on
political requirements than tactical considerations. The change
of mission would give me more flexibility, manoeuvrability, and
freedom of action. He did not agree. He also refused to give me
additional troops and resources with a view to entering India
and destroying the Mukti Bahini bases and sanctuaries from
where they were launching operations into our territory.
era
)
\_\
a