Te 
i 
ee 
ee 
——
THE INVASION 
123
road-bound and bulk of the forces canalized to the required channels
and areas as planned. Good luck. Allah be with you.
The Indian plan was to attack East Pakistan from all directions
by carrying out a battle of encirclement and finally converging
on Dhaka. They entered our territory with three infantry corps
and a communication zone acting as a Divisional Headquarters.
Kilo Force of Divisional strength was used for the Chittagong
Hill Tracts. From the Air Force they used seventeen squadrons of
modern aircraft and 125 helicopters. They had airfields all
around East Pakistan, and from the Navy: twelve capital ships
including their aircraft carrier Vikrant, which could also be used
as a mobile airfield.
On 21 November my Chief of Staff rang up the Vice Chief of
General Staff at GHQ, Major-General Qureshi, and followed up
with a written signal about the Indian invasion. I tried to speak
to the Chief of General Staff, Lt.-Gen. Gul Hassan, but he had
gone to Lahore to celebrate Lid knowing full well that the Indians
_ were going to attack East Pakistan on 21 November. I tried to
' contact Gen. Hamid, COAS. He too was not available. I learnt
later that both he and the President had left for Sialkot, ostensibly
to visit troops but actually for a partridge shoot—no C.-in-C.
' visits Muslim troops on an Eid day. The callous attitude of the
three seniormost officers of the Army shows that they were not in
the least interested in the affairs of East Pakistan or the integrity
of Pakistan. Like Nero, they played while Dhaka burned.
This did not upset me because I had guessed their intentions
and had an inkling through my COS that they had decided to
quit East Pakistan and abandon us. No effort was made by either
the President or Foreign Minister Bhutto to raise the matter at
the United Nations, to internationalize the issue, or to obtain a
cease-fire and a political solution by calling all the political
leaders.
By refusing to start the new offensive in the west, Yahya Khan made
the survival of Eastern Garrison practically impossible...
It must be recorded that invasion of East Pakistan by India is
perhaps the only instance of an armed attack by one member state of
United Nations on the territory of another, which the victim did not
immediately bring before the Security Council.
haloch
ira 
\ 
AN
YTA/NUAA/ 
YN 
W,
VY 
VY 
VV
VV 
VV VV.