176 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
A 6905 of 7th December from Governor to the President. It is
imperative that correct situation in East Pakistan is brought to your
notice. I discussed with General Niazi who tells me that troops are
fighting heroically but against heavy odds without adequate artillery
and air support. Rebels continue cutting their rear and losses in
equipment and men are heavy and cannot be replaced, the front in
Eastern and Western sectors has collapsed. Loss of whole corridor
East of Meghna River cannot be avoided. Jessore has already fallen
which will be a terrible blow to the morale of pro-Pakistan elements.
Civil administration ineffective as they cannot do much without
communications. Food and other supplies running shert and cannot
move from Chittagong or within the province, even Dhaka city will
be without food after seven days. Without fuel and oil there will be
complete paralysis of life. Law and order situation in areas vacated by
Army pathetic as thousands of pro-Pakistan elements being butchered
by rebels. Millions of non-Bengalis and loyal elements are awaiting
death. No amount of lip sympathy or even material help from world
powers except direct physical intervention will help. If any of our
friends is expected to help that should have an impact within the
next forty-eight repeat forty-eight hours. If no help is expected I
beseech you to negotiate so that a civilised and peaceful transfer
takes place and millions of lives are saved and untold misery avoided.
Is it worth sacrificing so much when the end seems inevitable. If help
is coming we will fight on whatever consequences there may be.
Request be kept informed.
This signal was not from me but originated from Governor's
House and was drafted by Farman. It is absolutely wrong that the
front in Eastern and Western sectors had collapsed. Nazar of 16
Division was very much active, a fierce battle was still raging in
Hilli on the borders, and the enemy’s 6 Division was contained
in Dinajpur, Saidpur, and Rangpur. In 9 Division’s area, Brigadier
Manzoor was withdrawing towards Kushtia and heavily involving
an Indian division. Brigadier Hayat was withdrawing towards
Khulna and engaging another Indian division, the bulk of I
Corps, and the River Madhumati line was intact. There was no
danger to Faridpur, Sylhet, Maulvi Bazar, Ashuganj, Mainamati,
or Chittagong Hill Tracts. These garrisons were still fighting
heroically and withdrawing to their last-ditch battle positions
according to plan. All the seaports, airports, and Divisional
Headquarters, and most of the ferry sites, were with us. The
commanders were actively controlling the battles. The enemy
V4 ~~ch 
i \ 1; 
1 kK T9 5
\@ 4 
[KX 7UX7 halo
; 
[7 COIN
yV W VV e 
é|
.
WIDIAaLy. AGI 
EC