DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
18]
The President replied with signal G 0001 dated 9 December
1971 in which I was ordered by the President to accept the
Governor's decision, and arrange things accordingly. The
message to the Governor reads:
Your flash message A 4660 of 9 Dec received and thoroughly
understood. You have my permission to take decision on your
proposals to me. I have and am continuing to take all measures
internationally but in view of our complete isolation from each other,
decision about East Pakistan I leave entirely to your good sense and
judgement. I will approve of any decision you take and I am
instructing General Niazi simultaneously to accept your decision and
arrange things accordingly. Whatever efforts you make in your
decision to save senseless destruction of the kind of civilians that you
have mentioned in particular the safety of our armed forces...you
may go ahead and ensure the safety of our armed forces by all political
means that you will adopt with our opponent.
No political solution was offered at the UNO. What political
action could the Governor take in the matter? His jurisdiction
was limited to East Pakistan, where there was virtually no
government. The political means, 1.e., the Awami League MNAs,
were in Calcutta, and the most important person, Sheikh Mujib-
ur-Rahman, was in West Pakistan. A deal could have been struck
with him. A confederation would have been acceptable to him.
Why was no suggestion made to haye political parleys with him?
Apparently the decision about East Pakistan was being left to
the Governor who, due to the preyalent situation, could not do
anything in East Pakistan because the only other party was India.
Foreign affairs is 
a federal subject and the President should have
instructed our mission at the UNO to seek a political solution. He
did not do so. Apparently they wanted to fire the gun from my
shoulders. How could the Governor have ensured the safety of the
armed forces, and from whom? The armed forces were fighting
the rebels, the Mukti Bahini forces, and the locals in the interior,
and the Indian Army in the battlefield, thus protecting themselves.
On 10 December I received the following signal from COS
Army:
For Comd from COS Army. President’s signal message to Governor
copy to you refers. President has left the decision to the Governor in
< 
= | 
; 
7 
- 
—~ 
1a’
XK7UX7UN7 
Lh 2 | OVO’ Ir VI 11 1 b Tc }AT WU CC) f 1 |
YA/ 
AA/S 
AA 
} 
4 
Y 
JX 
D_ ATs 
FF 
!
vv 
y 
Vv 
O S, LA L NZ we 
uf a 
/