EVENTS LEADING TO SECESSION 
4]
' notified. On 28 February, Bhutto repeated his threat to launch a
movement if the National Assembly session was called. He warned
that if any member of his party attended the session, he would
be liquidated. He urged that either the Assembly should be
delayed or the 120-day time-limit for framing the Constitution be
withdrawn. This was of course an empty threat, because the
Awami League, with its two-thirds majority, could have had the
Constitution passed any time. Postponement of the Assembly was
announced on | March. The grounds given were the boycott of
the Assembly by the PPP and the tense situation created by India.
It is on record that Yahya had closed-door meetings with Bhutto
on 11, 19, and 26 February. The postponement was the outcome
of the devious game played by Yahya and Bhutto.
The civilian Cabinet was dissolved. Admiral Ahsan was removed
from the post of Governor. Sahibzada Yaqub took over.-the
additional duties of Governor of East Pakistan—all Generals
appointed as governors relinquished the command of troops,
except Yaqub. Mujib issued a call for a general strike on 2 March
to protest the postponement of the Assembly session.
Immediately, the Awami League toughs went on the rampage in
various parts of Dhaka and many shops were looted. During this
period of chaos, armed Indians penetrated East Pakistan. Non-
Bengalis were attacked and killed. Army units were also attacked.
Yahya looked on with too placid an attitude. He called for a
Round Table Conference on 10 March, little realizing that the
time for parleys had passed.
On 4 March 1971, Mujib launched a civil disobedience
movement. The Awami League again went on the rampage. Army
Commander General Yaqub was silent, in no mood to move. The
postponement of the Assembly session was the main reason which
precipitated violence. Bhutto and Yahya were equally responsible. !
They stalled the transfer of power. Yaqub’s inactivity also_
contributed towards the killings and other heinous crimes
committed by the Bengalis. Yaqub could have nipped the
insurrection in the bud, it being in its nascent stage. The Bengali
troops had not yet mutinied. All Yaqub faced was a rag-tag mob,
lacking the skills of trained soldiers. With an intelligent mixture
of force and persuasive diplomacy, the march towards total
defiance could have been halted, and Mujib forced to adopt a
more amicable attitude towards the problem.