198 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
solution for the difficulties of my beleaguered Eastern Garrison.
They did not have the moral courage to say that the small, tired,
and ill-equipped Eastern Garrison not only held the enemy, but
did not allow them to carryout any of their tasks. Western
Garrison, which had freedom of movement and no fear for its
flanks and rear, had a choice of initiative and every other
conceivable facility to win the war but could not do so. Thus, the
misconception deliberately propagated by the Indians was given
credence without taking into consideration the relevant points.
Evolved doctrines and concepts have a tremendous bearing
on postures, both defensive and offensive. The forward defensive
posture was followed in the 1965 and 1971 wars, and the area
defence and forward defensive posture is still practised in the
Pakistan Army. In other words, we defend completely our
national territory—cities, towns, communication centres, head-
works, ports, etc. This concept is a legacy of the British, inherited
by both Pakistan and India.
One of the major reasons for adopting a forward defensive
posture is geographical depth, which Pakistan lacks and therefore
cannot, under any circumstances, trade space for time like Russia,
which has hundreds of miles of depth and can lure the enemy to
destruction. Loss of cities, headworks, or communication centres
located near the borders creates an extremely adverse psycho-
logical impact. In the 1962 war with China, India defended Sela
although Bomdila was an ideal place to defend. The Cabinet and
the Indian nation could not reconcile themselves to the idea of
losing national territory without putting up a fight.
Eastern Garrison was fighting a complex war against both
internal and external aggression, having to cope with insurgency
nurtured and supported by the Indians and with the Indian
threat. The political mission spelled out was to defend East
Pakistan, ensuring that no area fell into the hands of the Mukti
Bahini and the Indians which could be declared as Bangladesh.
Eastern Command was also shackled with the military mission of
engaging and tying down the maximum Indian troops to ensure
that the parity which existed on the western front was not turned
into enemy superiority. This was directly linked with the
operations in the western theatre, as both theatres of war were
controlled and co-ordinated by GHQ.