288 
APPENDIX
What the former regime owed to the people—the fountain of
power—was: (a) to court martial the guilty indicated by the
Commission rather than retire some generals, send others abroad
as ambassadors and kick up still others by way of a reward for
their follies and crimes; and (b) to release the Report for public
consumption in an abridged form deleting those portions which
quoted secret official documents or top-secret communications
sent by some foreign Powers, including the Super-Powers, at the
height of the national crisis. That would have taken care of
national interests involving security or sovereignty.
Rejecting these sensible options open to them, the PPP
stalwarts not only made the Hamood Report the personal
property of the Prime Minister, but also denounced it parrot-like
as lop-sided, laconic and biased. Supposing the report was
inadequate, Bhutto’s men had none but their leader to blame
for it. Indeed, he saw to it, while setting up the Commission with
a flourish of trumpets, that it should be hamstrung by its limited
terms of reference and scope of inquiry.
One can say, on the authority of unimpeachable sources, that
the probe body was specifically told to confine its investigation to
the ‘military débacle’ and not to delve into the ‘causes of
surrender’, notably its political background. Chief Justice
Hamoodur Rahman is believed to have pleaded for the
enlargement of the terms of reference to enable him to look into
the ‘totality of the situation’ before the traumatic fall of Dhaka.
But he was firmly directed not to burn his fingers with the
political nettle. The implication was clear.
This object was also reflected in the composition of the
Commission. It was, no doubt, headed by a chairman of
unquestionable integrity—though hailing as he did from former
East Pakistan, which lay shattered and tattered, he must have
been emotionally upset—and saddled with a former Defence
Secretary. But it had no neutral political figure or outstanding
military expert on its panel. Subsequently, of course, the services
of two military advisers were commissioned by the probe body—
Lt.-Gen. Altaf Qadir and another high-ranking officer who was
the author of Pakistan Army—who had close links with the regime
in power and enjoyed its confidence.