186 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
fortress defences well organized and determined to fight it out’:
and G-1286, about 2300 hours 13 December, that said: ‘moving
to built-up area for final battle’. Of course, there were some
among the officers who seemed to be a little demoralized at the
impending battle of Dhaka.
The CGS, Gul Hassan, had telephoned me on 12 December
1971, saying in Pushto, ‘yellows coming from the north and whites
from the south’ (referring to possible assistance from the Chinese
and the Americans). I do not understand why the CGS was
bluffing me, but it shows how the plan to blame me for the
defeat was being built up.
On 11 December, the civilian officers had moved into
Governor’s House. They had done a good job of keeping the
fabric of civil administration intact. Against heavy odds and in a
hostile atmosphere, they stuck to their places of duty without a
murmur. They faced grave danger to their lives but they bore all
the hardships with fortitude.
On 13 December, at 7.30 am, Farman met the Red Cross and
the UN Relief Commission. His book states clearly that he
requested the Red Cross ‘to establish an international zone by
taking over Hotel Intercontinental’ and signed the relevant
documents. He did so without the Governor’s or my approval.
He did 
not 
even bother to inform me_of his action. He was
behaving as if he wer 
were both Governor and Commander Eastern
“Command. Our civilian officers moved to 6 Hotel Intercontinental.
A curfew was clamped in Dhaka.
Farman has concocted another lie, saying that I wanted to
send a cease-fire message from Governor’s House as I did not
want my troops to know about it. He is contradicting himself—
he knows full well that the signal would have been passed on by
army communications, as his signal about approaching the UNO
had been, and the troops would know in any case. My signal in
fact conveyed my resolve to fight to the last.
The IAF bombed Governor’s House on the morning of 13
December. At 1230 the Governor informed me that he was
resigning as the President was not listening to him—by then it
had become evident that the Governor was pressing the
President hard to end the war. I therefore conveyed my resolve
to defend Dhaka and to fight it out, vide my signal No. G 1282
of 131530 December: