APPENDIX 
285
offrs and men seem to be gradually drifting away from the
glorious traditions of the Army. What I have observed, I must
bring to your notice for immediate attention and correction:
a. Absence of battle procedures and battle drills.
b. Offrs and men are quite oblivious of the fact that they are
in battle and should, therefore, be in proper battle trim. As
I said in my conference on 1] April 1971 all ranks to be
properly dressed with 
FSMO and be properly armed on all
occasions. For obvious reasons, there has to be uniformity
of dress, including head-dress, With the exception of Gen.
Officers, all others must be similarly dressed in the field
ALL ranks must wear FSMO (either with or without pack)
and steel helmets; carry their personal wpn, Lower down
comds must carry maps, whistle, note book, compass,
binocular, pointer staff etc. Berets may be worn in offices
or when in rest areas. Peak caps must not be worn in the
field.
c. In def or at halt, proper measure are not being taken for all
round def. Whenever a new posn is occupied, proper
protective and def measures must be taken. This is nec to
guard against surprise attk, infiltration etc. On arrival in a
new posn immediate ‘stand to’ must be carried out; sentries
and outposts estb. as per battle drill.
d. There is far too much of ‘bunching’. This has already been
the cause of cas due to mor etc. fire. Further, we seem to be
getting road bound and are forgetting foot mobility, and
hardly ever seem to manoeuvre cross-country.
e. There seems to be lack of inquisitiveness, and lack of sense
of urgency and -aggressiveness. I insist upon all this and
expect subordinate commanders at all times to act in a
manner that helps to further the higher commander's
mission. Once contact is made, it must be maintained and
followed vigorously.
f. Care of arms and weapons is being neglected. These must
be properly cleaned, oiled and kept ready for battle. There
is no shortage of oil or cleaning material.
g. It seems that troops are shy of inclement weather. All ranks
must be mentally and physically prepared to op in any type
of weather; bad weather is often a boon in battle or in the