SURRENDER AND POW CAMP NO. 100 
233
visible in his eyes and actions dissipated. His having been a
Military Adviser to five Governors, coupled with his participation
in the drastic military action on 25 March, had aroused the
animosity and seething anger of the Bengalis, who wanted to
punish him for his alleged crimes against them. He was blamed
for the massacre of intellectuals, although here too the case has
been a little overstated, because some of the Bengalis named
therein are still alive. Thus encased in a cocoon of fear, he wanted
to escape. The Bengalis had vowed vengeance at any price.
After some discussion, the senior Pakistani officers agreed to
accept the Indian proposal, so I called the Indian team to my
office. Personally, I felt indignant and agitated, for the Indian
proposal was inadequate, failing to highlight the measures for
the safe custody of the civilians. As the Governor had resigned
on 14 December and the civilian officials had moved to the free
zone of Hotel Intercontinental, the onus now rested on me, as
both Military Commander and Civil Administrator, to ensure that
no harm befell the civilians. I therefore spared no effort to ensure
their protection and safe return to Pakistan. I put forward two
conditions to Jacob: first, that the Pakistan troops would retain
their personal arms for self-protection and the protection of the
civilians until adequate Indian troops were available for their
protection in Dhaka Area; and second, that all Pakistani civilians,
civilian officials, and staff should be treated like civil internees,
not left at the mercy of the Bengalis, and accompany the troops
wherever they went.
Jacob readily agreed to the first demand, but argued that the
civilians would have to stay in Bangladesh until swapped with the
Bengalis stranded in camps in the west. Further talks would be
useless if they failed to embrace the civilian issue in its totality, by
granting sanctuary in unequivocal terms on behalf of both the
Indian Army and the political leadership. My adamant posture
left Jacob with no option but to advise his superiors of the
preconditions. After hectic telephoning, Jacob was given carte
blanche powers to deal with the issue. With the impediment
removed, the matter was resolved.
The Bengali member of the negotiating team objected but his
protests were set aside. During this period, many senior Indian
and Bengali officers and reporters had come to Dhaka. They
risked being held as POWs if negotiations broke down, since