82 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
— 
Two divisions plus against Pachagarh-Rangpur and Hilli
sector under 33 Corps (Lt.-Gen. Thapan).
— 
Two divisions plus from Krishnagar under the newly-
formed 2 Corps (Lt.-Gen, Raina) against Jessore-Khulna
sector to capture Dhaka.
In addition, an overwhelming concentration of army artillery,
and about nineteen engineer battalions, with a lot of bridging
equipment, was also reported. The Indian Army was also reported
to be constructing roads along the eastern border from
Karianganj (opposite Sylhet) to Aijal down to the Chittagong
border which were expected to be ready by October.
In view of these threats, my plan was rehashed. After discussion
with Major-Generals Jamshed and Rahim, Air Commodore Haq
(who were in Dhaka), and my Chief of Staff, Brigadier Baqir
Siddiqui, it was decided to create certain ad hoc formations for
deception, as well as for the occupation of defensive positions
against the envisaged threats along the penetrants mentioned
above.
The border outposts (BOPs) were mainly to be manned by
the Mujahids, Razakars, Scouts, and Rangers, who were also to
protect the lines of communications. The bulk of the regular
troops were to be concentrated in strong points and fortresses to
fight a proper defensive battle. The BOPs covering main
approaches were to be held by regular troops or CAF beefed up
by regular troops, and the rest of the borders were to be held by
CAF under regular officers and JCOS.
During war, commanders are not always faced with the
situation of their own choice. They are at times put in a difficult
position and at times faced with adverse circumstances and the
worst possible conditions. Under those circumstances even their
soundest plans can fall flat due to reasons beyond their control.
My position and circumstances were not altogether that bad.
There were quite a few things in my favour which, if exploited
properly, could have helped a lot and might even have turned
the scales in our favour. Field Marshal Rommel says: ‘No plan
survives contact with the enemy.’ If a commander’s plan gets him
to the battle, it is enough. After that he will fight by instinct, by
ears and eyes and tactical sense, like a duellist.
1
~\ oO)
Ore
LJ CAL
_ 
Fava Zest
a 
OA 
@ 
CGA 
@,
y 
y 
Vv 
y 
Vv 
2)