242 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
materials, but later they discontinued the provision, and we had
to buy our own supplies. Our mail was collected daily and we
always waited in a state of expectancy to receive the mail.
Censorship was heavy and at times the main theme of the letter
was axed by the censor. I received a lot of mail, sometimes bitter,
but mostly letters of encouragement which fuelled my resolve to
face the dire circumstance of captivity with courage and
determination. I always made it a point to reply to the letters,
even if only briefly. Food, gift parcels, and letters were also sent
from abroad; the parcels mostly contained chocolates, toffees,
shaving materials, perfumes, and such like. Had it not been for
the encouragement from Pakistan and abroad, the two and a
half years of captivity could have been hellish. Our attitude was a
deterrent to the Indian diplomats and pro-Indian Muslims who
were pestering the other camps with distasteful philosophy. The
junior Pakistani officers viewed their lectures with contempt and
distaste, and displayed a hostile attitude towards their professed
opinions. The concerted efforts of the Indians to brainwash our
officers and other ranks proved a dismal failure, and their efforts
to find agents to spy for them proved equally futile.
Whereas visits by Indian officers were not relished, those from
Red Cross teams were truly cherished. They imposed checks and
balances on the Indians and made efforts to ensure that no
excesses or irregularities were committed by them on Pakistani
POWs. Any complaint forwarded to them was pursued with
diligence. They praised the Pakistani soldiers’ dignified
behaviour in captivity.
At one stage the Indians started building a wall around the
camp. I protested but was informed that it was meant to obscure
the view of two persons sent by the Pakistan Government to
eliminate me. General Padda told me that he had been called to
GHQ Delhi and informed that Indian intelligence had captured a
Pakistani by the name of Jamshed from Calcutta, who divulged
that he and another man had been sent to liquidate General
Niazi. Indian GHQ had instructed him to take protective measures
to foil any attempt on my life. These were lots of bushes around
the camp, affording good cover to anyone armed with a telescopic
rifle. After the construction of the wall, whenever I came out,
certain posts on the outer circle were alerted, taking defensive
position in the trenches. Early in the mornings the area