118 
THE BETRAYAL. OF EAST PAKISTAN
The Date of the War
Before | discuss the Indian open war against East Pakistan, it is
necessary to correct a misapprehension about the day when open
all-out war started in East Pakistan.
Guerrilla warfare and Indian sneak raids into our territory
had been going on since March 1971 and both sides were
suffering material losses and human casualties. Artillery was being
used all along on both sides, and tanks and aircraft had been
taking part since early November 1971. The only difference was
that we were using these arms and weapons from our own area
in our own defence to oust the Indian invaders or stop their
entry into our area, whereas the Indian Army were using their
weapons from both their own soil and our soil. From late August
till November 1971, there had been several battalion- and
brigade-sized raids into every sector of East Pakistan by the Indian
Army. On the night of 20/21 November 1971, the Indian Army
attacked East Pakistan from all directions. The Indian attacks
were supported by tanks, artillery, and other arms, but were
repulsed in most cases. The Indian Army, in order to prove that
their war was a ‘lightning campaign’, had been downplaying their
offensive action as a limited war and border clashes.
Even in West Pakistan not much was published about
insurgency, or Indian raids on our territory in East Pakistan.
Similarly, they did not tell the people in so many words that a
full-fledged war had been going on in East Pakistan since 21
November 1971. Some writers confuse the date with 3 December,
when our Army attacked the Indian Army in the West, the Indians
retaliated, and the Russians joined the war openly on the Indian
side. The Pakistan Government did not bother to inform the
people as to what was really happening in East Pakistan.
When open and all-out war was begun by our attack on India
in the West on 3 December 1971, we had already suffered about
four thousand dead and about the same number wounded, if not
more. From May to November we had sent one thousand nine
hundred wounded to West Pakistan. We had lost twelve tanks
and three aircraft fighting against the Indian Army prior to 3
December. ‘Two Hilal-e-Jurat, ten Sitara-e-Jurat, twelve Tamga-e-Jurat
and 
many 
more 
mentioned 
in 
despatches had 
been
recommended and awarded. To have earned these gallantry
A/S NAA,
a 10 
h | it
XT 
£m
\/ 
¢ 
€ 
>} | 
|
YeowswNJVJAASA