70 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Training
By May 1971 about fifty per cent of the insurgents had been
disarmed. The rest of them had managed to cross over to their
pre-planned sanctuaries. The Indians had set up some fifty-nine
camps along the border where the rebels were trained and
equipped. Their training programme included indoctrination and
motivation. It was such a vast organization that the Indians had
appointed a Major-General to organize and co-ordinate the
training and indoctrination activities. Basic military training,
including the handling of weapons, was imparted in these camps,
but the main emphasis was on commando training and the use of
explosives, mines, grenades, etc., for sabotage and terror tactics.
Political leaders, mostly MNAs/MPAs, and professors and
teachers, were mobilized to motivate the trainees and for counter-
propaganda measures. They also carried out recruitment drives.
Political guidance was thus available within the country, and all
necessary direction to the rebels in the interior was being
provided locally in a meticulously-organized system.
In order to paralyse river communications, special attention
was paid by the Indians to under-water training. Initial screening
of prospective trainees was carried out by Indian naval officers,
then they were despatched to special under-water training camps.
About 300 rebels were flown from Agartala to Cochin for training
as under-water saboteurs. It was also known that about 300 frogmen
were trained at Plassey, on the Bhairathi River in West Bengal,
under the supervision of instructors from the Indian Navy and
some defected Pakistan Navy submariners and SSG frogmen.
The trainees were divided into three categories, keeping in
view their educational background ana suitabiniy, and training
was imparted to them accordingly:
Science Graduates: Technical training was given to them for two
months.
Undergraduates: They received training in the use of small arms,
mortars, rocket launchers. Instruction in map-reading and
commando tactics was also given.
Non-matriculates: They were trained as saboteurs. They received 
|
training in the use of various types of explosives, mines, and
grenades, and also in blowing up bridges, culverts, and other
vital installations.
4a?
NE oo 
OAT 
AY 
A
ry 
?
/ 
\ 
| 
op
YV 
VWUILIit