THE 1965 WAR 
2)
one hour's move notice, I left with an escort of one section
strength to carry out a detailed recce of village Badiana and the
surrounding area.
When I entered the village, my driver Alam Jan Mahsud and I
spotted about half a dozen Indian soldiers clustered around a
wireless set. They were deeply engrossed in listening to
something. We stopped, reversed the jeep, and moved to a mandir
(temple) about three hundred yards from Badiana..'The escort
section was instructed to leave their truck in the mandir and
occupy positions on the right edge of the village and wait for 1/1
Punjab. In case the escort section was attacked by the enemy with
the strength of a platoon or more, the section was to withdraw
through the nudlah and join me in the mandir.
After one hour, Alpha company of 1/1 Punjab reached the
mandir. Their platoon was ordered to join the escort section
already deployed on the right periphery of the village. After a
few minutes there was firing and then complete silence. The
company commander, Major Zaman Kiani, was sent ahead to
ascertain the latest position. He came back after about thirty
minutes. He explained that the Indians had attacked with a
platoon strength, The attack had been repulsed. The enemy in
the village had managed to get away in a hurry. The company
commander deployed his company in and around village
Badiana. The defensive measures and digging started. My escort
had not yet arrived. In the meantime, Lt.-Col. Amir Gulistan
Janjua (later Brigadier and Governor, NWFP), CO Guides
Cavalry, and his Second-in-Command, Major Fazle Haq (later
Lt-Gen. and Governor, NWFP) drove up in a jeep. Janjua told
me that 19 Lancers were going to sweep the area on the other
side of the village and his regiment, the Guides Cavalary, would
support them in case of attack by Indian armour. In the
meantime there was tank fire, and the 19 Lancers destroyed some
of the Guides Cavalary’s tanks. I informed General Abrar that
village Badiana was in our control and the Indians had been
ejected from the village by 14 Para Brigade troops, therefore the
attack by 19 Lancers should be discontinued. As the area was in
the control of 1/1 Punjab, the attack was called off.