THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
163
Divisional Commanders to fall back on to their main positions.
Enemy paratroops landed on the afternoon of the 10th at Tangail.
Brigadier Qadir was ordered to withdraw to Dhaka on the
night 9/10 December. 31 Baluch, which was holding Jamalpur
and Kamalpur, was successful in containing the enemy advance
for twenty-one days. They were besieged but they bayoneted their
way through the enemy encirclement. 33 Punjab, under Lt.-Col.
Razzak, also fought extremely well and kept the enemy at bay in
this sector. They had engaged in some tough battles, and survived
poison gas which was used against them. They too successfully
carried out the withdrawal to Dhaka.
Major-General Gurbux Singh was wounded and replaced by
Major-General Nagra, ex-2 Division, as 101 Communication Zone
Commander. Gurbux was an experienced and practical soldier
whereas Nagra was a boaster, a drawing-room strategist. Nagra’s
attacks were repulsed at each place during the withdrawal. Qadir
delayed the Indians for more than twenty-four hours at every
delaying position. At no time were the Indians or Mukti Bahint,
who in their thousands surrounded our troops now, allowed to
trap us. Our troops managed to extricate themselves each time,
and forced the enemy to proceed with caution. The enemy was
found to be sluggish and disorganized in their advance towards
Dhaka. 
|
93 Brigade reached Dhaka in good shape but the Brigade HQ
and its escort got entangled with the enemy paratroops in area
Kaluarkar. This small force under Brigadier Qadir delayed the
adyance of enemy paratroops for four days. Later, when they were
exhausted due to hunger and lack of rest, and their ammunition
was completely finished, Brigadier Qadir was taken POW.
Lt.-Gen. Sagat Singh airbridged the Meghna River on 11
December. The object of the para landing was to block the
withdrawal of troops coming from Mymensingh. The aim of air
bridging the Meghna by helicopter was to capture the Dhaka
side of Bhairab Bridge. Brigadier Saadullah’s brigade reached
Bhairab Bazar from Ashuganj before the arrival of the Indians
and firmed in. The aerial bridging capability was Arora’s trump
card. By withdrawing 93 Brigade from Mymensingh to Dhaka
and Saadullah’s brigade from Ashuganj to Bhairab Bazar, we
blunted the enemy move. We beat them to the draw. The enemy
failed to block the mave of both brigades.
Gh @ @ 
L. oY
J 
WW 
f 
i 
|
\ 
Vv 
sv 
e 
QS 
WAZ