HAMOOD-UR-REHMAN COMMISSION 
263
out of the army because of his report. Justice Hamood told him
that the Commission had not recommended any action against
him but had actually commended his role in the impossible war
in East Pakistan, That leaves no doubt that the original report
had been tampered with.
As far as 
| am concerned the HRC was set up by Bhutto to
appease the public and cover up the misdeeds of those in power.
That is why the Deputy Judge Advocate-General, GHQ,
considered the evidence ‘weak’. To me it was an illegal inquiry.
We were subject to the Pakistan Army Act and entitled to the
protection granted us therein. We had not committed any
offence, and all procedures laid down in the Pakistan Army Act
should have been complied with. The HRC ought to have
followed the procedure of a civil court, where the evidence is
produced, examined, and cross-examined by the other party.
That we were denied this right proves Mr A. T. Chaudhri’s
assertion that the norms of a court of inquiry were not observed
by the HRC, If they did not follow the norms, then their
conclusions are invalid and illegal.
It has been said that the HRC report was rehashed and
modified by forces stronger than the HRC. In the report, there
were eighteen pages about Bhutto’s activities. Bhutto was furious.
He is reported to have ordered all copies confiscated and the
pages containing unfavourable and unwelcome remarks replaced,
and to have summoned the Registrar to authenticate the replaced
pages. The Registrar, however, refused to endorse them, and an
angry Bhutto had him locked up in a room with no food and
water. It was only due to the direct intervention of Mr Hamood-
ur-Rehman, the Chief Justice, that he was released. This story was
told to Mr Habib-ur-Rehman by Justice Hamood.
It is interesting to note that after presentation of the report,
Bhutto is said to have asked the judges to hand over their personal
notes to him. The judges consulted each other and Justice Tufail
is said to have suggested that all notes and records should be
handed over otherwise they would get tangled up in the Official
Secrets Act. They handed over the records and their notes. The
FSF carried out a search of the Commission’s office and the
residences of HRC staff and others, and took away relevant papers.
That shows that even the judges were afraid of his tyranny.