TOPOGRAPHY AND TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
63
their activities by fire from across the border and by physically
-aiding our positions near the border. But the demoralized rebels
used to run away as soon as they contacted our troops or were
out of sight of the Indians.
During these operations about forty thousand rifles, sixty-five
machine guns, including ten heavy machine guns, one hundred
and fourteen light machine guns, thirty-one mortars, twelve
recoilless rifles, and great quantities of ammunition fell into our
hands. The heavy casualties and the loss of so many weapons by
the enemy were due to the break-neck speed and boldly-
conducted operations at all levels. The speed with which these
operations were conducted may not have a parailel in the history
of guerrilla warfare. It was due to this speed that the enemy was
shaken. They lost their nerve and ran helter-skelter for safety,
leaving behind a vast quantity of weapons and equipment and
transport. 
Their move back was not an organized withdrawal but
a disorganized retreat. In the short space of less than two months,
the rebels were beaten hollow at their own game, in their own
areas, in spite of the fact that they had the physical support of
the local population and the Indians.
This campaign can rightly be called a ‘lightning campaign’. I
sent the detailed report of the operations to GHQ and asked
permission to enter India to follow the beaten Mukti Bahini now
taking refuge on Indian soil. General Hamid told me on the
telephone: ‘Both the President and I are very happy with your
wonderful achievement. Don’t enter Indian territory. I will discuss
with you your future course of action soon.’ That was that.
Our fast movement, the sealing of borders, and the
establishment of communications had upset the timetable of the
Indian Army. They had anticipated that Mukti Bahini would keep
the Pakistan Army engaged inside the province around the big
cities and cantonments and make it ineffective after a few months
due to the shortage and irregularity of supplies and transport. The
€asy formula worked out by the Indian strategists would have
succeeded if Tikka had remained or if I had acted on General
Tikka’s plan, which was of a defensive nature. The Indian Army
had worked out that, if each guerrilla killed one Pakistani soldier,
the Pakistan Garrison would be eliminated in a few months.
Major-General Fazal Muqeem Khan (Retired) writes in his
book, Pakistan’s Crisis in Leadership, that the rebel forces had