298 
APPENDIX
(3) During World War II my regiment being Rajputs had
nicknamed me ‘Amar Singh Rathore’.
b, 
Pakistan Operations.
(1) Locust Operations: Sitara-e-Khidmat.
(2) 1965 War: Hilal-e-Jurat.
(3) 1971 War: Hilal-e-Jurat and Sitara-e-Pakistan.
(I have the honour of being awarded Hilal-e-Jurat
twice)
c. 
Medals. A total of twenty-four medals have adorned my
chest. (More than anyone else in the army).
8. 
My failing, I would say, was in not being part of any gang of
fortune seekers, sycophants, self seekers, social climbers, or
conspirators. I always called a spade a spade and never minced
my words. I abhorred power politics and held accumulation of
wealth in contempt. I was loyal to my superiors and juniors both.
I can say without hesitation that I did more for the good of the
country and its armed forces than anyone else.
9. 
I held authority to grant commissions to both officers and
JCQs, which was not even enjoyed by the C.-in-C. Pakistan Army.
I could award battlefield gallantry awards up to Sitara-e-Jurat. This
delegation of powers which was the prerogative of the Head of
the Govt showed their confidence in my being fair in my dealings
with all and that my judgement was beyond any suspicion. I don't
think there will be any other such example of a Commanding
General being given such sweeping powers.
10. Sir, when I got the orders for surrender (I got orders on 13
December 1971 but signed the surrender document on 16
December 1971) as a precautionary measure I had moved all
cash (including foreign exchange) and gold in banks to Dhaka
in order to protect my country’s financial wealth. Who was there
to stop me from grabbing a large chunk of cash and gold and
fleeing to a neutral country? Asylum is not uncommon in modern
society, and could have been arranged. I may not then have lived
in abject poverty as compared to the living standards of our top
brass today. I would have also escaped the humiliation of signing
the surrender document and living in India as a POW. I arranged
the burning of all currency under the supervision of Colonel
Muhammad Khan.
11. But thievery and deserting troops and people during crises
was not Niazi’s cup of tea. I decided to surrender with my troops
www.balochlibrary.com