300
APPENDIX
Pakistan Garrison. All generals evaded posting to East
Pakistan; finally I, being twelfth on the seniority list, was
selected to command East Pakistan Garrison, because
the President, gauging the attitude and performance of
generals senior to me, decided to go for efficiency and
suitability instead of seniority and formality. As CGS, Gen.
Gul Hassan’s handling of Divisions and Corps was so
disastrous that the war in West Pakistan was lost in spite
of the fact we had everything in our favour. He
deliberately made false promises to me regarding
despatch of reinforcements and equipment for East
Pakistan, because professionally he wanted to run me
down, and was an active member of the junta which had
decided to get me defeated and so lose East Pakistan. He
was promoted as COAS in his present rank but was
removed by Mr Bhutto. He got his full pension and an
ambassadorial job.
Air Chief Marshal Rahim. Disgraceful conduct during
the 1971 War. He hid himself and his Air Force while
the Indian Air Force had more or less free run all over
West Pakistan. He was not only retired from his post but
made an ambassador and given full pension.
Lt.-Gen. Jahanzeb Arbab. He was removed from
command of his brigade in East Pakistan by his GOC
and sent back from East Pakistan for trial for corruption
and looting cash. He was found guilty by an enquiry but
was promoted from a Brigadier to the rank of Lt.-Gen.
and later retired with full pension.
Maj.-Gen. Rao Farman Ali.
(1) The crack-down in March 1971 was presided over by
Gen. Farman Ali. The action was so severe and harsh
that it resulted in closure of all avenues of
compromise with the Awami League. He contacted
the UN representative in Dhaka in December 1971
and divulged the contents of a Top Secret document
to him without the approval and knowledge of the
Governor or myself or the President. He was in close
touch with the Indian C.-in-C. and the Russians
without our knowledge.
(2) He sent Rs 80,000 (a lot of money in 1971) to his
B® 
|
4 
~~ 
7
L. 
J = 
Crqaewr vy 
ay 
as
\ / 
{ 
| 
pp
WW 
W 
UC Al OCNIIDIal Y 
WN Jill