THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
157
Brahmanbania to Ashuganj, where a trap had been set for them.
Fire discipline in the formations was excellent—we let the Indian
troops come into the built-up area, then hell was let loose. Due
to our effective firing the Indians lost 120 men and four tanks.
The enemy was reinforced by another battalion. A strong counter-
attack led by Brig. Saadullah forced them to fall back. At this
stage, General Officer Commanding 14 Division, Qazi Majid,
ordered the blowing up of Ashuganj Bridge while 27 Brigade was
sull on the east bank of the Meghna River and when there was
no immediate danger to the bridge. The brigade managed to
cross over and reach Bhairab Bazar.
The [Indians started crossing the Meghna by using helicopters
south-west of Bhairab Bazar. The Indian build-up at Narsingdi
was slow, in spite of the fact there was no interference from our
side. Ferrying tanks and artillery across the Meghna was a difficult
task. I lacked the long-range capability to disrupt their landing
plans because we did not have medium and heavy artillery guns.
Similarly, if I had had my Recce Regiment (tank) and long range
artillery, the enemy would have resisted the temptation to resort
to aerial bridging or landing para-troops at Tangail. Also, if I had
had a few squadron of modern aircraft, I could have successfully
interfered with enemy tank movements, para drops, heli landings,
and river crossing operations.
Within the overall defensive plan of the sector, 14 Division had
been entrusted with the task of defending Narsingdi-Narayanganj
sector. They were to fall back when ordered from Sylhet and
Ashuganj. Sylhet brigade had come down to Maulvi Bazar. Majid
was ordered to send the troops to Dhaka; instead, for unknown
reasons, he pushed them back to Sylhet. Majid had been given the
mission to fall back on Dhaka after the destruction of the Bhairab
Bazar bridge. 1 ordered him to fall back to Narsingdi. He regretted
his inability to do so. He was specially given six ferries for the
move to Dhaka, and the railway line was also available to him—it
was later used by the Indians, and his troops watched the spectacle.
He could easily have reached Dhaka, but he never even made the
attempt. It appears his disobedience was part of the plan to let
East Pakistan Garrison face ignominy. He knew that the defence
of Dhaka was vital. Sull he failed to obey. I therefore removed him
from the command of his Division and put his troops under the
command of 36(A) Division. Sylhet-Chittagong and Comilla