THE INVASION 
133
President's political directive. This new mission given to me was
being accomplished up to the time the order for surrender was
issued, 
|
If the High Command had planned that Eastern Command
should keep the enemy tied down indefinitely without a major
offensive effort from West Pakistan against India, then starting
the all-out war on 3 December was the greatest blunder the High
Command made. If they had planned for an offensive and failed
to carry out their plan for war in the west, then the blame should
be placed entirely on them, because at the cost of Eastern
Command they had the best possible relative strength ratio—
parity in infantry, and five armoured formations to the Indians’
three. This I would say was the chance of the century for Pakistan.
We have never had such superiority and I do not think we will
ever have it again. High Command’s follies and indecisiveness,
and General Tikka’s failure to launch the intended offensive by
the Reserve Army, tilted the balance in the enemy’s favour. By
this offensive, according to their strategic concept, they were
supposed to release the pressure on East Pakistan and the
territory gained by them was to be bargained for the territory
lost in the east.
From their inaction it should be quite clear that they had no
plan of saving East Pakistan. The reference to Chinese activities
gave us the impression that our major offensive in the west,
supported by Chinese activities opposite us, would achieve
decisive results. Involving more enemy and the Chinese help
meant continuous fighting on our well-sited, well-selected, well-
prepared and well-stocked positions and resorting to offensive
defence so that the enemy could not thin out troops from here.
We carried out various manoeuvres to split their formations and
drew them at a tangent rather than allowing them to go abreast
and in a position to switch from one axis to another. We deprived
the enemy of his manoeuvrability and reduced his superiority to
one to two or one to three on several routes, the protection of
which needed his regular troops. We were fighting along interior
lines and routes that converged on last-ditch battle positions,
thus contracting the frontage. By our commando raids and other
offensive actions, and by our gradual withdrawal, we succeeded
in involving the maximum number of Indian troops; eventually
we succeeded in luring them onto our strong positions located