138 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Rangpur. Our troops fought delaying battles which caused
considerable attrition on the enemy’s advancing force. They
successfully carried out a fighting withdrawal within the
formulated plan and occupied Rangpur Fortress. The enemy
force was tied down, its initiative blunted. Despite hectic efforts,
the enemy made no headway and failed even to establish a
blocking position tll the very end.
Indian 71 Brigade advanced towards Dinajpur. The advance
was checked at Birganj. Failing to make any substantial gains, the
enemy diverted its efforts to setting up a road-block between
Dinajpur and other positions. Even these efforts failed dismally
as our line of communications remained open. The Indians next
put in 9 Mountain Brigade south of Dinajpur, in a move to
encircle our position. The move failed to create any viable impact
and our positions remained intact. The spirit of the defending
troops remained high. Brigadier Shafi, by correct use of the
terrain, efficient use of local resources, flexibility, and tactical
ability, led this division in tenacious resistance. He kept the
Indian troops involved in front of his Fortress defence and
effectively ted them down until the end of the hostilities.
Brigadier Shafi had been specially selected by me to command
23 Brigade, which was to hold Dinajpur-Rangpur and not allow
Indian troops to advance further.
Initial success at the outbreak of war, when Brigadier Ansari
was commanding 23 Brigade, had emboldened the Indians.
Convinced that the BSF battalions in conjunction with Mukti
Bahini could deal with the Pakistani troops in this sector, the
Indian hierarchy had decided to shift 6 Division against West
Pakistan. With Brigadier Shafi taking over command, the fighting
pattern took a dramatic turn, An aggressive stance replaced the
defensive posture. He planned audacious raids on the enemy’s
lines of communication, gun areas, and HQs, and by spoiling
their attacks he halted the enemy advance. The offensive zest
lost its edge. Unable to make headway, the Indians abandoned
the idea of shifting 6 Division. The Indian Army was finding it
difficult to match the Pakistani troops’ indomitable spirit, and
what they were finding difficult to perform would have been
next to impossible for the BSF and Mukti Bahini to accomplish.
K 
) 
| 
rp | 
| LT» } .
YA/ 
VYA/ 
YY . / 
| 
rd 
( 
iy 
]
W/W 
W/W 
\ 
a/ 
\ 
iA 
yy
vy 
VV 
VV 
eCVWTuUsvr/s oil