264 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Whatever has been published is apparently the brainchild of
vested interests. In fact the original copies were all destroyed.
Only one copy of the amended version survived but nobody was
willing to authenticate it. So in reality, there is no Hamood
Report. Its name might be there but the contents are largely
fabricated. There is a possibility that the new version of the so-
called Report, if published, would have exposed many in power
because of distortions in their statements. Mr Wali Khan, in an
interview published in an Urdu newspaper, said: ‘There are many
deficiencies in HRC’s report. The most important is that all
parties have been exonerated, all accusations have been deleted
from the account whereas I maintained that the Army was
compelled to take action when politicians failed to find the
solution. I clearly told this to Justice Hamood, that Pakistan was
dismembered by Bhutto and Yahya Khan. However, when I saw
the typed version of my statement it had been tampered with. I
corrected the draft and sent it back after retyping. A photocopy
of the corrected draft is still with me.
New Commission
The HRC Report was a top secret document. So-called extracts
from it have been published in Pakistan and abroad. Whatever
has been published is to suit vested interests. From what has
appeared in print so far, the attempt seems to be to conceal and
confuse rather than reveal and explain. The disclosures made so
far appear to have been inadequate, deliberately loaded, and
purposely slanted. I am fully convinced that the leaked extracts
were not from the original report, which has been rewritten,
re-hashed, or altered to such an extent that it has lost its
authenticity. Mr M. B. Naqvi, a senior journalist, wrote in Dawn
in August 1986:
It is essential that an all embracing high level enquiry, with senior
army officers, politicians and superior judiciary as members of the
Commission be constituted to arrive at the truth and punish the
guilty.