EARLY YEARS 
7
jungle warfare, they fought with skill and tenacity and
maintained constant pressure through by-passing positions and
hooking attacks. The only road on which the Japanese could
advance was under our control. Mortars and artillery fire
inflicted substantial damage on us before we could dig in.
Survival lay in digging proper trenches and linking them
together with communication trenches to facilitate movement
and avoid casualties. The Japanese had managed to occupy the
surrounding hills, some higher than ours, and they dominated
our posiuon by observation and fire. Our moves were mostly
confined to the hours of darkness.
Our Brigade Commander, Brigadier Warren, was a brave man
who taught us that stagnation results in strangulation. Patrolling,
ambushing, and sneaking raids enhanced the morale of our
troops. After about a week, although the fury of the attacks had
dissipated, the siege continued. | was given the task of ambushing
a Japanese ration party. We were successful, and the complete
party of ten lay dead on the track.
Finally the 2nd British Division came to our rescue and the
siege was broken after thirteen days. Brigadier Warren had
deployed the brigade very intelligently and conducted the
defensive battle brilliantly. With meagre resources he had
managed to stem the Japanese advance at Kohima for thirteen
days and shattered the Japanese hopes of capturing the territory.
He was awarded the DSO. The Japanese, realizing that further
advance into India was fraught with extreme difficulties, decided
to abandon their plans to advance further and started a systematic
withdrawal! from Assam.
The Trap at Slopey Hill
After two weeks of rest, during which we were given convalescent
rations, 161 Brigade was ordered to impede the Japanese
withdrawal, harass them, and destroy their troops and vehicles.
Within the framework of the brigade plan, 4/7 Rajputs were
ordered to cover the roads, lay ambushes, and disturb the enemy
balance when their troops were withdrawing. As a Lieutenant, J
was given the overall command of Bravo and Charlie Companies,
being senior to Lieutenant Richardson, who commanded Charlie
ye
WW X 7 bal. ochlihr baa
Vv \ e 
LJ Ali TF & 6 I Ai Ui Ai y e VW Ul et