190 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
c. Safety of all those who settled in East Pakistan since 1947
guaranteed.
d. No reprisals against those who had helped the adminis-
tration since March 1971.
Under these conditions, the Pakistan Armed Forces and
Pakistan Para Military Forces would cease all military operations.
A copy of these proposals was transmitted to GHQ. I still did
not issue orders to formations because I was determined to fight
if COS India did not agree to my conditions.
The reply from the COAS Indian Army, General Manekshaw,
was received at 2330 hrs on 15 December 1971, and is reproduced
below. He acknowledged my communication regarding cease-
- fire but insisted on surrender as already communicated by him
to General Farman Ali in his two messages—of which I was not
aware. I did not know why and how and under whose orders
Farman was communicating directly with General Manekshaw.
For Lt.-Gen, Niazi from Sam Manekshaw, Chief of the Army Staff India.
Firstly, 
| 
have received your communications of cease-fire, in
Bangladesh at 1430 hours today through the American Embassy at
New Delhi.
Secondly, I had previously informed General Farman Ali in two
messages that I would guarantee (a) the safety of all your military and
para military forces who surrender to me in Bangladesh (b) complete
protection to Foreign Nationals, ethnic minorities and personnel of
West Pakistan origin no matter who they may be. Since you have
indicated your desire to stop fighting I expect you to issue orders to
all forces under your command in Bangladesh fo cease fire immediately
and surrender to my advancing forces wherever they are located.
Thirdly, I give you my solemn assurance that personnel who
surrender shall be treated with the dignity and respect that soldiers
are entitled to and I shall abide by the provisions of the Geneva
Convention. Further, as you have many wounded I shall ensure that
they are well cared for and your dead given proper burial. No one
need have any fear for their safety, no matter where they come from.
Nor shall there be any reprisals by forces operating under my
command,
Fourthly, immediately I receive a positive response from you / shall
direct General Arora the Commander of Indian and Bangladesh Forces in the
_ Eastern Theatre to refrain from all air and ground actions against your
forces. As a token-of my good faith I have ordered that no air action
shall take place over Dacca from 1700 hours today.
wwfmwy) 
wy 
L oO) | I» 
h \ | Ar O11 ¥°XTM 7 
4 v CY ] 4 a ae |
Vv Vv VV V Vv a L J aA I LJ Wil I I LU yf Al y ewVUIiIli