216 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
area was the worst for military operations. It was full of ravines,
marshes, and lakes, and did not allow large-scale military
manoeuvre. It was more suited for defence. India launched its
main effort of three infantry Divisions, independent brigades,
and Mukti Bahini brigades, along with their specially-formed
Kilo Force with many battalions of BSF. What did Arora gain in
trying to invest Sylhet, where our two brigades were successful in
pinning down his 8 Infantry division of six brigades? Similarly,
we succeeded in containing 57 Mountain and 23 Infantry
Divisions in area Comilla-Mainamati. The Indians tried hard to
capture this area but in vain. Their advance to Chandpur was of
no value. Initially it was not in our plans to hold Chandpur, but
under orders from GHQ we occupied it to be vacated: later for
the defence of Dhaka.
Arora frittered away all his resources against unimportant
objectives. Even 57 Division got bogged down in area Bhairab
Bazar and Ashuganj. 4 Indian Corps and 101 Communication
Zone were left with four weak brigades for the capture of Dhaka.
Their helicopters could have brought their infantry across the
Meghna one section per heli-gunship, but could not lift their
tanks or guns. The railway line was within firing range of our 27
Brigade in Bhairab Bazar. They would have had to clear Bhairab
Bazar so that they could bring up their tanks and heavy and
medium guns over the bridge before moving towards Dhaka, but
Sagat Singh could not do so because his corps was spread from
Sylhet to Chandpur and he could not concentrate enough troops
to tackle Bhairab Bazar Fortress, whose back was protected by
the mighty Meghna river.
Mymensingh-Tangail-Dhaka Sector
The shortest route to Dhaka was from Tura in India. The
communications were along the grain of the country and there
were no major obstacles, though there were good defensive
positions in Madhupur Forest/Tangail. The Mukti Bahini under
Kadir Siddiqi was fairly strong and could help the Indians during
their advance towards Dhaka. I ask myself why Arora launched
only two regular infantry brigades and one Mukti brigade in the
area under 101 Communications Zone. This area required a