122 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
all my troops had been drawn to the borders and I had no body
in reserve and only a few people in depth. On the maps we had
shown all the troops strung along the borders in a thin line and
had marked them with big circles. Actually only a few of them
were on the borders; the bulk of them were well behind. This
marked deployment pleased the Indians and also satisfied the
ego of our High Command, whose intentions were more
dangerous than those of the Indians and the Bengalis. My High
Command wanted me to be defeated in the first encounter with
the Indian Army. I was told not to lose any chunk of territory, for
which sealing of the borders was essential and which meant that
dispersal of troops along the borders was essential. As a result |
would become easy meat for the Indians. I adjusted my plans
slightly but did not give up concentration. To make it easy for
the Indians and give them time to defeat me, Yahya neither
attacked in the west according to our over-all plan (the Battle of
the East will be fought in the West), nor did he refer the case to
the United Nations.
The case was not taken to the UNO to ensure that no political
settlement took place. The retaliation offensive was not launched
from the western theatre to give Indians time to crush my tired
garrison with the weight of numbers and fire power. This was in
consonance with the Yahya-Bhutto plan to leave East Pakistan
without a successor government. This could only happen if I was
defeated. Hence this silence and passiveness on Yahya’s part.
I sent the following message to my troops on 21 November
1971:
The Indians having failed to achieve their mission of establishment
of Bangladesh and crippling of East Pakistan Garrison through
insurgency, sneak raids, tactics of attrition and war of proxy, have
openly invaded East Pakistan on the night 20/21 November. Their
onslaught has been checked along the entire front by the brave
soldiers of Pakistan. They should not be allowed to enlarge their
lodgement area. Send boys from Al-Badar and Al-Shams for deep
targets inside India. Use local guerrillas and own commandos to attack
their tank harbours, gun areas, and their lines of communication
(L of C). Jitter them at night. They have abundance of mechanical
transport (MT), tanks and aircrafts and no dearth of petrol, Don’t
allow them to resort to mobile warfare. Make intelligent use of rivers,
streams, creeks, lakes and pools and inundation to make their MT
VK 7YX7XX) 
LK = 1 ~ 7) lL ] “ kK oY) 4°X 
7 tr
LX7 [ A/ 
X \] 
| 
y? 1 I ( ¥ ( Oil D I< 1 t \ ] ( > )] nN
¥YV 
VV 
VY 
e B, CQALRIWY 
pa CRE 
eowv\Ji