140 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
position. The main weapon positions were also marked. Hilli was
the gateway to the Hilli-Gaibanda axis—the road to Bogra and
Dhaka, Hilli had been under constant pressure by the Mukti
Bahini, supported by the Indian Army, since mid November.
Fach time they were badly mauled. Hilli had been converted into
a strong defensive position by converting villages into strong
points. The strong points catered for all-round defence. Full use
was made of marshy areas, ponds, and bogs. The weapon pits
and fortifications were constructed with an eye to absorbing heavy
shelling and providing good killing ground. The localities were
mutually supporting, inter-connected with communication
trenches and mouse-holings, and medium machine-guns and
recoilless rifles from reconnaissance and support elements had
been integrated into the defensive layout.
The Indians attacked Morapara on 24 November with a
battalion from the south, after the Mukti Bahini had failed to
capture any area despite several attempts. As the enemy moved
forward for the attack, all machine-guns opened up from the
defended localities. Their attempt to advance was nullified by
our effective fire-power, marsh, barbed wires, and heavy concen-
tration of artillery and mortar fire.
The Indians were pinned down and suffered heavy casualties.
A couple of platoons of the enemy managed to reach the
southern end of the village, where an intense hand-to-hand fight
took place. Troops from other Indian battalions also crossed
from the north-east of the village, but they were outfought in the
hand-to-hand fighting here as well. The determination and
bravery of our troops compelled the enemy to withdraw from the
village area. The strength of the enemy attack dissipated and the
Indian operation failed.
The Indians’ claim that only one brigade attacked Hilli
Fortress is absurd. It 1s a crude attempt to hide the failure of
their operation. If they used only one brigade, why was the other
brigade of 20 Division closing around Hilli for ten days? One
Pakistani brigade crippled 20 Mountain Division, which was
backed by tremendous artillery and air fire-power. 20 Mountain
Division consisted of five brigades, one tank brigade, half a dozen
battalions of BSF, and the Mukti Bahini forces. They were
supported by divisional and corps artillery, and they had complete
alr supremacy, with no Pakistani aircraft to counter them. Our