58 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
communication is poor: its railway system is restricted and
metalled roads are few and raised. Here the communication
system is unique in the world; it is waterway-railway-roads, in that
order, while in the rest of the world it is the other way round.
The metalled roads are raised some fifteen to twenty feet above
the surrounding countryside, which is covered with either thick
vegetation, stagnant pools, or paddy fields. The water table is
about four to five feet, so weapons pits had to be built up rather
than dug down, making them conspicuous. Whichever way they
were made, the rainwater filled the trenches. Bhairab Bridge
connects Chittagong division with Dhaka division and Paksey
Bridge connects Khulna division with Rajshahi division. No bridge
links Dhaka division with Rajshahi or Khulna divisions, therefore
all movement between Rajshahi or Khulna and Dhaka Is by boats
or by air. Rivers have to be crossed on ferries,
A small example shows how difficult movement in the
province was. To get from Dhaka to Jessore: up to Narayangan]
the journey would be by train or road, from Narayanganj to
Khulna or Golando Ghat by steamer, and from there to Jessore
by broad-gauge railway. A crow’s flight distance of seventy-five
miles from Dhaka to Jessore would take two days and involve
three trans-shipments. Similarly from Sylhet to Jessore would
involve three to four trans-shipments by road, railway of two
different gauges, and steamer.
Deployment of Troops for Anti-Insurgency Operation
When I took over the Eastern Command, the prevailing situation
reminded me of Field Marshal Foch of World War I, when he
said, ‘My centre is giving way, my right flank is falling back,
situation is excellent, 
| must attack.’ I said to myself, ‘My centre
is breached, my flanks are turned, and I am more or less
surrounded. The situation could not be better, I must attack.’ I
did attack immediately and by the grace of Almighty Allah I had
complete success in the first round of the war. I addressed two
letters to all formations on maintenance of discipline and training
which are reproduced at Appendices 3 and 4.
As mentioned above, the former East Pakistan is surrounded
by Indian territory on three sides. The total frontage comes to