td 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
General Tikka Khan was sent as Yaqub’s replacement on 7
March 1971. Tikka arrived in Dhaka by air and took over the
duties of Commander, Eastern Command, MLA, and Governor
of East Pakistan. He was not welcomed; in fact he was presented
with a garland of shoes at the airport. To top it all, the Chief
Justice refused to swear him in as Governor. Tikka was a straight-
forward, hard-working, and unassuming person. He lacked
Yaqub’s slick and suave manner; in fact he was not the sort of
person to inspire confidence in others. He lacked strategic insight
and tactical flair, yet a halo of grandeur and vicarious heroism
had been woven around him.
On taking over the command of Eastern Garrison, Gen. Tikka
tried to meet Sheikh Mujib. Although Mujib had met Yaqub, he
refused to meet Tikka. Gen. Tikka issued a directive to the troops,
based on the mission spelled out to him; this included: disarming
of the East Bengal Regiment, battalions of the East Pakistan Rifles,
and the police; security of Chittagong naval base; control of air-
fields including Lal Munir Hut and Ishurdi; security of towns.
Looking at the directives, except for the disarming of regular
and irregular Bengali troops, the stress was on the defensive side,
i.e., security of cantonments, etc. During implementation of the
plan the main task given to Tikka—disarming of the armed
Bengalis—was forgotten and he went off at a tangent. The result
was that we lost not only the initiative but the whole of the
province, except for a few garrison towns.
Another wrong step General ‘Tikka took was that he uncere-
moniously turned out of East Pakistan all foreign correspondents,
newspersons, reporters, and I'V crews. Some of them were
manhandled, their higgage searched, and films removed from
cameras. They all moved to India eventually. So the foreign media
turned against us and started reporting twisted versions of events
in East Pakistan, their source of information being the Indians
and the refugees fleeing from East Pakistan. Their twisted and
exaggerated accounts and false stories did a lot of damage to
Pakistan and its armed forces. Our Government did not bother
to counter them, and as a result even our own people started
believing the false and exaggerated accounts of the foreign Press.
On 14 March Bhutto suggested two Prime Ministers, he himself
for West Pakistan and Mujib for East Pakistan, and his utterances,
e.g., Udhar tum, idhar hum, clearly meant two Pakistans. Gen.
ey