THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
145
successful withdrawal from Hilli to Bogra, forty miles away, and
breaking through the Indian encirclement without any air cover
or long range artillery support, was a worse stigma on the
generalship of Lachhman Singh, than his unsuccessful offensive
operations earlier on.
Brigadier Tajammal Hussain Malik had volunteered to fight in
East Pakistan. I wanted to keep him for the defence of Dhaka but
he insisted on going to a front-line brigade. He was sent to 205
Brigade under General Nazar. I had full faith in him as a good
commander and a brave leader. He had proved his mettle in the
1965 war. He displayed the qualities of a true soldier of Islam
and gave the toughest battle to the Indians. I recommended him
for the award of Nishan-e-Haider, but GHQ ignored him and his
heroic deeds as many chairbound soldiers and sycophants had to
be catered for. I insisted on his promotion to Major-General as
some people were afraid of him because of his unflinching faith
in Islam. He was promoted and became the only Brigadier from
East Pakistan to attain this rank.
Our troops also successfully transfixed the Indian army in
Dinajpur, Rangpur, Saidpur, Bogra, and Rajshahi, so that the
enemy could not transfer troops to West Pakistan, In fact, with
the arrival of Brigadier Manzoor’s brigade from 9 Division into
16 Division’s area, the enemy was sandwiched in the north and
.south. Had the ceasefire not taken place, the enemy would have
been placed in a precarious situation.
The performance of the Indian Corps Commander in this
sector was below average. Not only did he not capture Dhaka, he
failed completely even to capture the preliminary objectives. He
was sacked after the war for his failure to defeat the tired, ill-
equipped garrison despite the vast resources placed at his
disposal. The battle result tn this sector exposes the error of two
COASs, Gul Hassan and Tikka, in accusing us of dispersing the
troops in penny packets. It should be remembered that Gul
Hassan never took part in any battle, and that Tikka never won
any battle in Pakistan. The troops were deployed within the ambit
of the tactical doctrine of the Pakistan Army as approved by
GHQ, otherwise 16 Division, indeed my whole force, could have
been defeated in detail.