250 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
panicky and vanished. When he reappeared I asked him what
the delay was and where he had gone. He said he had spoken to
General Tikka and told him it would be impossible to reach
Lahore by car due to the presence of the crowd, which stretched
all the way to Shalamar Gardens, about eight miles from Wagah.
So I was taken to Lahore airport in the Cantonment by helicopter.
There was a big crowd outside my house as well. | came out of
the car, shook hands with a few people, and waved to the rest.
Many people brought sweets, garlands, etc. The gifts became so
many that we had to empty a room to put them in. I stayed for
ten days in Lahore and each day people thronged my house.
I left for Mianwali on the Mari Indus Train, which starts from
Lahore at eight o'clock at night. All the railway stations were full
of people who had come to greet me. I did not sleep that night. I
came out at every station and waved to the people. When the train
entered the area of Mianwali District, there were bigger crowds.
People had brought drums and flutes and were dancing. When
the train reached Mianwali Station, there were a lot of police but
no civilians. When I got off the train the Deputy Commissioner
and Superintendent of Police came and shook hands with me. I
asked the Deputy Commissioner the reason for not allowing people
to come on to the railway platform. He said, ‘Government orders.’
I said, ‘DC Sahib, I am a law-abiding citizen and a responsible
officer of the Pakistan Army. This is too much. Allow the people to
come.’ He said he was sorry but he could not do it. I told him that
in that case I would, and he should take himself and his men off if
he wanted to avoid getting into trouble. In the crowd there were
quite a few army officers who had taken leave to come and receive
me, and quite a few from the police. So I waved to them. Within
minutes they charged at the policemen, snatched their rifles, and
literally threw them over the iron fence. The police did not fire
because my people too were armed. Both the DC and SP
disappeared. The whole city and suburbs had come to receive me.
Nobody went to work or to his office, and no shops were opened
that day. Here too lots of people came to see me every day, The
majority were retired army personnel.
Bhutto, seeing my popularity, became cautious and tried to
patch things up with me, but I declined his offers. He kept me in
uniform for over a year with all the benefits of Generalship before
he took any action.