124 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
The Indians had promised their Russian mentors that they
would capture East Pakistan in a week, capture Dhaka in twelve
days, and destroy the Pakistan Garrison in the process, but their
attack was halted at the very outset. The Indians stretched the
time to 3 December to achieve their aim, but they were stil
helpless near the borders even after thirteen days of their attack
on 21 November 1971.
Indian Intentions and Plan
The intentions of the Indians, their plan, and auxiliary efforts
were now quite clear. They were advancing as under:
Jessore Sector: The newly-raised II Indian Corps to capture Dhaka
(Lt-Gen. Raina) comprising: 
4 Mountain Division; 9. Infantry
Division; 50 (I) Para Brigade Group; two regiments of tanks and
five BSF battalions.
Bogra Sector: 33 Corps to capture Rangpur-Bogra and cross
over to Dhaka from Sirajganj (Lt.-Gen. Thapan) with 471
Engineers Brigade and 20 Mountain Division; 
6 Mountain
Division: 340 (I) Brigade Group; 33 Corps Artillery Brigade; 69
Cavalry (PT-76); 72 Armoured Regiment (T-55); and ten BSF
battalions.
Mymensingh Sector: The Indians started their advance with 5
Independent Brigade but had to bring in 63 Brigade to reinforce
this sector. 
A Mukti Bahini Brigade under Brigadier Shah Baig
Singh of the Indian Army was also operating in this area. The
whole sector was under command of 101 Communication zone.
The sector commander, Maj.-Gen. G. S. Gill, lost his foot due to
a mine explosion and was replaced by Maj.-Gen. Nagra, ex-2
Division. In Dhaka we saw the whole of 2 Division’s staff
controlling the operation in this sector.
Sythet, Brahmanbaria, and Laxam Sector: This was the main effort
comprising 4 Corps under Lt.-Gen. Sagat Singh with 8, 23 and 57
Divisions, 
a Mukti Bahini Brigade, 471 Engineer Brigade, many
engineer battalions and seventeen BSF battalions. It was
responsible for the eastern sector and had the task of capturing
Dhaka along with their auxiliary effort from Tura-Mymensingh
from the north. 8 Division of six brigades was to secure area