144 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
The Company of 23 Punjab commanded by Major Shahid attached
to 32 Baluch during these operations was practically wiped out. A
small number of the survivors were taken prisoners. The heroic fight
of Havildar Hukam Dad had taken place during this battle...Major
Sajid, Company Commander of 23 Punjab, was on the eastern side of
the main road. He was captured by the enemy advancing from the
south. Havildar Hukam Dad of Sajid’s Company had successfully
foiled three enemy attacks to link up from the south and north. The
Indian Major ordered Major Sajid, his captive, to stop this fanatic
fellow, or they would assault his position. As Sajid showed his
reluctance, an Indian detachment charged on Hukam Dad’s position.
Alone in his position he sprayed bullets into the charging troops. He
killed three of them. The others crawled back. Further infuriated,
the Indian Major, with a revolver at Sajid’s chest, ordered him to stop
that fanatic fellow. Sajid obeyed. He shouted to Hukam Dad to stop
it. He replied, “Sahib! you seem to have exhausted your ammunition
but I still have two magazines with me. Don’t worry, I have enough.”*
It was in this sector that Major Akram, one of the company
commanders of 4FF, was awarded a posthumous Nishan-e-Haider
for his gallantry in Mapara area. The e complete 205 Brigade
Group fought extremely well. Lt.-Col. Abbasi of 4FF was wounded
and evacuated. As 4FF was holding Hilli, a very important
position, I could not afford to leave it without a good CO, so I
took my General Staff Officer, Lt.-Col. Mumtaz, GSO-I
(Intelligence), to Hilli when I visited the area on 26 November
1971. He put up a magnificent show. He also officiated as Brigade
Commander during Tajammal’s absence when the latter was
ambushed. For his extraordinary bravery he was awarded Sitara-e-
Jurat. It was a model battle against the enemy’s four brigades,
one Mukti Bahini brigade, and one armoured brigade with
incessant air bombardment, and he held out for nineteen
continuous days until ordered to withdraw to Bogra.
General Lachhman Singh had more than enough troops, fire
power, and conducive circumstances to have done much better,
but he let the battle run itself and became a hopeless spectator.
He went on hurling troops into successive battles without feeling
the pulse of the battle. This is typical of generals who conduct
operations by sitting in the HQ, basing their decisions on the.
‘reports coming from the front, without bothering to go forward
to see, smell, and feel the pulse of the battle themselves. Our