EVENTS LEADING TO SECESSION 
35
Administrator by Iskander Mirza, the Chief Executive of Pakistan.
Ayub Khan chose his priorities with clarity. He strove to preserve
what we had inherited, the values and concepts, and planned to
implement a national reconstruction programme with special
emphasis on the development of East Pakistan. His first and
foremost alm was to address the ills, both social and economic,
which were rampant in Pakistan. To fulfil this aim, the eradication
of smuggling, hoarding, and corruption was accorded top
priority. His second aim was to restore political stability, which
had been eroded by inept leadership. Ayub Khan’s dedicated
efforts to boost industrialization achieved considerable success.
After the 1965 War, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto made a statement in
the National Assembly which caused a furore. He said that East
Pakistan had been ‘saved by China’. This was not a simple
statement, but one which had far-reaching consequences. The
Bengalis’ thinking underwent a radical change. It began to
appear to them that if the bulk of the forces were located in
West Pakistan, and there were hardly any troops in East Pakistan
to defend it, then the union with Pakistan held no practical
advantages. This feeling soon gained strength. The diffident
attitude of the West Pakistan leadership failed to justify their
strategy. The Bengalis were convinced more than ever before
that they were being neglected. To a certain extent their anxieties
were not unfounded,
The discontent kept simmering. Sheikh Mujib carried out overt
and covert activities to meet his objectives. In 1966 the Agartala
Conspiracy was unearthed. Sheikh Mujib, in connivance with civil
and junior army officers, had conspired with Indian agencies to
bring about a revolt in East Pakistan. The meetings had taken
place in Agartala, India, hence the name. Mujib and the other
conspirators were arrested.
_ 
The Agartala Conspiracy was not a fabricated story created to
implicate Sheikh Mujib. Indian intelligence activities in East
Pakistan had started with the inception of Pakistan. They were
actively aided by the Hindus settled in East Pakistan. This has
been confirmed by Mr Ashok Raina in his book Inside RAW: The
Story of India’s Secret Service (Vikas Publishing House, New Delhi,
1981), in which he has highlighted the meetings which took
Place between pro-Mujib factions and the Indian Intelligence
Bureau Operation (IIBO). Mr Raina names Mr M. K. Sarkaran