DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN — 197
‘there to the western sector unless I kept all of them involved. All
that could have been done only by remaining where we were
and not where the Indians wanted us to be, in the Dhaka
Triangle or Bowl.
Over and above political, economic, and tactical drawbacks, I
had many other problems which would have increased further.
We had no proper supply and maintenance system. We were
working on ad hoc systems and a makeshift basis. We were living
and fighting mostly by improvising on a large scale. We could
manage because we were holding vast areas. By moving to the
restricted area of PBM we would have found it difficult to collect
enough fresh rations for my entire force, so we would have been
living on hard and dry rations, and the already under-nourished
troops would have developed various diseases due to shortage of
fresh supplies. Thousands of Urdu-speaking people would have
thronged to this area for protection, and it would have been a
problem to supply them with food when supply routes were
blocked by the enemy. Due to hunger, and the lack of medical
cover, medicines, and sanitation, an epidemic would have spread
and people would have died like flies, including my troops, and
it would have been a problem even to bury them properly.
The concept of defence based on the rivers Padma,
Brahmaputra, and Meghna (PBM) fizzes with controversy.
‘Sentimentalism has played a large role in complicating the issue.
The PBM idea was mooted by the Indians for the ulterior motive
of covering up their follies and failings and the inefficiency of
their High Command, its faulty planning and the poorly-
conducted operations by their field commanders, despite the
most conducive circumstances. The Indians wanted to convince
their people that the performance of their Armed Forces had
improved since 1965 and not deteriorated. If the war of 1971 is
analysed properly, it will be shown that India was unable to win
the war on its own, without outside help. In the 1971 war, this
help was provided t to them by my High Command who, like the
Indians, wanted to break Pakistan.
The Dhaka 
Bowl Concept was neither studied in its true
perspective nor critically analysed. Certain Pakistani writers, like
| Major-General Fazal Mugeem, Major Siddique Salik, and Major-
"General F arman, adviser to the Governor of East Pakistan, bleated
in consonance with the Indian tune that the PBM was the only
i