DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
187
Alpha. Enemy build-up at Matia sq. 7344 by heliborne troops
continues. Enemy at Matia now advancing along road Matia-Darma.
Bravo. Details contact by paratroops awaited. Charlie. Enemy conc.
also reported at Daud Kandi and two helicopters also landed south
of Narayanganj. Details awaited. Delta. Enemy making all-out efforts
to capture Dhaka ASF. Dhaka fortress defences organized and
determined ta fight tt out.
The war in the west was also not going according to plan.
There was a feeling of disquiet and despondency. The spirit of
1965 was nowhere to be seen. The army in the west had already
lost 5,500 square miles of territory. My COS, Brigadier Baqir
Siddique, was constantly in touch with Brigadier Amir Gulistan
Janjua, Private Secretary to the COAS, There was no satisfactory
action or direction from the Chief of General Staff down to the
Military Operations Directorate. In fact, the Director of Military
Operations did not contact us even once. Therefore, our contacts
perforce went up to Brigadier Janjua, who was helpful. He was
enthusiastic in the beginning but after a few days of fighting in
the west he told my COS that the offensive had failed. This was
despite the fact that West Pakistan had superiority in armour and
parity in infantry and had the initiative. The failure was
unexpected and militarily unforgivable.
On the night of 13/14 December 1971, within a couple of
hours of my signal to fight in built-up areas, PS(C) Brigadier
Janjua rang up my COS to warn him that an important flash
signal was coming. It came at midnight and read as under:
For Governor and General Niazi from President. Governor’s flash
message refers. You have fought a heroic battle against overwhelming
odds. The nation is proud of you and the world full of admiration. I
have done all that is humanly possible to find an acceptable solution
to the problem. You have now reached a stage when further resistance
is no longer humanly possible nor will it serve any useful purpose. It
will only lead to further loss of life and destruction. You should now
take all necessary measures to stop the fighting and preserve the lives
of all armed forces personnel, all those from West Pakistan and all
loyal elements. Meanwhile I have moved UN to urge India to stop
hostilities in East Pakistan forthwith and to guarantee the safety of
the armed forces and all other people who may be the likely target of
miscreants.