38 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
operations. No circumstances, except when a country is engaged
in war, can rationalize a military commander's refusal to provide
the necessary help during natural calamities. When Yaqub stalled,
and Yahya procrastinated, American and British relief teams,
without Islamabad’s knowledge, arrived in East Pakistan to carry
out relief operations. The Bengalis were outraged and Mujib
furious with the government’s inability to provide help. He said:
‘It took British soldiers to bury our dead’. Yaqub’s indifference,
and his failure to contribute towards the amelioration of human
suffering, aggravated the already tense situation.
I have known Sahibzada Yaqub since 1949, when we did the
staff course together at Quetta. Taciturn by nature, he chose to
remain silent during the class and model discussions. During
World War II, he surrendered and was taken POW. When his
fellow officers escaped from camp, he made no attempt to do so.
During staff course, he strongly opposed the Two Nation Theory,
which he termed a political blunder. During the 1965 War, he
commanded an Armoured Division, which was not committed to
battle during his command. Being polished and well versed in
English, his promotion to higher ranks was smooth.
Yaqub was posted as Commander Eastern Command in 1969.
He reorganized and regrouped the troops under his command,
in consonance with the Army War.plan, “The Battle of the East
will be fought in the West’. He was the author of security plan
‘Blitz’, evolved to combat the Bengal uprising. As Martial Law
Administrator he developed friendly relations with Mujib and
had a rapport with Nurul Amin and Bhashani.
In the meantime an important development was visible on the
political horizon. Two parties, the Awami League and the PPP,
dominated the election front. Each was concentrated in its own
area, with no influence whatsoever in the other province. During
the 1970 elections, Yaqub’s tilt towards Mujib was conspicious.
He turned a Nelson’s eye towards the pressure tactics of the
Awami League toughs. This may have been by way of
compensation for his uncompromising attitude during the floods,
but was more likely due to his lack of will power and inner
strength to confront Mujib’s arm-twisting tactics.
Mujib achieved an astounding victory in the elections. He won
160 out of 162 seats in East Pakistan, while Bhutto’s PPP
completely outdid its rivals by securing 81 out of 138 seats in