210 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
plan envisaged an encircling movement on exterior lines by
advancing on all penetrants, thus allowing us the advantage of
interior lines. In doing that they violated one of the principles of
war: they did not cater for the limitations of only one major road
and one railway from north to south and east to west, with-no
laterals and no capability of switching forces from one sector to
another, or from one sub-sector to another. They also apparently
ignored the topography, which suited the attackers in two major
sectors—because all the rivers flowed from India into East
Pakistan, they could have gone deep into our area without
crossing any obstacle. They did not even use the northern
obstacle-free approach as a main effort. Concentration of effort,
which creates local superiority, a war-winning factor, was ignored.
Maintenance of the aim is one of the principles of war, and
terrain is one of the vital factors. The Indians had the advantage
of local support. Mukti Bahini forces provided them information
about the terrain and the lay-out of our defences right down to
the location of our bunkers. In fact, Indian officers, in the guise
of civilians, were taken round the areas and shown our defensive
positions. It is rather surprising that, in spite of all the intelligence
available to them, they blundered into a conventional offensive,
showing complete disregard for the terrain, natural obstacles,
restricted manoeuvrability, and possible areas of breakout or by-
passing of our positions. Our fighting capabilities should have
been taken into account. They had been thwarted in the 1965
war in spite of the fact that they struck first, and at points of their
choosing. We succeeded in stopping them at BRB and Chowinda
and never allowed them to capture their objectives of Lahore
and Stalkot. Also, they had been fighting against us during the
insurgency and knew our capabilities. We did not allow their
support to insurgents to succeed in East Pakistan, and then we
repulsed their attacks against the borders. They assumed that my
troops were tired and would not put up much resistance, and
that they would get a walkover thanks to the weight of numbers
and steel. But instead they were badly mauled, and the heroic
resistance put up by my formations shattered their offensives. I
attribute their failure to lack of good planning, poor conduct of
operations, rigidity, and lack of initiative. Lack of concentrated
and co-ordinated effort, and not using armour boldly and
offensively, added to their weakness in carrying out mobile