XXX 
INTRODUCTION
President, but by then the damage had been done. Farman has
misrepresented facts in his book. He was in fact secretly in touch
with General Sam Manekshaw, C.-in-C. Indian Army. I came to
know of his communications with India through General
Manekshaw’s signal of 15 December saying that he was already
negotiating surrender with him.
Granted, the commanding general and his troops play the
leading role in a battle, but there are many factors beyond their
control which have far-reaching consequences on its outcome,
and eventually on the war. Anyone writing about a military
débacle should consider many factors: climatic conditions,
geographical location, the political and military mission assigned
to the commander, quantum of troops available for the task,
extent and type of area of responsibility, local conditions, attitude
of population, resources available, distance from base, availability
of the right type of equipment and armament, replenishment
and reinforcing capability, availability of reserves, naval and air
support, intelligence set-up, medical facilities, and the strength,
resources, and facilities available to the enemy. These factors
must be taken into account before any verdict is passed on the
efficiency of the commanding general.
Nearly all the writers on the 1971 War have divorced the East
Pakistan War from the West Pakistan War. This omission is unjust
and misleading. The plans for both the theatres of operations,
East and West, were concomitant and interlinked. The battles
with the Indian Army were not to be fought in isolation. As a
matter of fact the main and decisive battle was to be fought and
won on the western front.
Similarly, most of the writers have not taken into account the
elements of operational environment and their effects. National
strategy, political thinking, economic situation, conduct of
diplomacy—all have crucial bearings on the military operation.
Viewing military operations. in isolation is an escape from reality.
The military action is 
a means to an end and not an end in
itself; it is 
a wheel within a wheel. Therefore, it is important for a
writer to understand the national strategy and its implications
during a war.
The most annoying thing is that none of the writers of the
books on the 1971 War kept in view the tasks allotted to me, or
the achievements of my small, tired, ill-equipped force under the