49? 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
In the beginning of March, Mujib announced his plan to run a
parallel government, in defiance of Martial Law. The atrocities
committed by Mujib’s Awami League during the first fortnight
were too brutal to be described. In Bogra 15,000 persons were
killed in cold blood. In Chittagong, thousands of men and women
were bayoneted or raped. In Seraj Ganj women and children were
locked in a hall and set on fire. The target of these brutalities were
West Pakistanis and Biharis. Also, West Pakistani officers serving in
the East Pakistan Rifles were killed, their wives raped and made to
serve food to Bengali officers naked. The later propaganda about
atrocities by West Pakistani soldiers was deliberately spread to
discredit the Pakistan Army, contrary to the facts.
Admiral Ahsan was replaced by Lt.-Gen. Yaqub as Governor of
East Pakistan on | March 1971. Within four days, he resigned as
Governor and Commander, Eastern Command, saying that he
‘could not kill his Pakistani brothers’. The Bengalis were
exhilarated, the West Pakistanis dismayed. His decision had far-
reaching consequences. Yaqub witnessed the horrors of
holocaust, the genocidal destruction by the Bengalis, yet he
remained silent. His indecisiveness emboldened the Awami
Leaguers who continued with the mayhem. The hawk had
mellowed into a dove. His attitude is reflected in General Sher
Ali’s book, He writes: ‘I know in principle he did not disagree, in
fact at one stage he was being a hawk, and Yahya asked me to
speak to him on the subject.’
Again, according to General Sher Ali, ‘It is tragic for me to
record that the commander in East Pakistan at the time of crisis,
because of political involvement took a decision contrary to the
conduct expected of him as a soldier, standing by his men in
crisis. Instead of standing by his troops, he resigned and left.’ He
further writes: “The reason given was conscience. He said he
could not do what he had been ordered to kill his brother
Pakistanis. What is to be examined is, whether he was against the
use of troops on principle from the beginning or was he against
it at that particular time, The excuse of “conscience” is acceptable
only if he had resigned and gone much earlier.’
After resigning, Yaqub went to Karachi, where he was attached
to Station Headquarters. He was demoted to the rank of Major-
General and pensioned off. Keeping the grave nature of the
offence in view, Yahya was inclined to court-martial him, but as