WAR CLOUDS 
103
Overall Concept of War with India
Since the inception of Pakistan, tor histsrical and geographical
reasons, the bulk of the armed forces were stationed in West
Pakistan, with a divisional-sized force located in East Pakistan.
The concept involved was The defence of East Pakistan lies in West
Pakistan. Translating this into more coherent terms, it meant
that the war with India would be decided on the West Pakistan
front, whereas the garrison in East Pakistan, while defending
East Pakistan, would keep the maximum Indian forces involved
and tied down for a given period—I repeat, given period—during
which the decision on the western front would have been
concluded. This concept remained the basis of our military
strategy until the day we were ordered to surrender at Dhaka—a
detailed explanation is attached at Appendix 14.
Presentation at GHQ
In compliance with GHQ orders I sent my Chief of Staff,
Brigadier Baqir Siddiqui, and Major-General Jamshed, my
Second-in-Command, to GHQ to give detailed briefings on past
and likely future enemy actions, deployment of troops including
Mujahids, EPCAF, and all other forces, and to present my
appreciation of courses open for counter-insurgency and meeting
the external threat. I conveyed to GHQ that:
Having succeeded in combating insurgency I expect India to start a
war against us when the terrain in East Pakistan is dry and Chinese
passes are blocked. Recently there has been extraordinary activity of
Mukti Bahini and guerrillas. Reports of Indian troop concentrations
all along our border are pouring in. The war appears to be imminent
as soon as enemy build-up is completed in November or it may extend
to December, 
.
The operational environment at present is not conducive to us to
fight a full-fledged war. The guerrilla activities are directed against us
and destruction of bridges, culverts, roads and railway lines and the
majority of the local population is hostile. The civil administrauon is
symbolic only. However, law and order is under control where
Razakars and Mujahids are operating beefed up by regulars. The
industrial workers, who have succeeded in restoring production to
7 
a |
v
Jalochl
hech 
0
=a
VV VV VV.