5.
APPENDIX 
295
(1) No open war conflict with India. Hence our troops
are not to trespass into Indian territory nor fire into
a
(2) Evict by force of arms any intrusion by India in East
Pakistan. 
|
On 13 December 1971 1 gave the final orders of ‘Last
man-last round’ which was virtually an order to die. No
officer or man hesitated and the response was in the
affirmative. These orders had to be changed to
‘Surrender’ on the orders of the President of Pakistan
advised by General Hameed and persuaded by Dr Malik,
the Governor who told me that delay in surrender would
cause difficulties in holding operations in West Pakistan.
They wanted to cease hostilities in West Pakistan at all
cost. The panic and stress was so great that the Govt. was
hysterical to shed East Pakistan and save West Pakistan.
So to save West Pakistan, our base, from disintegration
and Western Garrison from further repulses I staked my
reputation, my brilliant career, and the high traditions
of Pakistan Army and agreed with a heavy heart to lay
down arms when we were nowhere near defeat and
tactically better placed than Indians at that particular
time. More or less the same thing happened with the
Japanese Forces deployed in the Pacific in World War II,
who had about fifty-eight Army Divisions with sufficient
aerial and naval support and tactically and strategically
were in a better position than the Allies. The use of atom
bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki forced the Japanese
Pacific Forces to surrender unconditionally in order to
save their motherland from further destruction.
My President, in the capacity of most senior military officer
my conduct of operations was governed by two important
undisputable constraints, firstly, the National Aim spelt out by
the government for the defence of East Pakistan, secondly, the
military resources that were given to me which encompassed all
the three services. The simple comparison given below would
suffice to prove that the achievements of Eastern Garrison were
gratifying by all standards with meagre resources and the worst
possible prevailing conditions.
4
ave i
V ° f J rau
4 
“1
aval a’ 
PATI, ON 
ry
Ocn| lit TAary. Com