212 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
available troops to make an impression on it. Bhairab Bazar and
Narayanganj Fortresses could not be ignored when attacking
Dhaka.
Dhaka was the lynchpin, and maximum efforts should have
been directed at capturing it. But their plan was more to capture
cities, dissipating a Division to occupy them, rather than
concentrating maximum effort where the decision was to be
achieved, which was Dhaka, The Indian C.-in-C. was right when
he remarked that General Arora was no Rommel, because
Rommel or any other good general would have identified the
Schwerpunkt, the ‘point of main effort’, where the decision was to
be obtained.
The Indians raised a corps (II) of two divisions plus under
General Raina for the capture of Dhaka and this was located
opposite Jessore. 33 Corps in the north-west under General
Thapan was to capture Rangpur-Bogra-Rajshahi area. 4 Corps
under General Sagat Singh was to capture area Sylhet, Comilla,
the Mainamati and Chandpur. K (Kilo) Force was to capture the
Chittagong Hill Tracts and pose a threat to Chittagong, and 10]
Comm. Zone of two brigades plus a Mukti brigade was to capture
Mymensingh, Tangail, and Dhaka. General Arora divided his
mighty force into four parts, gave each a civil division of East
Pakistan as its area of responsibility, and that was the end of his
responsibility. He became a spectator in the battle. We did not
find any reserve unit or formation being launched anywhere to
influence the battle or to accelerate their advance on Dhaka.
Major-General Lachman Singh, Commander 20 Indian
Division, said that D-day was to be advanced to 21 November
because of Eid. The Indians therefore attacked from all directions
on 21 November. We were ready and fully prepared to receive
them. Except for the loss of our three aircraft in Jessore sector
on 22 November we did not lose any significant territory up to
3 December. Our troops fought tenaciously and the Indian
attacks were checked along all the borders. Their battles for the
frontiers remained confined to the border areas, and generally
they were pushed back; our losses of territory were negligible.
Rangpur-Hilli-Bogra-Rajshahi Sector