218 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
would have achieved better results than he gained by his
stereotyped plan based on old-fashioned tactics.
The Germans called their offensive concept blitzkrieg because
it was based on lightning mobility, by-passing of positions, and
Heating straight for their objective, achieving destruction of the
enemy's forces in the process. Later, when they amassed their
armour for the Ardennes Offensive they planned for total
mobility. Their enemy was so stunned that by the time they knew
what had happened, the Germans had already reached their
objective and the entire enemy was in the bag. Arora had enough
tanks and APCs to move at speed in at least two sectors and on
two axes where the ground was suitable for moving mechanical
transport cross country. Local help was also there to enhance his
mobility. It was not lack of resources or unsuitability of terrain
which made Arora drag his feet on the battlefield of East Pakistan,
but lack of determination, lack of confidence, lack of knowledge
of mobile warfare, over-cautiousness, and a dearth of good field
commanders, plus, of course, the stiff and organized resistance
put up by the Pakistan Army from tactically sited positions.
General Arora’s plan did not have any of the ingredients of
blitzkrieg. Instead of concentrating his forces, he dispersed them
all around East Pakistan. Had he concentrated all his armour in
Rangpur-Hilli and Tura-Mymensingh sector, which were ideal
tank terrains, he would have achieved better results. Instead of
attacking head-on in both sectors, he should have boldly launch-
ed his armour. Bypassing Rangpur-Dinajpur and containing our
forces with a minimum of his troops, instead of the full
6 Mountain Division, he could have made a breakthrough from
north of Hilli area—as he tried to do much later. Then he should
have moved straight on to Sirajganj Ghat—where there should
have been ferries available for crossing the Jamuna River—and
then towards Dhaka. Similarly in Tura-Mymensingh sector, had
he put in maximum armour and a couple of infantry divisions
and bypassed or contained our positions, he would have been in
a position to pose a threat to Dhaka within a week. Since at
Kamalpur he preferred to throw two brigades against our one
composite company, (having only one regular platoon), and put
five infantry brigades, a tank brigade and corps artillery against
Hilli, naturally it would have taken him months to capture East
Pakistan, if at all. But being held by our troops on the borders