WAR CLOUDS 
101
_ 
above, Pakistani troops were not backed by any political and
psychological campaign from the Central or Provincial Government.
Even West Pakistan was not united behind them, Against all these
great odds the troops had still succeeded in securing their initial
objectives and defied all the Mukti Bahini efforts fully supported by
India. But no political advantage was taken of their success.
Considering the dimensions of the task given to them, their
performance was nothing short of a miracle.
India’s continuous and daily increasing pressure on the borders
was affecting the morale of the troops. A feeling was setting in that in
the event of war they would be cut off from West Pakistan and no
help would reach them. They would be left in the lurch to fend for
themselves in the face of the Indian Army and the hostile population.
The officers and men were affected by homesickness and a sense of
isolation was creeping in. These feelings were further heightened by
the fact that the President, who was also the C-in-C, did not visit East
Pakistan even once during those dark months, and the visits of the
COS, Army and other senior afficers too were few and far between.
This absence gave potent handle to the Indian propaganda. The East
Pakistan population, including the West Pakistani elements were
anxious that the President should come and see the prevailing
conditions for himself. There were whisperings, rumours and
speculations as to why he did not come. Some thought that he was
too scared to visit the province; others believed that he was too
engrossed in his gay living to bother about what happened in East
Pakistan. The troops particularly wanted to see their C-in-C in their
midst. They argued that if he could visit the Lahore and Sialkot
borders, he could come to them as well. His visit would have helped
to counter the Indian propaganda that they were hostages at the
mercy of the Indians and the Mukti Bahini. But the President never
visited them even once since the military action started in March
1971. There would hardly be a case in military history where an army
fighting a most difficult operation did not at all see their C-in-C for
nine months, and saw the second-in-command (the COAS) only twice
during that period, once in August and again in October 1971. They
had become a forgotten army after having successfully put down the
well-planned insurgency, They had carried out the task given to them,
efficiently and swiftly and had now been engaged for eight long
months in futile operations whose objectives had not been defined.
They were still fighting tenaciously but had reached the last stages of
battle fatigue. In spite of all the handicaps, they still projected the
impression of being full of fight and confidence. With all their visible
high spirits the three divisions of the army in East Pakistan, without
®@ 
-
www.balochlibrary.com