256 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
with political parleys and on their failure, the political order is
restored by military shock action, and finally ends with a political
solution. Mr A, T. Chaudhri further writes,
If the terms of reference of the Hamood Commission were restricted
and it was told by its sponsor, a super politician, to eschew politics,
the object clearly was to make the report babble in conformist tone
vindicating those at the helm of power.
The scope of the Commission was restricted to the military
operations, and that too mainly to operations in the eastern
theatre, divorced from the conduct of war in the western theatre.
This was unjustified and aimed merely at crucifying the
Commander Eastern Command and his troops. As the national
war plan embraced both the theatres, keeping in view the
geographical configuration, the battles had to be fought in close
rapport, with intimately interlinked actions based on concomitant
and premeditated plans. If this was not the case we would not
have had ‘the battle of the East will be fought in the West’ plan,
and the High Command would not have given me the task of not
allowing the Indians to move troops from east to west. To carry
out this order I had to stop my planned offensive against 20
Indian Division from the north and go on the defensive in area
Dinajpur-Saidpur to contain 6 Indian Division, which was to be
moved to the western sector. Later I would not have been forced
to surrender when I was still in a position to keep fighting. The
defeat was in the west because of their inability to stem the
advance of the Indian forces in spite of the fact that we struck
first, at places of our own choosing, and had more tanks and
most conducive circumstances. The surrender was not our fault.
As it 1s, when I refused to lay down arms, the COS Army
ordered me to act on their signal of 14 December 1971 as the
security of West Pakistan was endangered. Since the Commission
was not familiar in depth with national and military strategy, it
could not be expected to reach an accurate conclusion. Even
Lt.-Gen. Aftab, who was heading his own inquiry committee, when
confronted by me about the performance of the Army in West
Pakistan and Tikka’s failure to launch the pre-planned offensive 
|
to relieve pressure against East Pakistan, told me, ‘Never mind
about West Pakistan, let us concentrate on East Pakistan.’ I was