150 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
position to contain the remnants of Ansari’s two Brigades in Kushtia
and Khulna areas with two of his own Brigades and push on to
Faridpur and Golando Ghat with the rest of his Corps. However, as
we have seen he allowed his one Division to get involved at Kushtia.
In the event his second Division also got stuck on the road to Khulna.
The opportunity to reach Dhaka was lost.
The views expressed by the author, an Indian, clearly indicate
the failure of the Indian Army despite overwhelming superiority
in all spheres. The greatest help was provided by the locals, who
carried out disruptive activities, guided them, and provided them
detailed information. Leave alone reaching Dhaka, all the Indian
Corps failed even to capture their preliminary objectives. Every
move by the Indian commanders was checkmated. The
determined Pakistani commanders outmatched the Indian
Generals at every step.
From across the river obstacle, I was defending Dhaka. We were
successful in keeping the enemy at bay. The Indian Army
formations were kept away from Dhaka, and away from each other.
They were involved in their respective sectors. We tied them down
completely, not letting them transfer troops to the western theatre,
nor allowing one sector force to be switched over to the other
sector. If not ordered to surrender to save West Pakistan, we could
have fought for a considerable period. We had lured the enemy to
our fortresses. Battles were being fought at places of our own
choosing. We were dug in; the enemy was in the open. The Indians
had to maintain a stretched L of C; we had no, or only limited,
lines of communication to guard, and our guns, ammunition, and
food were safely tucked away in our fortresses.
The advice of the author of Indian Army after Independence to
General Raina, Commander II Indian Corps, is indeed very
interesting. He says that Raina should have contained our two
brigades at Daulatpur (Khulna) and Kushtia with two of his
brigades, and he himself should have gone for Dhaka with the
rest of his troops. It appears a bit far-fetched when judged in the
context of the battles which took place. He overlooks the
performance of the Indian troops against our troops defending
the fortresses and strong points in various areas. Two Indian
brigades could not contain two Pakistani brigades. Raina’s long
L of C would have been blocked, forcing him to send back troops
to protect it, which would have reduced his offensive power.
www.baloch ior: uv.com
WW,
\/
_ 
J
A