OPERATIONAL PLAN 
97
against us in case of an all-out attack by the Indian Army against
East Pakistan, vide their intelligence note of October 1971.
Neither ISI nor MI Directorates warned us of the Indian
helicopter-gunship capability, which we encountered during the
war. However, we stuck to our estimate of an attack by about
eight Indian divisions. On the other hand Mukti Bahini and
hostile locals provided the Indian Army with ready intelligence
about us.
Due to our lack of intelligence resources and set-up we could
neither deny information to the enemy nor get information about
the enemy. So, to hide information about our plans, weaknesses,
and strength, we had to resort to deception, bluff, and whispering
campaigns on a large scale in an organized manner, We
succeeded in foxing the enemy about our fighting strength and
our weaknesses and deficiencies till the end, and the enemy
planned his invasion on our exaggerated strength.
Chinese Influences
Bhutto visited China in early November 1971 as the head of a
political-military delegation and met the Chinese Prime Minister
Zhou Enlai on 7 November. The Chinese Acting Foreign Minister
accused India of interfering in Pakistan’s internal affairs. He said
that the Chinese Government would resolutely support the
Pakistan Government in its just struggle to defend Pakistan’s
integrity.
This weighed heavily on the Indian planners, At the time of
the formulation of Indian plans, ‘collusion between Pakistan and
China could not be-ruled out. As such, borrowing formations
from the holding force against China had to be very judiciously
exercised both in terms of quantity and time’ (/ndia’s Wars since
Independence by Major-General Sukhwant Singh, oe nt ia 
Director
of Military Operations India).
Another disturbing effect of Bhutto's China visit was the
conspiracy to carry out a coup détai against Yahya, in which
Lt.-Gen. Gul Hassan, Air Marshal Rahim Khan, and some others
were the main actors.
During my discussions with General Hamid, I had stressed
that no war should be started in the west because we could deal