OPERATIONAL PLAN 
87
in a country which had the support of the Indian Army and the
advisers from Russia. The defence was based on fortresses and
strong points in depth to restrict the enemy’s freedom of
manoeuvre, to maintain mobility, and to engage the enemy in a
series of defensive battles, thus causing him attrition.
since the East Pakistan Civil Armed Forces had disintegrated,
local Razakars, mainly consisting of ex-Biharis and loyal East
Pakistanis, were trained initially to man the border outposts and
fall back on to the strong points and fortresses manned by the
regular Army. The officers were from the regular Army. They did
an admirable job. They gave a tough fight to the Mukti Bahini
and fought minor patrolling and tactical actions.
I received an intelligence report from GHQ that, in spite of its
threatening stance, India was unlikely to resort to an all-out war
with Pakistan, but might carry out nibbling attacks to support the
rebels and capture some territory. It was recommended that the
borders should be sealed on top priority basis. We did that by
deploying locally-raised civilian armed forces, backed up by
regular troops where required.
Dhaka was the linchpin. The whole defence concept was built
on various lines of defence based on rivers or other water
obstacles, or on major centres of communication acting as
fortresses which the enemy would have to clear before advancing
any further towards Dhaka. At most places the enemy would have
to launch major river-crossing operations, carry out heliborne
landings, or drop paratroops. Incidentally, GHQ and ISI
Directorate never informed us of a heliborne threat, nor of the
Indian capability. The plan was discussed and finalized in the
formation commanders’ conference, at which I was accompanied
by General Jamshed, acting as my No. 2, and the commanders of
the supporting arms. In October 1971 we were visited by COAS
General Hamid. He was briefed on these changes, which were
later incorporated by GHQ in the ‘Order of Battle’ issued by
them that month.
My plan proved functional ea, given the prevailing circum-
stances, the most practical. It was evolved to encompass various
missions, especially the political requirement, which over-rode
all other considerations and which I could not ignore. Whereas I
could visualize only a portion of the overall plan of Pakistan, the
High Command could comprehend the complex panorama of
. X 7X X ) X x ) 
~» —» 
| 
/ my (° ¥ 
7 a @ 
lew } 
\ lm 4ta—
VV VV VV rd | J 6 LO YW | 
oS ) I L Al Y oO ( L Orn
~~