306 
APPENDIX
d. Pakistan has long borders, numerous approaches, wide
areas, and peculiar operational environments. In fact the
space is too large and troops too meagre, and we are called
upon to hold frontages which are big by any operational
standard. It is therefore difficult for a defender to organize
the defence in depth according to idealistic tactical
teachings.
The Pakistan Army therefore adopted a tactical doctrine of
fighting a defensive battle based on different layers augmenting
each other. The concept envisaged causing maximum attrition
on the enemy to dissipate and weaken his forces and make him
lose cohesion before he attacked with the main force and made
deep thrusts in the area. Initially, the defences had to be located
as far forward as possible on likely penetrants, falling back on
successive lines of defence if forward defences were overwhelmed,
leaving important population centres near the border occupied
as Strong Points and Fortresses. This concept was applied in East
Pakistan, where initial defences on important penetrants were
placed as far forward as tactically possible, such as Hilli,
Chaugacha, Banapole, Akhura, Comilla, etc. The forward defence
lines were not based on BOPs, but on natural or artificially-
created ground features and obstacles.
The Strong Point and Fortress system was not only adopted in
East Pakistan, but is still the current operational policy in West
Pakistan, in that we fight a series of defensive actions on the
Strong Points and Fortresses in pre-designated towns and cities.
The Strong Points may not be mutually supporting, but their
gaps are covered by patrolling, nuisance mines, and Recce and
Support elements. A Strong Point is actually the base of
operations for that force, and is designed to take the fight to the
enemy, causing maximum attrition to his troops and weaponry.
This also slows down enemy operations and ties down his troops
in guarding the lines of communication in rear areas, thus
causing him harassment and disrupting his L of C. Manoeuvres
are carried out from the Strong Points to dominate the gaps and
cut off the enemy’s L of C. In our environment of a relatively
large space defended by a relatively small army, the concept
remains valid. It is up to the Divisional Commander to harass the
bypassing enemy, by allocating troops to do the needful.
ery
-<
ry wew 
y 
Lr 
art
tv" 
Wwow«rt 
sy 
kK or 
TM 7" | ye ] 
; lL. oY wy 
(%f\trr
WWW 
.VDALVULI ll Vidal y COLL
oe