THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
15]
Faridpur and Golando were held fairly strongly under the
personal command of General Ansari. The approaches to these
fortresses were being guarded by the ad hoc Brigade of Col. K. K.
Afridi, a brave and experienced officer. The Indians had yet to
cross the Madhumati River, which was being guarded by Afridi’s
troops. His troops were to fall back to Faridpur and Golando,
increasing the strength and defensive capability of the fortresses
considerably. Under the circumstances, General Raina would not
have been in a position to muster enough strength to invest
Faridpur.
Chittagong
The Indians had moved their aircraft carrier to East Pakistan.
Our submarine Ghazi had under complete stealth reached the
Vikrant’s anchorage. According to the reports, however, it went
too deep to attack Vikrant, failed to surface, and remained
undetected until some papers and equipment floated up.
Submarine Ghazi had done extremely well in the 1965 war, when
‘it was commanded by Karamat Niazi, who was awarded Sitara-e-
| furat and later became C.-in-C. Navy.
Chittagong was defended by our naval troops and an ad hoc
Brigade under Brigadier Ata Muhammad Malik, a tough
Brigadier with a flair for meticulous planning and personal
leadership. He foiled the enemy’s attempts to capture Chittagong
and held up their troops. He did not give up till the end. Another
ad hoc Brigade was commanded by Brigadier Taskeen. The
Commandos, local Chakma tribesmen, and Mezos from Indian
Assam were part of this brigade. They kept the Indians away
from the sensitive objectives and towns in Chittagong Hill Tract
area and inflicted considerable losses on the Indian Kilo Force.
An attempt by the Indians to launch an amphibian operation
against Cox’s Bazaar, an area held by our regular troops, did not
succeed, Out of the battalion launched by the Indians, only twelve
men could disembark. Two of them drowned, and the adventure
ended in a fiasco. Indian Kilo Force, operating in the Chittagong
Hill Tracts, did not show any offensive spirit.
1; th
WW -b: aloc ch N1Orar y com