PREFACE 
XXV
The final plan for the dismemberment of Pakistan was hatched
between General Yahya and Bhutto at Larkana, Bhutto's home
town. The plan, which came to be known 
as the M. M. Ahmed
“plan, aimed at abandoning East Pakistan without a successor
government, which meant: by losing the war. So all the efforts of
: Yahya’s junta and Bhutto’s coterie were directed towards losing
the war. They neither desired a political settlement, nor did they
want a cease-fire. Instead of working on the plan, ‘Battle of East
Pakistan will be fought in West Pakistan’, which was evolved at
the very inception of Pakistan to keep Pakistan united, they were
working on the plan, ‘Lose East Pakistan without a successor
government.
India could not establish a Government of Bangladesh on the
soil of East Pakistan despite the eight month long insurgency. In
desperation, India invaded East Pakistan on 21 November 1971.
The strength of their invading force, including para-military
forces, was half a million, plus half a million available from the
forces deployed on China’s border. When President Yahya was
told about the Indian invasion he said, ‘What can I do for East
| Pakistan? I can only pray’. With one sentence Yahya absolved
‘himself of all his responsibilities and duties as the Head of State
and Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. But over and
above his ‘prayers’, Yahya Khan could have started a vigorous
offensive according to our national plan, i.e., ‘Battle of the East
will be fought in the West’, for which our reserves were already
concentrated in the West. The allotted codeword would have put
our reserve force into motion. We had five strike forces in the
west while the Indians had only three. There was every chance of 
—
success, given the superiority of our strike forces and the fact
that the initiative was with us.
The government in power did not take the case of the Indian
invasion to the UN Security Council straight away. The motive
was to give India enough time to win the encounter by defeating
the small, ill-equipped, and tired Pakistan Eastern Garrison. By
not starting the offensive in the West immediately, the Army in
the West emerged as a broken and discredited institution and it
made the position of Eastern Garrison critical. However, in spite
of our shortages, and the step-motherly treatment meted out by
the High Command, in spite of hunger,-thirst, and battle
exhaustion, we fought on and completed our allotted tasks most
palocnilorary.«
J