HAMOOD-UR-REHMAN COMMISSION 
257
not a subaltern whose actions were confined to a tactical level. As
a Lt-~Gen. and commander of a theatre, I had to think on a
strategic level and could not afford to ignore the operations in
the west. That is why I had instructed my staff to plot West
Pakistan's battles on a map. But Aftab, who had a meek
personality, could not resist the bait of a diplomatic assignment,
which he eventually managed when he went to Libya as
Ambassador. Col. Sabir Qureshi, who was acting as liaison officer
between the HRC and the Aftab Committee, was sent to Saudi
Arabia as Military Attache,
The HRC was headed by Justice Hamood-ur-Rehman, Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court. The other members were Justice
Shaikh Anwar-ul-Hagq, Chief Justice of the Punjab High Court,
who was due for elevation to the coveted post of Judge of the
Supreme Court, and Justice Tufail Ali Abdul Rehman, Chief
Justice of the Sindh High Court. Col. Hassan was the legal adviser.
Lt.-Gen. (Retd.) Altaf Qadir was the Military Adviser (MA)
appointed to assist the court in matters dealing with purely
operational strategy and the conduct of war. This composition
raised many an eyebrow.
To quote the late Mr A. T. Chaudhri again:
|The] object was also reflected in the composition of the Commission.
It was no doubt headed by a Chairman of unquestionable integrity
though hailing as he did from former East Pakistan, which lay
shattered and tattered, he must have been emotionally upset. It had
no neutral political figure or outstanding military expert on its panel.
The Government had decided that all Bengalis were to be
repatriated to Bangladesh. Justice Hamood should have been
sent back but he did not want to go, and this leverage was applied
to obtain a favourable report. Normally judges keep away from
the parties involved, but Bhutto used to invite Commission
members and had psychological influence over them. Justice
Hamood once told me that the Prime Minister had toid him that
he had received a complaint from Mr Muyjib-ur-Rehman with
tons of evidence against the Pakistan Army. This shows his clever
manoeuvres to influence the judges. Hamood also told me that,
although he was Chief Justice of Pakistan, his son, a major, was
not being cleared to leave for Bangladesh—the only instance of
a Bengali being retained in the Pakistan Army.