THE 1965 WAR 
23
Lt.-Col. Ata contacted Commander Artillery, 15 Division, on
the wireless and asked for artillery fire support, including their
Medium Regiment. Within five minutes 15 Division Arullery
started engaging the specified targets as these targets had also
been registered by them. When the dust cleared one tank was in
flames and the other two had vanished.
Our infantry, which had been told to go to ground, resumed
the attack. The attack was successful. The losses were minor
despite the enemy’s liberal use of artillery fire on the attacking
troops. The enemy vacated the position, which was occupied by
two companies of 1/1 Punjab. The company advancing from the
nullah, after clearing opposition in their front, also joined the
two companies and formed firm base inside the rakh. The
Battalion Commander brought his fourth company and Battalion
HQ forward. The anti-tank screen was also brought ahead to
defend the newly-captured area. Nasrullah was told to mop up
the position and firm in. By evening the entire area of Rakh
Baba Bhoore Shah was captured and under control of 1/1
Punjab.
Attack on Alhar
After resting for a day, I asked GOC’s permission to attack Alhar
village. 1/1 Punjab was holding Rakh Baba Bhoore Shah. Their
defensive position extended one hundred yards beyond the
railway line. It was a good defensive layout, but their front and
right flank were exposed. With a few mines and a few anti-tank
guns they would not be able to hold a concentrated armour and
infantry onslaught. Up till now, enemy armour was being used in.
a ramming battle to destroy our armour. The Indians, having
failed in their tactics to destroy our armour, now suddenly
switched over to infantry attacks supported by armour. Such
attacks could be launched by the enemy on 1/1 Punjab’s position.
Yo maintain continuity of the brigade defences and ensure its
integrity, it was essential to capture Alhar village, which was
located about twelve hundred yards on the right of Rakh Baba
Bhoore Shah.
To capture a built-up area, especially devoid of armour
support, is an arduous affair which can result in heavy casualties.