EPILOGUE 
a7 
7
‘cannon fodder for the British’, continued unabated. Bhutto's
undue haste to recognize Bangladesh so that he could perpetuate
his power finally scuppered the chances for a reunification of
Quaid-i-Azam’s Pakistan.
The action of Eastern Command could be viewed in the
following four phases:
Phase 1: Restored the border of East Pakistan by defeating the
insurgents and pushing them back to Indian territory
by May 1971—a feat described as a ‘miracle’ by Tikka’s
supporters.
Phase 2: Defeated the Indians who were supporting the guerrillas
in their endeavour to capture a chunk of East Pakistan
in order to establish Bangladesh. They were unable to
do so by 20 November, even over a frontage of 3,000
miles.
Phase 3: Having failed in the proxy war, the Indian Army
attacked openly on 21 November. According to their
plan they wanted to capture East Pakistan in twelve days,
but they were still fighting the war on the borders on 3
December and did not capture any area of significance.
Phase 4: The start of the delayed war in the west, despite our
recommendations to the contrary. Not achieving any
success there made my position very difficult, but my
troops fought tenaciously and kept the Indians on the
borders for another week. The Indians failed in their
mission, and even praised my withdrawal to the final
battle locations for the defence of Dhaka and the
fortresses. In spite of conspirators like Farman and Qazi
Majid, my troops put up a determined fight and I was
ready for the defence of all my fortresses including
Dhaka. But Yahya insisted on my surrender, and instead
of accepting the Polish and Russian Resolutions, Bhutto
inflicted humiliation and ignominy on Pakistan and its
armed forces.
If I had not been forced to surrender, we could have held East
Pakistan for a longer period, because the Indians were widely
spread, we were still holding all main cities, seaports and airports,
and they had only four weak brigades on initial contact with the
outer defence of Dhaka. To build up their strength, they would