THE 1965 WAR 
25
‘a counter the enemy move, Holding Zafarwal was vital for
blocking attacks from the Indian Army.
After issuing the instructions and the timetable for the move
of the two battalions, I left at about 1500 hours with my recce
group for Zafarwal. Major (later Brigadier) Mahmood, commonly
known as Tony Mahmood, accompanied me as escort with a
section of 4FF under his command. We reached Zafarwal at night.
There were still some civilians in the town. I located my Brigade
Headquarters in the High School building and made a local
recce. 4FF, which had followed me, was deployed in and around
Zafarwal. Early next morning, after a cup of tea, I went out to
recce the area and selected the deployment area for the Second
Battalion, which had stayed in a temporary position during the
night. My Brigade Major Imtiaz accompanied me.
Zafarwal was on the bank of a dry stream about one thousand
yards wide. The other side of the stream had clusters of trees and
tall elephant grass, and appeared to be a good defensive position.
It was decided to have two strong points. One strong point was to
be located in Zafarwal and the other across the stream. This
would force the enemy to split his oops. Without capturing
these strong points the enemy would not be in a position to
advance further. The Second Battalion Commander was given
the area of responsibility. He was told to deploy his battalion on
the other side of the stream.
Before the battalion could move, Major Tony Mahmood
informed me that enemy tank movement had been observed
across the stream. The strength was about a squadron. Their
close proximity suggested their unawareness of the presence of
our troops in Zafarwal.
1 informed General Abrar about the armour movement in our
area. He told me that the enemy had launched a strong attack in
Chawinda area and a fierce tank battle was raging there. The
infantry was closely following them..He said that the tanks in
Zafarwal area could be the uncommitted troops. It was vital to tie
down the tanks to ensure that they could not be shifted to join
the battle in that sector.
I told Major Tony to take over the anti-tank guns deployed to
cover our left flank, move close and engage the enemy tanks. He
moved out. After fifteen minutes the booming of the anti-tank
guns started. More anti-tank guns were moved to engage the
| 
eK y
y
TX XT7 
@ <9 | 
I~ 
| 
) 
> 
L. ‘Se at SD We 7 
r 
7 
°° T\trr
WV 
DALOCN IOTarVv.COrMM
\ 
) 
JUAN Y BARA 
A 
ALY A CAA 
y 
e VW XJ 
A 
ee