APPENDIX 
307
‘Toe OVERALL CONCEPT OF War wiTtH INDIA, ITS
APPLICATION, AND GHQ’s ROLE IN ITs EXECUTION
Since Pakistan’s inception, for historical and geographical
reasons, the bulk of the armed forces were stationed in West
Pakistan, with a Divisional-sized force in East Pakistan. This
naturally gave birth to the concept, ‘The Defence of East Pakistan
lies in West Pakistan’, or, “The battle of the East will be fought in
the West’. Translated into coherent terms, this meant that the
decision in a war with India would be obtained on the Western
Front by launching a vigorous offensive to capture a sizeable
chunk of strategically important Indian territory. The East
Pakistan garrison, on the other hand, would fight a defensive
cum limited offensive battle, by keeping the maximum number
of Indian troops engaged and tied down for a given period, until
the decision on the Western Front was achieved.
This concept was adopted after protracted trials based on
copious studies, and remained the basis of our military strategy
till the end of the 1971 war. Within the context of this concept,
the plans for fighting a war with India in East Pakistan were not
to be in isolation, but an integral part of the overall strategy. The
battle plans of both the theatres were concomitant and
interdependent, to be controlled by GHQ. CGS branch
functioning under COAS was responsible for co-ordinating the
military operations and ensuring the successful implementation
of the war plans by the theatre and sector commanders. The
theatre plans were accordingly evolved to support each other.
Any action taken in isolation could result in a fiasco.
East Pakistan is encircled by India, therefore the garrison in
East Pakistan was in a state of strategic encirclement, with only
air and sea routes open, which as expected were severed at the
very outset of the war. To be encircled by an enemy is the worst
situation an army can face in war. Until and unless the
encirclement is broken from within, enabling the encircled force
to join the main Front, or in the other case,-where the theatres
of operation are wide apart, with the enemy in between, a
diversionary thrust from the other theatre forces the enemy to
pull out his forces or abandon the siege, it is only a question of
time before the encircled force is destroyed. Numerous examples