TOPOGRAPHY AND TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
59
3,000 miles (2,500 miles land and 500 sea). The frontage is not
in one line or in a semicircle as in West Pakistan, but makes
more or less a complete circle which is divided into four sectors
by mighty rivers. Therefore, to hold a continuous defensive line,
even with gaps between defensive localities and areas, was not
possible. Even Divisional defensive areas could not be organized.
At most battalion, and at places Brigade, localities could be
organized in Divisional defensive areas.
I inherited General Tikka’s deployment. I wanted to evict the
guerrillas and I had two courses open to me:
a. Start pushing them towards the borders and eventually destroy
them or push them across India. This would have taken a long
time and would have been expensive in men and materials. |
would have been fighting on ground of their choosing, and
their routes of reinforcement and withdrawal would remain
open till the end.
b. Without caring for flanks and rear, shoot out with multiple
columns for the borders and seal the routes of reinforcement
and withdrawal. By our fast move and multiple thrusts we
would be able to achieve surprise and thus create panic among
the guerrillas, and the fear that they were being isolated.
Hence they were likely to leave their prepared positions and
safe areas and run for India for security and safety.
I decided to adopt the second course.
General Tikka’s deployment was mostly of a defensive nature.
For an offensive, some changes in grouping and deployment
were required, but as I wanted to achieve surprise and wrench
the initiative from the enemy, speed was most essential to reach
the borders quickly. So I made minimum changes, gave new
tasks to formations, and told them to shoot out. I just told them
to ‘reach the borders fastest with the maximum speed’.
I issued directives which were to be carried out in the following
four phases:
Phase 1: clearing of all major border towns and sealing of the
routes of infiltration, exfiltration, and smuggling, and
clearing Chittagong base and keeping it safe from
artillery and mortar fire.
Phase 2: opening of essential river, road, and rail commu-
nications.