ENGINEERED DEBACLE 
229
of Yahya, Hamid, Omer, and Mitha, gathers at Yahya’s house to
discuss how to retain power, but Gul Hassan’s group succeed in
making Yahya resign at gunpoint.
_ 
21 December 1971:
A vicious propaganda is unleashed against me, my troops, and
the army to discredit us in the eyes of the people. The
propaganda against me is so venomous and so extensive that |
am considered to be the main culprit, not Yahya or Bhutto. This
is the final act of the conspiracy, ensuring that the real culprit,
Bhutto, is not exposed.
January 1972 till 
1974:
Bhutto's attitude after the fall of East Pakistan betrays his callous
attitude. Mr Mohammad Younis, who was detailed by Mrs Gandhi
to oversee the arrangements for Bhutto’s stay at Simla, writes:
On the second day he (Bhutto) exploded, ‘I have not come here
to seek the release of POWs. They hail from the area that has
served as cannon fodder for the British for over a century, what
difference does it make if a hundred thousand die for Pakistan?!
The question then arises, if he had not gone to Simla to get
the POWs back, then why did he go? And what did he achieve? 
|
Under the so-called Simla Pact, the cease-fire line in Kashmir
was changed to a line of control. The posts occupied by the
Indians in Azad Kashmir during the 1971 war were not vacated.
This sealed the fate of Kashmir and the Kashmiris’ quest for self-
determination. This agreement was not reached between the
delegations of the two countries, but between two individuals. All
discussion between the delegations prior to the meeting 7m camera
of the two Prime Ministers was an eyewash. On return from Simla,
Bhutto's coterie had the cheek to say that Bhutto charmed Mrs
Gandhi during their meeting in seclusion, but from the result
achieved it appears that it was Mrs Gandhi who charmed Bhutto.
Bhutto came back from Simla without getting the release of his
POWs and without getting vacated the 5,500 square miles of
territory captured by the Indians or the posts occupied by Indians
in Azad Kashmir during the war of 1971.
Both Indira Gandhi and Bhutto were keen for the recognition
of Bangladesh, which would drive the final nail into the coffin of