DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
183
and my troops, who were fighting valiantly to save the integrity of
the country. 
— 
|
After a great deal of discussion and consultation, it was decided
to await the President’s reaction to this signal. I unambiguously
told Farman that I should be kept abreast of written or oral
discussion with Rawalpindi. I insisted on seeing the President’s
approval, Finally it was agreed that, instead of communicating
my disagreement, it would be written that, ‘General Niazi submits
himself to your command’, meaning that I would only agree to
the proposal after the President had approved it. The signal sent
to the President from the Governor read as under:
For President of Pakistan. Your G 0001 of 092300 Dec. As the
responsibility of taking the final and fateful decision has been given
to me I am handing over the following note to Assistant Secretary-
General Mr Paul Mark Henry after your approval. Note begins. It was
never the intention of the Armed Forces of Pakistan to involve
themselves in all-out war on the soil of East Pakistan. However a
situation 
arose which compelled 
the Armed Forces to take defensive
action. The intention of the Government of Pakistan was always to
decide the issues in East Pakistan by means of a political solution for
which negotiations were afoot. The Armed Forces have fought
heroically against heavy odds and can still continue to do so but in
order 
to avoid further bloodshed and loss of innocent lives I am
making the following proposals: As the conflict arose as a result of
political causes, it must end with a political solution, I therefore
having been authorized by the President of Pakistan do fhereby call)
upon the elected representatives of East Pakistan to arrange for the
peaceful formation of the Government in Dhaka. In making this
offer I feel duty bound to say the will of the people of East Pakistan
would demand the immediate vacation of their land by the Indian
forces as well. I therefore call upon the United Nations to arrange
for a peaceful transfer of power and request: One. An immediate
cease-fire. Two. Repatriation with honour of the Armed Forces of
Pakistan to West Pakistan. Three. Repatriation of all West Pakistan
personnel desirous of returning to West Pakistan. Four. The safety of
all persons settled in East Pakistan since 1947. Five. Guarantee of no
reprisals against any person in East Pakistan. In making this offer, I
want to make it clear that this is a definite proposal for peaceful
transfer of power. The question of surrender of Armed Forces would
not be considered and does not arise and if this proposal is not
acceptable the Armed Forces will continue to fight to the last man.