= 
"Sipatewraa
194 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
d. Cantt and city built-up areas for final fight to the finish.
I never wanted, asked for, or gave any indication for a cease-
fire or surrender. My important signals ended with the assertion
‘will fight to the last man last round’, and my resolve is indicated
by the setting up of HQ Eastern Command with communications
in the Government Quarters, 
and by my pleas to COS Army that
I could fight it out. It was General Hamid’s and GHQ’s orders
that I should surrender to save West Pakistan.
Henry Kissinger records: ‘There was no question of saving
East Pakistan. Both Nixon and I had recognized for months that
its independence was inevitable.” He further states: ‘We
recognized the Indian occupation of East Pakistan as an
accomplished fact, our objective was to scare off an attack on
West Pakistan.’ The Indians were in occupation of Shakargarh,
ready to break out towards Gujranwala-Wazirabad. They were a
couple of miles from Marala Headworks and could destroy
Pakistan’s economy and infrastructure. Knowing this fact I then
decided to obey orders and face the ignominy of surrender—
which suited all parties: Mujib, Bhutto, the Indians, the
Americans, and the Russians. 
me ' Gre ther 24 
a4
_I quote from the book Jron Bars of Freedom by Matiur-Rahman +
oe 
=
and Waseem Hassan: ‘Aiding India in her expansionist venture
were a motley collection of friends. First and foremost among
them was the Soviet Union, followed by the United States and
other lesser powers such as Israel and Afghanistan, all plotted to
dismember it.’ The French writer B.H. Levy rightly observed:
‘The die was cast, the plot was laid, Pakistan was condemned to
die, because the great powers had decided unanimously to
assasinate her.’ Dr Safdar Mahmood quotes Levy in his own book
and writes, ‘the plan was hatched between India, Russia and USA
to break Pakistan.’
No outsider can break up a country without the assistance of
the people of that country. The disintegration of Pakistan was
the result of various conspiracies, but in the final analysis the
break-up was due to Yahya’s desire to retain power, Bhutto's
treachery and greed for power, and Mujib’s dubious activities in
quest of power.
Eastern Garrison was used as an expendable pawn in a game
of power-politics. I was made the sacrificial lamb. My position in
East Pakistan can be compared with that of the Japanese Pacific