86 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
A new ad hoc 314 Brigade under Colonel Fazal Hamid with
EPCAF was created for Khulna sector.
A neéw ad hoc 91 Independent Brigade (Brigadier Ata Malik) was
created in Chittagong with one battalion, two companies, local
garrison troops, and naval troops.
53 Brigade (Brigadier Aslam Niazi) on relief was moved to
Dhaka as command reserve.
A new ad hoc 36 Division under Director-General EPCAF
(Major-General Jamshed) was created at Dhaka with a new ad hoc
93 Bngade (Brigadier Qadir Niazi) at Mymensingh with two
battalions and CAF in the area.
Later an ad hoc 39 Division under Major-General M. Rahim
Khan with 53 Brigade was raised to defend Chandpur under
GHQ orders. GHQ did not send the promised replacement for
Dhaka.
Due to the shortage of field artillery we could not give one
regiment to each brigade, which is authorized. The artillery was
proportionately distributed, keeping in view the main routes of
ingress into a given area.
The ad hoc formations were not like actual formations. They
were short of trained staff, officers, and transport. Communi-
cations were provided from existing resources of Command HQ,
Divisional HQ, civilian VHF, and line communications, They were
good enough for command and control. The troops could see
senior officers visiting their areas, which is necessary for their
morale during war. Their disposition also foxed the enemy about
our real strength and resources.
The following basic points detailed in our operational
instructions of March 1971 were emphasized: forward defensive
posture, and causing maximum attrition to the enemy by trading
space for time and falling back on to the designated fortresses
and strong points; in case of fortresses becoming untenable, it
was decided that the troops would fall back on predesignated
final lines to block the approaches to Dhaka. 14 Division, 93 ad
hoc Brigade from Mymensingh, and 314(A) Brigade from Khulna
were to fall back on Dhaka area.
In spite of major changes in the intelligence estimates, GHQ
did not issue us any written operational instructions. In my plan
I had to cater for both adverse conditions and the conflicting
requirements of defence against Indian invasion and insurgency
| 
; 
] 
_ 
7 
- ~
\ M / \ MN \ N ; 
{ 
|
> 
aie A 
lf. f°. vrw
~~ 
/ 
( ~( 
» | 
} 
|
= 
wo. 
ew \/ZY 
ABD