20 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
anti-tank gun-fire. The guns were dismantled and carried on
charpoys and reassembled on the position.
After a detailed recce of the area, I decided to capture Uri. I
got two mountain guns from Ordnance Depot, Rawalpindi, and
selected an ideal place to locate the guns from where Uri could
be effectively engaged, but before Uri could be attacked I was
ordered to move to Sialkot, where the enemy armour had
attacked to force a decision. Major-General Abrar had requested
that my 14 Para Brigade be placed under his command. I left
Azad Kashmir, reached Sialkot sector, and reported to GOC 6
Armoured Division. Thus from 12 Division, I moved to 6
Armoured Division, and fought the war under General Abrar in
area Badiana, Chawinda, and Zafarwal. I had been sent to 12
Division at the request of Major-General Akhtar Malik and had
now. been sent to Sialkot sector at the request of Major-General
Abrar Hussain.
Sialkot Sector
Precisely at 2100 hours on 9 September, I reported for duty to
Major-General Abrar Hussain, MBE, Commander, 6 Armoured
Division. After the usual niceties and a cup of hot tea, he briefed
‘me on the map about the latest situation. He laid great stress on
Rakh Baba Bhoore Shah, which he said was to be captured
immediately.
Rakh Baba Bhoore Shah was dense with trees; it provided
ideal cover, concealment, and adequate area for dispersal for the
enemy tanks. The tanks concentrated nightly in a laager to refuel
and replenish. To deny this space to the enemy was vital. It was
too close to our positions. It had to be captured at all costs to
ensure that it could not be used by the enemy armour to carry
out offensive operations.
I was informed that Badiana village, located on the road
connecting Sialkot, Pasrur, and Narowal, was under our control.
The area beyond the village.was held by the Indians. Their main
position was in the rakh, I went to Bhopalwala where my brigade
was concentrated and gave the orders for the move. The
battalions reached their allocated positions by 1400 hours the
next day. After visiting the battalions and placing 1/1 Punjab at