36 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Nair, who later became the Second-in-Command in RAW, as the
liaison with the pro-Mujib group. The Pakistan Intelligence
caught up with their activities when the pro-Mujib group made
an unsuccessful raid on the East Bengal Rifles’ armoury in Dhaka,
President Ayub Khan called a Round Table Conference (RTC)
to which all the prominent political figures, including Mujib 
and
Bhutto, were invited. Meetings was held on 26 February and
subsequently on 10 March 1969. From the very outset Bhutto’s
animosity towards the conference was obvious. He not only failed
to participate in the conference, but issued statements against it.
Similarly, Mujib was adamant in his six-point demands. Despite
friendly persuasion by other politicians, he was not to be moved.
Ayub Khan contended that the six points meant confederation
and not federation and would subsequently lead to the division
of Pakistan. The politicians failed to contribute toward the success
_ of the deliberations. Mujib’s rigid attitude, Bhutto’s nonchalant
stance, and the meek role played by other participating politicians
were the major reasons for the failure of the conference.
People by then had started resenting Martial Law. Due to his
ill-health, President Ayub had to rely on the Army, and Yahya
Khan, the Commander-in-Chief, took advantage of the political
turmoil. He encouraged Mujib and other leaders to disagree
with the RTC’s proposals. He assured Mujib that Martial Law
would not be imposed and the Army would not interfere in the
demonstrations against Ayub Khan. He kept his word and did
not intervene until he succeeded Ayub Khan.
Ayub Khan resigned on 25 March 1969, abrogated the
Constitution and asked Yahya Khan to assume power. Yahya had
decided to hold elections. Yahya, Mujib, and Bhutto were the
three men who were in a position to create an impact on national
politics. General Yahya, with the backing of the Army, was the
most powerful. Mujib was an accomplished politician and an
orator par excellence who could arouse the masses by his emotional
speeches. Bhutto was a fledgling, and had previously been
roosting under the protective wings of Ayub Khan. He was
sophisticated but arrogant, polished but brutal, he could speak
the poor man’s language but was egocentric, intelligent but
emotional. The trio was involved in a desperate tussle to achieve
political ascendancy. Each was ambitious, each wily, each trying
to elbow the other out.