40 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
against the Centre. On 30 January 1971, an Indian plane was
hijacked to Lahore. Emotionalists as we are, we welcomed the
two Kashmiri hijackers without delving into the issue. The
Kashmiris were given asylum. Pakistan had fallen into a 
trap,
since this gave the Indians a strong reason to suspend the flights
of Pakistani aeroplanes over Indian territory. Later, when sanity
prevailed and emotions cooled, an inquiry was conducted which
revealed that the hijacking was planned by India to give them an
excuse to suspend flights between East and West Pakistan. 
:
On 11 February 1971, Bhutto met Yahya. The next day PPP
| aastom attacked the Awami League office at Lahore and burnt
its flag. Later Yahya announced that the National Assembly would
meet in Dhaka on 3 March. Bhutto was not receptive to the
announcement. He said: “We cannot go there only to endorse the
Constitution already prepared by a party, and return humiliated.’
On 15 February, Bhutto told his followers at Lahore that he would
launch a protest movement if the Government backed Mujib. He
also said that either East Pakistan should be allowed independence
or Mujib should be arrested and taken to task.
On 22 February 1971, Yahya had a meeting with the Provincial
Governors in Islamabad. Lt.-Gen. Yaqub, Commander Eastern
Command and MLA, also attended. It was in this conference
that the plan for military operations was approved. Yaqub was
given a carte blanche to execute plan ‘Blitz’, in case Mujib failed to
modify his stance on the Six Points. After the conference, Yaqub
visited General Hamid in GHQ, who offered him an extra brigade
to deal with any new development. He refused the offer,
professing that adequate troops were available in East Pakistan to
deal with any contingency. When he reached Dhaka, he changed
his mind and requested the promised brigade. When two
battalions of the brigade reached Dhaka, he again telephoned
Gen. Hamid and informed him that Mujib was perturbed about
the troop build-up and had requested that further air-lifting of
troops be stopped. Gen. Hamid, normally ugruffled and quiet,
lost his cool and told Yaqub to be firm. The third battalion was
despatched according to plan.
The Awami League was so alarmed by these divaloonienis
that they even agreed to be flexible on the Six Points. On 27 
|
February 1971, Governor Ahsan informed Mujib of the decision
to postpone the National Assembly session until a date to be