DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
211
manoeuvres. I exploited their poor leadership, weak planning,
over-cautious approach, and always doing the obvious: my
formation commanders re-adjusted positions and repulsed their
offensive everywhere.
Their extreme caution and failure to advance at speed to
outflank or bypass us shows that they fought according to set
patterns given in war manuals. Their plan was obvious to us.
Arora did not have the gambler’s touch, nor did he urge his
formations to push forward at speed. He did not take even
calculated risks, so it was not difficult for us to nullify all his
disjointed and ill-co-ordinated efforts, which lacked force and
vigour. He failed to use his mobility and fire-power intelligently.
So, in spite of all our handicaps, we succeeded in tying down all
their forward moves by good planning, bluff, unorthodox
methods, good deception, and above all by the determination’ of
my troops in all sectors.
Plans generally require a change or review after first contact.
Every commander makes alternative plans in case of failure of
the original plan. We had a holding role, and our withdrawal
from the borders to the next holding or defensive position was
carried out with excellent results and we did not suffer any
setback. We were successful in delaying or containing the Indians
at every intermediate position. The Indians had no alternative
plan to meet the developing situation. They followed a set course
and mostly kept banging their heads against our positions instead
of bypassing them. In fact they were reacting to our moves instead
of seizing the initiative and exploiting any opportunity which the
battle presented to them. 
|
Instead of aiming at the destruction of our forces, they laid
emphasis on capturing territory. They failed miserably in this,
We ourselves vacated Jessore and Mymensingh; the Indians failed
to capture any other city. We succeeded in pinning down their
forces in each sector. In fact, when the time for an attack against
Dhaka came, they were left with only four weak brigades. All the
rest were fighting isolated battles against us and our well-stocked
and well-prepared fortresses, and were having a tough time with
heavy casualties. Arora could not move his troops from these
sectors to concentrate against Dhaka, his ultimate objective. As a
matter of fact, Dhaka was so strongly held at this stage that it was
impregnable, and the Indians would have needed all their