THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
139
_ 
23 Brigade was saddled with difficult tasks. In addition to its
operational tasks of carrying out offensive-defensive operations, it
also had to protect the loyal Pakistanis—the rebels had started
killing ethnic Biharis, and the onus of protecting these innocent
people rested on this brigade. It was also being used to protect the
flanks of 205 Brigade in the south in area Hill, blocking the
approach to Bogra and Dhaka, where a fierce battle was being
fought. I intended to vacate area Dinajpur-Rangpur. It was vital to
pull the brigade out so that it could carry out operations in the
south in support of the troops at Hilli, with a view to trapping and
destroying the enemy there. This plan had to be abandoned to
comply with direct orders from GHQ (signal dated 5 December)
to contain and hold 6 Mountain Division, which otherwise would
have been shifted to the western theatre. We were carrying out
orders to ensure that the favourable situation in the western theatre
was not disturbed. I sacrificed my tactical plans to facilitate the
success of the Pakistani offensive from the west.
Brigadier Tajammul Hussain, Commander 205 Brigade Group,
had organized the Hilli defences with tactical finesse. He had
placed screens along the railway line at Noapara, at Basudpura
check-post, and at the Railway Station complex. The main
compact defended localities were sited in depth to cover all routes
leading into East Pakistan. They were effectively covered by 4FF
and elements of 13FF Battalions. The positions were supported
by a field regiment, a mortar battery, a squadron of tanks, and
elements of recce and support battalion. The depth of the
positional defence was about two thousand five hundred yards.
The battle of Hilli was the classic battle of the 1971 war. The
valiant Pakistani troops held up the bulk of the Indian 33 Corps,
supported by tanks and massive air support. The terrain is flat,
similar to Punjab. The ground is hard, allowing room for
manoeuvre and deployment of large formations. The defence
organized by Tajammul proved formidable against incessant and
repeated Indian attacks. Even the Indians’ efforts to bypass the
positions proved to be an exercise in futility. Every technique was
tried to reduce the fortress, but every effort to capture the
position met with failure.
20 Mountain Division was deployed in the Balurghat Bulge
and fully primed for attack against our positions. The Mukti
Bahini forces had provided them with a detailed layout of each