DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
209
The Indians supported 
the rebellion of the East Bengal Regiment
battalions and EPCAF with a view to dispersing and tiring out
our troops. Initially they did succeed in fomenting insurgency,
but it was short-lived. Their conduct of operations was faulty
because of voids in their plan. They had ignored our capabilities,
determination, and preparations. When I took over I ordered
the elimination of rebels and guerrillas by a speedy surprise
action and multiple thrusts. The East Pakistan borders were
restored within two months, the insurgents fled to India, and we
had near normalcy by May 1971.
War by Proxy
Having failed in their insurgency operations, they planned to
capture a chunk of territory to establish Bangladesh by launching
irregular guerrilla operations supported from across the border.
One of their generals remarked that if each guerrilla killed one
soldier, the Pakistan army would be destroyed. The Indian troops
and the Mukti Bahini forces, disguised as civilians, carried out
many acts of sabotage, destroyed road and rail communications,
and supported the rebels by fire and formation-size raids all along
the 2500-mile frontier. A brigade action which was launched at
Belonia was repulsed. Their attack again was haphazard,
disorganized, and lacked co-ordination. Had they planned in
detail, and co-ordinated their actions, we would have suffered
heavy casualties. In fact their proxy war petered out by November.
Open War
Their military plan had integrated the army, navy, and air force.
The latter two had nothing to fight against because we had no
navy and our one weak and old squadron of F-86 aircraft had
been grounded.
It was primarily the army’s battle, with close support from the
air force. Except for the destruction of ferries, small bridges, and
boats, the latter was used mainly in a ground-support role.
The Indians had a strength of twelve divisions. Their deploy-
ment by early November clearly betrayed their offensive
intentions. There was no surprise—a factor essential in war. Their