2 
TOPOGRAPHY AND TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
67
corner for Muslims, Bengali or non-Bengali, and they would
‘ke us any tme they were in a position to do so without any
a 
and without rhyme or reason, India had never been a
sence country since 1947. She had already conducted seven
wars and she was now fighting a proxy war against us in East
pakistan. | said we should strike now and make them practise
what they preach—Ahimsa.
After listening patiently, General Hamid said, ‘Niazi, your
suggestions are good, your arguments sound, they carry weight,
and are workable. I can come here with a skeleton staff to help
you and advise you and we can fight the battle of Pakistan in the
East. 
| would love to conduct this operation on Indian soil, or
carry out your last suggestion without much difficulty. No doubt
about it. But our Government is not prepared to fight an open
war with India and is in favour of carrying on fighting as we afe,
in which you are doing a wonderful job. Now listen carefully.
Your task is not to allow the Indians to establish a Government of
Bangladesh on the soil of East Pakistan, and if you can accomplish
that we will be happy and satisfied with your work, with you and
your troops. To sum it up, you will neither enter Indian territory
nor send raiding parties into India, and you will not fire into
Indian territory either. You should evict any hostile element
entering East Pakistan.’
I said, ‘What about a political settlement, for which Bengalis
are ready?’ He said, ‘Tiger, you should not worry your head
about political matters, they are very complicated.’
‘Wilco, Sir’ (it will be done).
That was about the end of my thinking of any offensive action
against the rebels by entering India, and it also shattered my
dream of carrying the war onto Indian soil.
Major-General Kushwant Singh writes, on page 65 of his book,
The Liberation of Bangladesh:
soft
Yahya had valid reasons for crossing International borders’ in the
fastern wing in pursuit of guerrillas as well as to overrun their bases
in India about the end of May 71, and of the opportunity to enlarge
conflict into a full fledged war by hitting India also in the West. That
was Inclia’s worst hour, its reserve formations were in the hinterland,
It had serious shortfalls of war material and soldiers and civilians
were not mentally attuned to immediate war. If Yahya had struck at