WAR CLOUDS 
107
c. Have sufficient additional troops
Make up deficiencies so as to be effective on the front line
‘and in the interior: fight profitably an undeclared war
against the regular Indian Army; and deal with and
eliminate the rebels in the interior.
GHQ agreed with the third course because they were of
the view that in the case of the first two courses, the enemy
would be in a better position to achieve its mission and we
might lose the whole game; it was also in keeping with the
mission of not losing any area of importance and tying
down the maximum Indian troops in this theatre of war to
create a favourable troop ratio in the western theatre, from
where the decisive offensive was to be launched. We also
favoured this course, but we asserted categorically that
additional troops and making up our deficiencies were vital
for containing the Indian offensive and for creating
difficulties for the Indians. GHQ agreed.
Some of our important recommendations were:
1) Start a war of the minds: a majority of the population was
still strongly motivated towards ‘Bangladesh’. For this
campaign we suggested the establishment of a Central
Psychological Warfare Board, to be located in Dhaka, to
indoctrinate the population. This required full-time
intensive effort and dedicated people to conduct it.
2) A prolonged state of uncertainty was not in the interest of
the country and the morale of its people. Hence normalcy
was recommended to be restored as soon as possible.
3) Engage Agartala airfield to retaliate to Indian firing.
4) Gear up the civil administration and provide it more
support by strengthening civil law and order agencies, and
set up a command structure, training, and indoctrination
for the paramilitary forces like Razakars, etc.
5) Enhance our military capability by inducting more troops
into East Pakistan, so that we could be effective on the
front line and in the interior and fight profitably an
undeclared war against the regular Indian Army and also
against the rebels in the interior.