THE 1965 WAR 
4]
out to be. Abrar fought the battles, Tikka bagged the credit. At
times history is unkind. It creates giants out of pygmies and titans
e not given their due share.
ar
After the War
The 1965 war with India came to a halt. ‘The transition from war
to peace took place. The reshifting and readjustment of officers
started. 
I remained with 14 Para Brigade, the Brigade I
commanded during the operations in Azad Kashmir and Sialkot,
after the cessation of the hostilities. Then my posting order came.
I was posted back as Commandant of the School of Infantry and
Tactics, Quetta, from where I had been posted to 14 Para Brigade
before the outbreak of the 1965 War. I was happy with the
posting. As Commandant of the training institution, I had started
a few projects which had been left half-way, 
| wanted to complete
the unfinished tasks.
After staying in the School of Infantry and Tactics for a few
months, I was posted to 8 Division, located in Sialkot, on
promotion, On 18 October 1966 I took over the command of 8
Division from Major-General Muzaffar-ud-Din. I knew the
operational area to a certain extent as I had fought in this area
in the 1965 War. To further familiarize myself with the area, I
carried out detailed reconnaissance. At times we camped in the
area for several days to maintain continuity. I prepared the
defence plan of the division. Defences were based on the strong-
point system. Company strong points were prepared within the
Battalion’s defensive framework. In fact, 
1 walked the complete
Divisional front. Each and every machine-gun and anti-tank
position was critically examined and selected after ascertaining
its fire effectiveness. The defensive layout was inspected and
greatly admired by senior officers. It left 
a deep impact on the
Corps Commander, Lt.-Gen. Abdul Hamid. General Yahya Khan
was also profuse in his praise. On completion of 8 Division's
defensive positions, I was transferred to command 10 Division,
located in Lahore.
As 
[had sweated and toiled to complete the task, I was curious
about my posting from one division to another, I asked General
Hamid about it. He told me there were two reasons for my