66 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
would have achieved its given tasks according to our concept of
fighting the main battle in the West. 
4
My second suggestion was that if the deficiencies of my
Divisions, particularly in tanks and artillery, were made up, and if
I were given one squadron of modern aircraft and some anti-
aircraft resources, and one Infantry Brigade Group, I would.
capture Agartala and a big chunk of Assam, and develop multiple
thrusts into Indian Bengal. We would cripple the economy of.
Calcutta by blowing up bridges and sinking boats and ships in.
the Hoogly River and create panic amongst the civilians. One air
raid on Calcutta would set a sea of humanity in motion to get out
of Calcutta, as happened during World War II when a Japanese
Zero fighter raided Calcutta.
My third suggestion was: Make up my deficiencies, send me
two more Divisions, some aircraft, and some anti-aircraft artillery.
(which can easily be spared without weakening the defenses of ’
West Pakistan), and I can fight not only the batde of East Pakistan |
but of Pakistan in the East and on Indian soil. Against our five
Divisions they will have to bring about fifteen Divisions, and the —
bulk of their air force and navy. They will have to leave some
Divisions against China and some for internal security, which will
leave them weak on the Western Front, and in such a case there 
_
should be no problem for us to liberate Kashmir and Gurdaspur.
If they remain strong in the West they will be weak in the East.
They cannot be strong everywhere. We are in touch with Mr Lal
Danga, leader of the Mezo freedom fighters, Mr A. Z. Phizo,
leader of the Naga freedom fighters in Assam, and Charu
Mauzumdor, leader of the Naxalites of West Bengal. They will
join hands with us. Our own Bengalis too are likely to join us in -
great numbers once we start fighting on Indian soil. It is 
a God-
sent opportunity, let us avail it. Morally, politically, technically,
and militarily we are justified in entering India because they
have entered our territory and are still firing into our territory,
raiding our posts, and giving sanctuary to our enemies.
General Hamid pointed out that all my suggestions meant
open war with India. I agreed, but argued that merely our entry
into their territory would force them to seek peace. The Indians
would be unlikely not to resort to open hostilities when they
were in a position to do so—they had not accepted the creation
of Pakistan, they had neither‘any sympathy with Pakistan nor a
y 
f 
| 
f 
» 
f 
|
| 
wg 
(| 
BI 
y,
’ 
' 
ce. 
\
| 
Bam 
Cc 
i 
i
1 
2 
A 
@ 
a 
5