OPERATIONAL PLAN 
93
would have done had they known my real strength and
deployment. For the same reason, after getting a bloody nose in
Kushtia, the Indian Army did not rush to Faridpur either,
These measures proved fatal for quite a few Indian generals,
particularly for General Arora, the Commander of Indian Forces
in East Pakistan, because in spite of all the facilities, conducive
circumstances, and tilting advantages, he could not achieve any
of his given tasks in nine long months on the frontage of three
thousands miles.
General Arora’s overall superiority of at least ten to one in
everything created the most conducive circumstances ever
available to any commanding General in the history of warfare.
He had air supremacy, giving him the options of aerial
envelopment, air bridging, air transport, and unobstructed air
supply, thanks to our lack of aircraft, anti-aircraft resources, long-
range artillery and tanks; he had command of the seas, free run
of the rivers, capability of landing and maintaining troops by
naval vessels along seashores and river banks on our flanks and
rear unopposed; and he had a carrying capability of about
brigade-strength groups in their APCs and on tanks in all the
sectors. Indian tanks had night vision devices and were
amphibious, whereas the shell of our light tanks was not effective
against Indian tanks. They also had enough long-range artillery
to keep my short-range guns under constant fire, thus reducing
fire support to the infantry considerably. Last but not least, they
had Russian experts to train and organize guerrillas, Russians to
handle their sophisticated weapons on the battlefield, and
hundreds of thousands of Bengalis (Mukti Bahini and the Bengali
dissidents) to help the Indian Army. Still General Arora could
not succeed militarily. We were manoeuvred into a political defeat
by Bhutto. Genera] Arora was retired immediately after the war
and not given any other job.
Visits
I had finalized the operational plan and it was kept constantly
under review. In the meantime, I had the honour of many visits
by prominent politicians of Pakistan whose advice was useful to
me. Although as Martial Law Administrator I had come into
halnachti
ae 
@ 
-TM® 
6 > ' 
I» fr 
» 
| 
| r~ 
FT? 
Oo) 
1 ~*~ 
> 
4
A, 
rH 
TC) 
PITT).