THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
165
Ashuganj, Kushtia, and Daulatpur. Dhaka fortress had over
31,000 troops. The Dhaka complex was impregnable under the
prevailing situation. 
.
According to the Indians’ own account, they had only four
weak brigades out of twelve divisions left to attack Dhaka. Could
they capture such a large built-up area as Dhaka city with that
strength when I had 31,000 strong, battlehardy, and experienced
troops, which included regular troops and CAF. (breakdown given
in Chapter 12), and was personally commanding the troops with
my recently-established HQ in Government Quarters in the heart
of the city, fully determined to fight it out? NO. NEVER. From
the military point of view we had succeeded in containing and
dissipating the Indian might of twelve divisions. Practically all
airports and seaports, and all the major cities except Jessore and
Mymensingh (which we had vacated) but including the ports of
Chittagong and Chalna, were still held by us. It was through a
conspiracy that Pakistan, its glorious army and brave Eastern
Command commanders and troops were let down. We were
ordered to surrender, and thus humiliated. We were not
defeated. We were let down and cheated.
Who is responsible for the blood of the shaheeds who laid
down their lives for the integrity of Pakistan? We buried the
shaheeds as amanat. Their bodies should be brought back to
Pakistan. It is they who deserve to be honoured by mausoleums
and not those who broke up Pakistan. If the Americans can search
for their dead soldiers in Vietnam and take then back to the
USA, then our Government, which has better relations with the
Government of Bangladesh, will probably find that an honest
diplomatic approach succeeds in a similar case.
Military burial is given to a soldier on the battlefield by his
enemies when they are particularly impressed by his courage. In
World War II, in which millions of soldiers took part and which
lasted six years, there is mention of only one such burial, that of
a British sergeant who had accompanied the Commandos sent to
kill Field Marshal Rommel in the Western Desert. He fought so
well, and with such courage, that Rommel himself ordered his
military burial. As opposed to this, in East Pakistan I had only
45,000 troops and para military forces from West Pakistan. During
twenty-six days’ open war in East Pakistan, the Indians gave
military burials to four Pakistani soldiers. In my opinion no other
a 
ii
/ 
| 6 | 
YR JKT
Ve 
VWULUY
gy 
e-
ly 
< 
a 
& 
al 9 
ad 
@. 
fr i aa eo 
oo 
ae 
|
TEI 
VDIidadl V 
COLL
LBRAA OY SD AL y 
oe SY YS 
] 
A BA