EARLY YEARS 
1]
When Admiral Mountbatten, Supreme Commander East Asia visited
Batavia during his tour of Netherlands East Indies recently, he was
met on the airport by Maj. Niazi, MC, of village Ballo Khel, PO
Mianwali, Punjab. Maj. Niazi was commander of the guard of honour
supplied by the 4th Battalion, the Rajput Regiment.
Admiral Mountbatten complimented the Major on the smart turn-
out of his men and enquired into his distinguished war record. Major
Niazi joined the Army 11 years ago and served in the famous 5th
Division in the Western Desert, until they were transferred to Burma
Front, In 1943 he was mentioned in despatches and in the jungle of
Kohima he was awarded Military Cross for outstanding bravery and
leadership. He now commands *D’ Company which is one of the two
Muslim companies in the Battalion.
Maj. Niazi arrived in Surabaya last vear and took part in the sweep
which cleared the town of armed bandits. Later his brigade was
transferred to Batavia from where they have escorted convoys loaded
with food for refugees in Bandung.
Back to India
From Burma we were sent to invade Singapore, but the Japanese
surrendered before the invasion started. From there we were
sent to Indonesia. We stayed there for about three months and
then we returned to India.
We left Java on 30 May 1946, embarked at Jakarta and landed
in Madras. The 5th Indian Division was concentrated in Ranchi.
Most of the set-up had changed. Our new commanding officer
was an old Englishman, Burton by name. The Brigade
Commander was Brigadier Thorat from South India. The
Divisional Commander was General Russell, known as Russel]
Pasha. Lieutenant-General Ranken was the Eastern Command
Commander.
Soon I went to Clement Town, near Dehra Dun, for the tactical
course. The course was attended by senior British and Indian
officers. Our two King’s Commissioned Officers were Lt.-Col.
Mohammad Afzal Janjua and Major Afzal Sheikh, who later
became Quartermaster-General in the Pakistan Army. The course
was also attended by many Indian Commissioned Officers. I got
above average grading and was posted to Tactical School,
Clement Town, as instructor. 
|
www.balochlibrary.com