214 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
available to them, the failure of the Indian Army in this sector
could only be attributed to bad planning, poor generalship, lack
of foresight, rigidity, and cautious approach. It shows
incompetence, lack of tactical and strategical sense, and no urge
to push on. Arora failed to take advantage of his armour and did
not make use of ferries, which could have been brought in
abundance to Sirajganj Ghat. Bridging was not possible over the
river because of its vastness. They had air superiority, aerial
bridging capability, and the support of the local population, and
should have succeeded in crossing the river within days. They
could have forced me to vacate Mymensingh area, and occupied
Tangail in Dhaka sector and Bera-Pabna in Rajshahi sector, in
the early stages of the war. Had they concentrated on containing
and bypassing General Nazar’s forces in this sector they would
have had a better chance of posing a threat to Dhaka, forcing
him to occupy Bera-Pabna line to block their move towards
Dhaka.
All kudos to General Nazar who, with meagre resources,
defeated the Indian designs by playing his cards extremely well
and succeeded in containing and mauling them. Any good
general would have gone for containing and bypassing our forces,
but Arora, by going for territory, risked the danger of being
destroyed by us while banging his head against our fortresses.
Arora should be grateful to Bhutto, Yahya, and the Indian
propaganda, for eulogizing his virtual defeat into a victory.
Otherwise, militarily it was a poor show that Arora and Thapan
put up in this sector.
Kushtia-Jessore-Khulna Sector
II Corps was specially raised under Lt-Gen. Raina to capture
Dhaka. Raina was considered by the Indians to be a brilliant
general, but his handling of the Corps belied his reputation. I
still wonder what prompted Arora and Manekshaw to raise this
corps of two infantry divisions in Krishnagar opposite Jessore.
This sector had formidable obstacles, as there were ravines every
couple of kilometres. Movement off the road was not possible 
-
because of the marshy nature of the ground. It was ideal defensive
terrain, as was proved by the fighting in the area. when 4 Indian
VWWW.DaALOCNIIOTalry.CO)