34 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
With the passage of time, certain issues became controversial
between the two wings. The most explosive issue was that of
language. The Bengalis were reluctant to adopt Urdu as the
national language. They felt it was being imposed on them, even
though Urdu had been declared the national language by Quaid-i-
Azam in a mammoth gathering in Dhaka on 19 March 1948. The
East Pakistanis wanted Bengali to be the national language. They
wished to retain their cultural identity through language. Also,
they did not want to be hampered by the lack of proficiency in
another language, which could place them at a disadvantage
against the West Pakistanis, who already had the edge in the armed
forces and the civil services. The Bengalis were adamant in their
demand. hey turned it into a political movement, voicing their
disenchantment. Thus a confrontation with the Centre took place.
The movement continued until the Bengali demand was accepted.
Bengali was declared as one of the state languages in 1954. The
issue was resolved, but the scar remained. The drift had started.
The West Pakistanis, on the other hand, were concerned that
the Bengalis, if given majority representation according to their
population in the federal set-up, would eventually edge them
out. They were also apprehensive about the Hindu influence on
Bengali politics. With twenty per cent of the population being
educated Hindus, and given their dominance in all facets of life,
who could have stopped them from dictating the national
policies? The government would be formed by Bengalis, the iron
fist in the velvet glove would be that of the Hindus. To ensure
that the Hindu influence was nullified, the parity system was
evolved, meaning equal representation between the two wings.
This was aimed at protecting the interests of the West Pakistanis
from exploitation by the Hindu-controlled Bengalis.
The removal from office of Khwaja Nazimuddin, the Prime
Minister and a Bengali, by Ghulam Muhammad, a West Pakistani,
created turbulence. The Bengali leadership in East Pakistan
launched a campaign. Most of the parties formed a united front
to express their discontent. A twenty-point agenda was formulated
which included autonomy of the province in accordance with
the Lahore Resolution, with only defence, currency, and foreign
policy under the direct control of the Centre.
In October 1958, General Ayub Khan, the Commander-in-
Chief of the Pakistan Army, was appointed Martial Law