TOPOGRAPHY AND TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
61
land, where the population is against you and friendly to your
opponent. Similarly, where traitors have co-operated with the
enemy, nations have gone down in spite of the heroism and
gallantry of the armed forces. We had to face both these elements
on a rather large scale. After General Tikka Khan's harsh and
haphazard military action, the getting away of the Bengali armed
personnel and politicians, their forming into Mukti Bahini and
establishing a Bangladesh government-in-exile in Calcutta, and
the local population turning against us, we became like a foreign
army in a hostile land. The Bengalis used to call us the “Army of
Occupation’. Mukti Bahini had the support not only of the local
Bengalis and the Indian Army, but of the whole of the Indian
economic, political, and military set-up, in addition to advisers
from Russia. 
‘ 
‘
Although the opposition was numerically superior, accustomed
to the local climatic conditions, familiar with the battle area, and
held the initiative, we still completed Phases 1 to 3 successfully in
record time. By the end of April 1971 we had cleared and
occupied all border towns and BOPs, sealed the routes of
infiltration, and re-established the boundaries of East Pakistan,
which had vanished during the time of General Yaqub and
General Tikka. By the beginning of May, the river and sea routes
to Chittagong, Chalna, and Khulna had been cleared, and traffic
to and from these ports had been started. Rail communication
too had been restored in the province.
On 13 May 1971 I sent a signal to GHQ Rawalpindi in which I
explained the latest situation, the. pattern of rebel activities, the
extent of Indian involvement, the change of boundaries, and the
new areas of responsibility for the various formations in tackling
the situation more effectively. The rebels, after having been
defeated in the towns, had retreated into inaccessible areas in
the interior or across the Indian border. Approximately 30,000
rebels had been either killed or made ineffective, and the rest
crossed over to India.
The new deployment was as under:
16 Division of three Brigades and an armoured regiment under
Major-General Nazar Hussain Shah in area Dinajpur, Rangpur,
Rajshahi, Pabna, and Bogra. 
.
9 Division of two Brigades under Major-General M. H. Ansari
to be responsible for area Kushtia, Faridpur, Barisal, Bhola Island,