148 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
failed to move forward or manoeuvre against the co-ordinated,
accurate fire of Hayat’s brigade.
Hayat’s performance was extraordinary. With a small force, he
played around with a superior enemy force. He blunted the
enemy armour, consisting of T-55 and PT-76 tanks, outwitted the
Opposition with his quick decisions and bold actions, and
eliminated the enemy by his courage, fortitude, and initiative.
Hayat was a brave commander. He had served under me in
Sialkot sector in the 1965 war and had done very well in
command of a FF Battalion, for which he was awarded SJ.
Two Indian Naval boats tried to enter Chalna seaport but
were destroyed. After this incident, the Indian Navy kept a
respectful distance from East Pakistan seaports.
The enemy advanced to Chauhadanga on 6 December.
Although not a tactically important town, the advance had an
adverse impact on the Governor because it was his home town.
The rebels played havoc with the locals and many were massacred,
The enemy's occupation, on 7 December, of Jessore, which we
had vacated on 6 December, added fuel to the fire. Desperate,
Governor Malik started asking for a ceasefire. I invited the
Governor for a briefing at Eastern Command. I informed him
that certain other areas would be vacated. We would be falling
back to Kushtia, Faridpur, and Khulna in the west. Major-General
Rao Farman, his military adviser, instead of pacifying him, created
confusion in his mind. The Governor was worried about the
safety of the civilians. He was deeply concerned about casualties
and the killing of innocent persons.
After Magura, 62 Indian Brigade advanced to Madhomati. The
purpose of the move was to capture Faridpur after clearing
Madhomati. Our intention was to divert the enemy forces in
another direction. Our troops at Kushtia succeeded in luring the
Indian division to the north. Jhenida-Khushtia offered a lucrative
target. Our troops in Kushtia could now cut the Indians’ lines of
communication in area Jhenida. Brigadier Manzoor at Kushtia was
told to cut the road but before he moved, the enemy started
moving towards him. General Barar, fearful of the flank threat
from the north to his over-stretched line of advance to Jhenida
and Madhomati, ordered 7 Mountain Brigade to attack Kushtia.
By getting drawn towards Kushtia, the Indian troops went off on a
tangent, thus giving us sufficient time to organize and re-adjust
e@ 
+4
och
YW7UKIUKT 
Na
V/ / 
y IV/ 
\ VA / 
iWé ]
VV 
VV 
VV 
e FE
| > te alt @ me ah 
Gi 
rr as rYNs
brary.com