14 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
located in Quetta. I remained with 8 Division till 20 June 1957
and again reverted to regimental duties. 
I was posted to 1/14
Punjab (5 Punjab Sherdils), located in Dhaka in East Pakistan. |
asked General Bakhtiar Rana, MC, General Officer Commanding,
8 Division, the reason for my posting before the completion of
two years tenure of duty. He replied, ‘I had asked the Military
Secretary for your posting to my division. I am very happy with
your good work and self discipline. You have been posted on the
orders of the Commander-in-Chief, General Ayub Khan. As 1/14
(Sherdils) is the Chief's battalion, he always selects the com-
manding officer of 14 Punjab himself.’ So again I had to change
my regimental badges. From 8 Punjab, I changed to 1 Punjab,
and now to 14 Punjab Regiment.
1/14 Punjab (Sherdils) was Headquarters Battalion of 14
Division, commanded by Major-General Umrao Khan, a capable
General. During our stay in Dhaka, the Sherdils had a good
reputation as the officers conducted themselves with poise,
dignity, and soldierly bearing. A road in Dhaka Cantonment was
named ‘Tiger Road’ after me. The name has not been changed.
Capt. Gohar Ayub, later Speaker of the National Assembly, Lt. Asif
Nawaz, later COAS, and Lt. Alam Jan Mahsud, later Lieutenant-
General, all served in 1/14 Punjab during my command.
After completion of a successful tour of duty in East Pakistan,
we embarked at Chittagong on 10 November 1957 bound for
West Pakistan. From Karachi 1/14 Punjab moved by train to
Lahore where we became part of 106 Brigade, commanded by
Brigadier Wahid Haider of 10 Division, with Major-General Azam
Khan as the General Officer Commanding.
From the time of our arrival in Lahore, we got involved in a
new tactical defensive concept being introduced in the Army,
known as the ‘New Concept’. It was the idea of C.-in-C. General
Ayub Khan. To ensure that the officers understood the concept
in its vital perspective, papers were written and discussions were
held, but the desired impact was not created on the young
officers, the unit commanders and the sub-unit commanders. It
was therefore decided to give a demonstration of the defensive
layout to the officers to convince them that this was better than
the old concept of defence being practiced in our army.
Brigadier Gul Mawaz, MC, Commander 103 Brigade, was given
the task of the demonstration. 103 Brigade was also located in