200 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
equipment, tanks, and guns behind. It would have been a blessing
for the Indians. The bulk of the twelve Indian divisions would
have suddenly become surplus; they could have encircled and
held the Pakistan Army in the Bowl with just three or four
divisions with the help of Mukti Bahini and the Bengali dissidents,
and could have shifted seven or eight divisions, most of their
armour and BSF battalions, the bulk of the Air Force, and the
navy with considerable ease to the western theatre.
With an additional seven to eight infantry divisions, thirty BSF
battalions, many squadrons of tanks, seventeen squadrons of
aircraft, and the bulk of the Indian Navy—including the aircraft-
carrier Vikrant which would have provided a mobile airfield in
the south—the Indians would have been in a comfortable
position to occupy West Pakistan without much difficulty.
Crossing the rivers may have been a formidable task for the
infantry, but the Indian Army, with its vertical envelopment
capability, could negotiate any obstacle, more so when we lacked
air capability and mobility to intervene, intercept, and destroy
the enemy airborne forces. Their complete air supremacy,
support from the local population, and paratroop landings—in
conjunction with the major thrust from the obstacle-free north—
could have made the Dhaka Bowl Defence not only redundant
but a death-trap for the troops of Eastern Command. Also, most
of the rivers rise in India and then enter East Pakistan. Thus the
Indians could carry out operations deep into Pakistan without
crossing the rivers. Only for converging on Dhaka did the need
for crossing the rivers exist, which they could have done by aerial
envelopment, amphibian vehicles, naval craft, and with the help
of the local boatmen. The best way to protect Dhaka, the nerve
centre, was not to allow the Indians to cross into Dhaka area in
strength. To keep them separated from each other, and away
from Dhaka, meant holding them on the other side of the rivers.
An army, like a man, cannot properly defend its back against a
blow without turning around, which temporarily unbalances it.
The brain is more sensitive to a menace in the back. When
deployed beyond the rivers, the Pakistan Army divided and
dispersed the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini. I could take on
the attacking Indians frontally, but did not have sufficient troops
to protect my rear and flanks, so I utilized the big rivers to
protect my back and separate ‘the bulk of the Mukti Bahini and