310 
APPENDIX
had a total of 24,000 troops to defend 30 miles of perimeter with
mines and obstacles and was considered poorly fortified and
thinly held; and in the second battle of El] Alamein, Rommel
defended 40 miles of area with 27,000 Germans and 50,000
Italians.
The Pakistani Western Garrison, meanwhile, was placed in a
highly favourable position, having the initiative to select the time
and place of attack. It had only to defend about 1600 miles of
border with India. Its rear was protected by the friendly Muslim
countries, Iran and Afghanistan. It had twelve divisions, plus the
swift moving Armoured Divisions, the complete air force, the
navy, the complete CAF, 3 C.-in-Cs under Supreme Commander
Gen. Yahya with scores of generals, Admirals, and Air Marshals
with ready plans. It also had the support of a loyal population
and the industrial back-up support. With half of the Indian Army
tied down in East Pakistan, Tikka’s Army Reserve could turn the
tide of the battle, depending upon his ability to launch the
devastating Armoured Divisions effectively and conduct and
control the fast-moving offensive with tactical finesse.
The success or failure of the war with India was directly
dependent on the successful offensive operations to be launched
by the Army Reserve. Any delay or inability to conduct a successful
operation by the Army Reserve would’ seal the fate of the ill-
equipped, numerically inferior Eastern Garrison and also have
an adverse impact on the operations in the Western Wing.
Under the changed scenario, Western Garrison’s role of
conducting a successful war gained greater importance. The
nucleus of the concept was in its timely and effective application,
Unfortunately, this was not to be. Yahya put in a belated, half-
hearted attack on 3 December. In only a few days he lost 5,500
square miles of territory, which is unforgivable. This attack was
late by thirteen days and gave the Indian Army time to
concentrate on the Eastern Front. On the Western Front, after
capturing 5,500 square miles of territory, the Indians as defenders
turned the military balance in their own favour. They threatened
Marala, and were positioned to cut off Reti, thereby isolating
Karachi from the rest of Pakistan. The Western Garrison despite
favourable odds floundered and was placed in a precarious
position. Due to Tikka’s mental immobility, the much-trumpeted
attack failed to materialize. The Eastern Garrison fought as a