46 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
and burning. General Tikka let loose everything at his disposal as
if raiding an enemy, not dealing with his own misguided and
misled people. The military action was a display of stark cruelty,
more merciless than the massacres at Bukhara and Baghdad by
Changez Khan and Halaku Khan, or at Jallianwala Bagh by the
British General Dyer.
General Tikka, instead of carrying out the tasks given to him,
i.e., to disarm armed Bengali units and persons and to take into
custody the Bengali leaders, resorted to the killing of civilians
and a scorched-earth policy. His orders to his troops were: ‘I
want the land and not the people.’ These orders were carried
out in letter and spirit by Major-General Farman and Brigadier
(later Lt.-Gen.) Jahanzeb Arbab in Dhaka. Major-General Rao
Farman had written in his table diary, ‘Green land of East
Pakistan will be painted red.’ It was painted red by Bengali blood.
This diary was found by the Bengalis when they occupied
Government House on 14 December 1971. Mujib showed the
diary to Bhutto during his visit to Bangladesh. Bhutto inquired
from me about this diary during my meeting with him. I told
him I had heard about it when I was in India but I had no
knowledge of it as I had nothing to do with the civil affairs of
East Pakistan.
As General Tikka deviated from his given mission, nearly all
the Bengali armed personnel and units slipped away with their.
arms, ammunition, equipment, and transport and joined the
Mukti Bahini forces, where they were soon joined by the Indian
Army officers and men. Similarly, all the leaders, except Mujib,
escaped and established the Government of Bangladesh in exile
in Calcutta.
On the night between 25/26 March 1971 Yahya sneaked out
of Dhaka before the start of military action. He told Tikka before
{leaving Dhaka, ‘Sort them out.’ Bhutto had remained behind to
see what Tikka did. Bhutto saw Dhaka burning and heard the
cries of the people, the crackle of burning material, the roar of
tanks, the boom of guns and rockets, and the rattle of machine
guns. In the morning, it is alleged, Bhutto patted Tikka, Farman,
and Arbab on the back, congratulated them for doing exactly
what was needed, and assured them that their future was secured.
Bhutto kept his promise. Tikka secured the coveted post of COAS.
Farman was made Chairman, Fauji Foundation, and Brigadier