THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
155
Kulamura but failed to capture it till 
6 December. It was captured
after extensive use of napalm bombing.
81 Indian Mouniain Brigade attacked Munshi Bazar on 5
December 1971. One Rifle company of 30 FF put up a brave
fight defending the town, suffering some twenty-two killed,
including the company commander. Meanwhile, the Indians heli-
lifted two battalions to the south-east of Sylhet town. Our 202 ad
hoc Brigade, under Brigadier Salimullah, had occupied the town.
He had converted it into a fortress with the remnants of units
falling back from the front. Our 313 Brigade, now commanded
by Brigadier Asghar Hassan, who had relieved Brig. Rana, also
pulled back to Sylhet from Maulvi Bazar where it had been sent.
Its move was not impeded by the enemy. Maj.-Gen. Krishna Rao
besieged the town with his division of six brigades. In spite of
napalm bombing and air support, he could not move forward or
make a dent in the Sylhet defences.
It was remarkable that despite battle fatigue and the prospects of an
unequal fight, 
a company each at Shamshernagar and Kualaura, with
a few paramilitary troops and very little arullery and air support, held
Krishna Rao’s brigades for days and in spite of the great odds against
them, they managed to slip away to Sylhet."
The credit for putting up such a strong resistance goes to
Brigadiers Salimullah and Asghar Hassan in their respective areas.
Their valiant efforts had nullified an entire enemy infantry
division which had been earmarked for the capture of Dhaka.
Brigadier Saadullah, Commander 27 Brigade, was defending
Bhairab Bazar sector with his brigade. Saadullah was a brave
officer, an inspiring leader who was always in the forefront of
brigade troops during attacks. He evicted the enemy from a few
places by personally joining the bayonet-charging counter-attacks,
He was recommended for a Nishan-e-Haider but was awarded Hilal
e-Jurat instead. It is unfortunate that such an excellent officer was
not promoted, He was considered a fundamentalist.
Saadullah’s brigade was deployed in Akhaura-Brahmanbaria
near Agartala. Our defences were mainly based on the Tista River.
It was flanked by many jheels (lakes). The other important town,
about five kilometres north of Akhaura, was Ganga Sagar. Both
places were held by us with a battalion each. The Indian airfield
3
: 
°1
WWW.D alocl We Drary.cOmM
e/
Cc