234 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
according to the code of conduct and professional ethics,
protection could only be given to the negotiating teams, not to
unauthorized entrants, while hostilities were continuing.
We also objected to the idea of a surrender ceremony. I
refused to have such a thing but our discussions were to no avail.
The Indians were adamant. They blackmailed us by threatening
to kill the loyal Bengalis. In fact many young men were butchered
and we were told that all the civilians would be handed over to
the Mukti Bahini. The question of the surrender ceremony
should have been decided in consultation with the civilian
authorities of the East Pakistan Government, but they had
resigned and gone to the neutral zone. Thus, since I had been
abandoned by the Central Government and deserted by the
Provincial Government intentionally, I had to take the decision.
Major-General Jacob and Brigadier Bagir Siddiqui then started
working out the details for the concentration of civilians in pre-
designated areas and other administrative problems affecting the
cease-fire, the concentration of troops in other sectors, and their
move direct to Wagah.
The most difficult task was to collect the troops, civil officers,
civilians, and their families staying in and around Dhaka. There
were Civil Aviation, PLA, Customs, and other Federal Government
employees who had to be moved to the Cantonment area. There
was confusion in the city. 
The Mukti Bahini forces were very
active and were attacking the civilians. My Chief of Staff, by his
indomitable spirit and courage, and by working day and night,
organized the evacuation of these people and assembled them in
the Cantonment area. This was all done withm three days before
our departure from Dhaka.
The plight of the Biharis and other loyal elements was heart-
rending. Their cries at being left to the vultures for ethnic
cleansing were most depressing and embarrassing. Reports of a
massacre had started pouring in. Young loyal East Pakistanis were
made to stand for target practice and were bayoneted by the
Mukti Bahini. Maulvi Farid Ahmed, a respected leader, an ex-
MNA, and a loyal Pakistani, was killed and his body, along with
many others, was dragged through the streets of Dhaka. We told
the Indians that it was a violation of the agreement, but they
were using such incidents to force our hand,