THE INVASION 
121
“There is a lot of noise of fire. It is like our fireworks at the
Horse Show at Lahore. The activity is all along the front and is
not restricted to any one particular sector.’
‘Any report of any column reported to be in a hurry and
making efforts to break through along any particular route or
sector?’ I enquired.
He replied in the negative. ‘It appears they have not found
it an easy nut to crack. Our out-posts, particularly on the main
routes, held by our regular troops, are giving them a tough
time and taking a heavy toll of the enemy. Usual Indian style,
Sir, more noise than movement—more bark than bite.’
‘It is better to have an open war than chasing sneaking
Indian raiders who, when in a tight corner, tuck their tails in
and make a quick run for their own country which we have
orders not to enter.’
Reports from other sectors confirmed that East Pakistan was
under an all-out Indian attack from all sides. The Indians used
their aircraft within about cight to ten miles of the borders, not
for deep targets like Dhaka; and their navy neither came for our
ports nor blocked our sea or air routes, It was not for fear of
international opinion because they never bothered about
international opinion: they were under the mistaken impression
that the Pakistan Eastern Garrison was spread near the borders
in a thin red line and could be crushed in a surprise attack by
sheer weight of numbers, steel, and fire using steam-roller tactics.
Again the Indian strategists and intelligence agencies had
made a mistake—the second bigger than the first. The first
mistake was in April 1971, when they had believed that I would
keep fighting around big cities and cantonments like my
predecessor Tikka, and that I was not in a position to start an
offensive with my meagre, ill-equipped, and ill-provided force
which was tied down around big cities by Mukti Bahini forces
and the Bengali dissidents; whereas I went on the offensive,
wrenched the initiative from them, and evicted the guerrillas
from the soil of East Pakistan in a lightning campaign of less
than two months. Thus we fooled the Indians a second time, this
time about our deployment. We had let it be known that due to
the nature of my mission, I had had to put everything in the
shop window and was left with nothing much in the kitty, because