120 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
attacked East Pakistan from all directions on 21 November 1971.
Before the infantry and tanks crossed the borders behind a
creeping artillery barrage, the objective areas were kept under
fire for about four hours, particularly targets along the main
penetrants. The Indians entered East Pakistan with full fury, with
great pomp and show, tanks spitting fire, guns and mortars
booming, machine-guns rattling, aircraft zooming, rocketing,
strafing, and napalming. We had nothing much to retaliate with
except our infantry, whose weapons had been getting a
hammering for many hours, and a few pieces of field artillery
which too were under enemy counter-bombardment. However,
we had well-constructed and weli-developed defences, and battle-
inoculated and war-experienced officers and soldiers. With the
intensity, weight, and duration of fire, rumbling of tanks,
groaning of thousands of moving vehicles, and the sweep of
aircraft, the battle ground thundered. This was meant to terrify
our troops and stun them before the arrival of the assaulting
Indian troops. However it failed to destroy our defences or have
any psychological effect on our war veteran soldiers, who carried
on with their normal routine in defence. The so-called blitzkrieg
and ‘planned envelopment’ failed miserably due to lack of good
generalship—they did not have generals like ours. Their
‘blitzkrieg’ petered out on the borders as soon as they contacted
our screen positions. Their multiple columns were checked and
kept well away from Dhaka and from each other.
India resorted to lies about the duration of the conflict in East
Pakistan and the start of open war. The total period of conflict
was about nine months—eight months of insurgency and border
clashes and twenty-six days of open war, not two weeks.
The Invasion
Major-General Nazar Hussain Shah, GOC 16 Division, reported
that the Indians had crossed the border in strength and a full-
fledged attack was on. I asked him how he knew it was a full-
fledged attack and not a sneak raid in division rather than brigade
strength but spread over a bigger area, as the Indians had been
doing since the last couple of months. Nazar said that he had
thought the same thing when he got the report, and so had gone
forward to check it himself.