28 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
confident. He said, ‘Inshallah, (by the grace of God), we will push
the enemy back.’ I relieved Lt.-Col. Latif of his command. He
wanted to come back but I did not give him permission to do so,
{ told him to sit in the trench and not to show himself to the
troops.
After about an hour and a half, Major Hayat rang me up. He
told me that the attack had been repulsed. The enemy had
attacked with two battalions supported by a squadron of tanks,
two of which had been knocked out. The enemy had extracted
his troops behind a smoke screen. Major Hayat asked permission
to follow them. I gave him permission to follow the enemy but
told him to be careful not to walk into a trap.
One man had made the difference. The courage and
determination of Major Hayat infused confidence 
in his officers
and men. It is true that in battle you need a man and not men. It
was a day of heroism. 4FF had excelled. Major Hayat was awarded
Sitara-e-Jurat for this action. Major Dilawar Butt, commanding the
heavy guns, had terrorized the enemy tanks. He was also awarded
Sitara-e-Jurai. Major Hasham, the field battery commander, also
gave excellent support. Although his guns were under constant
bombardment, still he remained steadfast and continued to give
artillery support. I believe he got the Imtiaz-e-Sanad. The Squadron
Commander of the tanks was the only disappointment. He and
two of his troops disappeared, although one troop stayed behind
and participated in the battle. The Squadron Commander was
court-martialled after the war.
One company of 3/14 Punjab was with me and was told to
move up and join 4FF at Zafarwal. I accompanied them. The
officers and the jawans were in high spirits. After having a cup of
tea with them, I left for my Brigade Headquarters. Lt.-Col. Latif
was told to report to Divisional Headquarters, from where he was
despatched to his Regimental Centre.
The battle became static. The front stabilized. The Indian
Army was beaten to a standstill. Brigadier Effendi, the Number
Two to General Abrar, was replaced by Brigadier Riaz-ul-Karim,
MC. The division was now a well-knit, cohesive team. This was all
due to General Abrar’s efficiency, personal touch, and
charismatic personality.
I suggested to General Abrar that we attack the Indians to
recover the area lost; the Indians had suffered heavy casualties,