230 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
united Pakistan. They wanted to eliminate any chance of
Bangladesh and Pakistan getting together as one country, because
as long as Pakistan did not recognize it, any future government
or people of Bangladesh could force the issue of reunification.
Bhutto conspired to recognize Bangladesh without even waiting
for the return of the POWs. In the UN Security Council, China
exercised its veto. The people of Pakistan were against recog-
nition. Therefore, Bhutto manoeuvred to convene a meeting of
the Islamic Summit, which Mujib could attend provided Pakistan
recognized Bangladesh. Under pressure from the Muslim heads
of state, Bangladesh was recognized, and Mujib arrived to
participate in the meeting.
Bhutto did not want his POWs to come back. If he had wanted
them they could have come much earlier. Bhutto held four ttump
cards. One was Sheikh Mujib—the POWs could have been
exchanged for him, but he was let go unconditionally. Another
was the two lakh Bengalis in West Pakistan, including Generals,
doctors, engineers, women, and children, who could have been
exchanged but were let go unconditionally. A third trump was
the Indian POWs, and the fourth was the Ferozpur Headworks—
by closing the headworks the whole of Ferozpur and its suburbs
could be inundated and vast areas of irrigated land rendered
barren. Our POWs and vast areas occupied by the Indians could
have been exchanged for these headworks, but Bhutto returned
them unconditionally.
At Simla Bhutto had arranged with Mrs Gandhi for the
Pakistani POWs do be kept in India for a long time. The Chinese,
however, threatened to veto the admission of Bangladesh to the
UN if we were not returned, so the Indians sent us home. We
were not brought back by Bhutto; we were sent back thanks to a
kind gesture on the part of the Chincse.
In this context, it is also instructive to note that Bhutto set Mujib,
who was a prisoner in West Pakistan, at large, without demanding a
quid pro quo from the Indians. Mujib’s presence in Dhaka was
imperative for the configuration of the new State and the Indians
needed him so badly that had Bhutto in return insisted on the
repatriation of the Pakistani soldiers, he could have secure: ‘: and
95,000 of them would not have suffered the humiliation of remaming
- 
prisoners for such an inordinate length of time. papa 
om ‘Bhi ithe
was kern that Mujib should go unconditionally a1. cs expect sty