DHAKA BOWL. MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
199
~ 
Western Garrison, which had five strike formations as opposed
to the Indians’ three, had the initiative and should have been
able to achieve the desired results by offensive-oriented
operations. They should have forced the Indians to abandon
‘their support to the Bengalis and to come to terms in order to
get those areas captured by us in the west vacated. This would
have kept Pakistan united.
I kept my part of the bargain. I tied down twelve infantry
Divisions of the Indian Army, thirty-nine BSF battalions, many
squadrons of tanks, seventeen squadrons of aircraft, and the bulk
of the navy, and ensured that a favourable troop ratio existed in
the western theatre. But regrettably, Western Garrison did not
do their job. If we study the Dhaka Bowl, we find that it only
encompasses a small portion of Dhaka civil division, whereas the
bulk of the Dhaka division and the other three civil divisions—
Chittagong, Khulna, and Rajshahi—are outside the cauldron.
Could I have left out cities like Chittagong (seaport) and
Divisional HQ, the Chittagong Hill Tracts, Chalna (seaport),
Khulna (seaport) and Divisional HQ, Jessore, Faridpur, Rajshahi
(Divisional HQ), Hill, Saidpur, Nator, Pabna, Bera, Rangpur,
Bogra, Sylhet, Mymensingh, Comilla, Brahmanbaria, Barisal,
Chandpur, Teknaf, and Noakhali? Except for Dhaka city and its
periphery, the rest of East Pakistan was outside the Bowl.
Withdrawal would have meant vacating more than three fourths
of East Pakistan without fighting or firing a single shot. The war
would have been lost before battle began. Similarly in the western
sector, we could not have left border towns and cities like Marala
(headworks), Sialkot, Pasroor, Narowal, Zafarwal, Shakargarh,
Wagah (headworks), Bedian (headworks), Kasur, Bahawalnagar,
Reti, Dharki, Umerkot, Mirpur Khas, Chhor, and Badin, and
withdrawn behind the rivers. If we could not do that in the west,
why should we have done it in the east? Why the two yardsticks
for the same country and the same army?
Besides jeopardizing the complete war plans, withdrawal
without orders was both disastrous and a court martial offence.
By withdrawing to the Dhaka Bowl, I would have contracted my
defence to a very small area—equal to the area my troops
occupied to defend Dhaka city—by vacating three fourths of East
Pakistan. It should also be kept in view that under the prevailing
battle situation I would have had to leave the bulk of my heavy