EARLY YEARS 
i
the job of Training Officer for Meena Camp, but I opted to join
the battalion rather than accept the offer of staying in the Camp
as Incharge Training as a Captain,
I was appointed the Intelligence Officer of the 4/7 Rajput
Regiment. Our battalion was part of 161 Brigade commanded by
Brigadier Hughes. Major-General Briggs was the General Officer
Commanding the 5th Indian Division. I gained much experience
under actual battlefield environments which later proved very
useful in confrontations with the enemy in India, Burma, Malaya,
Singapore, and Indonesia. The 5th Indian Division was soon
moved to Iraq and became part of the Persia Iraq Force. In Iraq
troops were being collected and trained to stem the German
onslaught into Iran and Iraq through the Caucasus.
On our return from the Middle East we went to Fatehgarh;:
our training centre. From Fatehgarh we left for Chas, a sntall
town near Ranchi in Bihar, where our division was concentrated
for jungle training prior to its move to Burma. From the training
area, 161 Brigade moved to the Teknaf Peninsula in Bengal, very
near to the Burma border. At Nihla, where our battalion was
located, we started intensive jungle warfare training. Our Brigade
was first given the task of capturing Razalil fortress in Arakan,
Burma, which it accomplished. Though we suffered heavy
casualties, we found out the difference between desert and jungle
warfare.
Bauthi-Daung Tunnels
Our next assignment was in Bauthi-Daung, a small town in
Arakan. The town was surrounded by low hills and thick jungle.
During the monsoons, railway communications assumed greater
Significance, as landslides normally blocked the roads. To
negotiate the hilly terrain, there were two railway tunnels, about
‘a hundred yards from each other and approximately one
thousand yards from the town. The tunnels, if destroyed or held
by the enemy, could contain our advance towards Bauthi-Daung
or onwards. To ensure logistical support to the advancing troops,
it was vital to control the tunnels. 161 Brigade was entrusted the
task of capturing the tunnels. Brigadier Warren formed a guerilla
company by pooling the guerilla platoons of 4/7 Rajputs, 1/1
yt 
a 
| 
- 
@ 1
rwy 
i. o) 
I~ 
fr°ne 
, i a te ay @ 
ee ed 
Os 
I°Xfryrwn
A/ 
| 
Fraeutelaan 
B) 
ai 
\
eLVMVUOAArVrJYJARYY BBR RCLVJTA OAR 
YY
>. 
Ve” 
LF AA A