EVENTS LEADING TO SECESSION 
39
West Pakistan. I was told by Fazal Qader Chaudhry, Maulvi Farid
Ahmed, and a few other leaders who were pro-Pakistami, that had
the MLA done his job with dedication and honesty of purpose
and not given a free hand to the AL to rig the elections, the
other parties would have won at least sixty to sixty-five seats in
the cities, thus constraining Mujib’s activities. The pre-election
report prepared by various agencies was negated by the results.
According to their assessment, no party would achieve an absolute
majority, thereby placing the Yahya government in a strong
position to play the role of godfather.
The situation after the elections became pregnant with
dangerous overtones. As no party had a majority in both wings,
the struggle for power between Yahya, Bhutto, and Mujib
intensified. Powerful impulses took over. Overbearing attitudes
and inability to adjust their roles within the frame-work of the
emerging political scenario gave new colour to the already
complicated situation. The leaders on’ both sides of the divide
adopted a confrontation course. The will to compromise and act
in conformity with the norms of political ethics was missing.
Bhutto was not willing to sit on the Opposition benches. He
suggested separate Constitutions for East and West Pakistan. He
started behaving like a leader whose party had won the majority
and was about to form the government. On the other hand Mujib,
after his victory in the elections, was even more confident. He
hardened his stand on the six-points issue. Bhutto in return failed
to acknowledge Mujib’s victory. He declared that Punjab and
Sindh were the bastion of power in Pakistan, therefore complete
co-operation of his party was vital for the formation of the
Constitution and in forming the Central Government.
Thus the national cart was pulled in opposite directions. Mujib
was defiant, Bhutto power-hungry. Yahya tried to appease Mujib
by acclaiming him the future Prime Minister. Mujib was not
swayed by empty words. He was not ready to accommodate Yahya,
who was aspiring to stay on as President of Pakistan. Disillusioned,
Yahya flew into the waiting arms of Bhutto. He along with his
coterie went to Larkana for a duck shoot, where the Larkana
conspiracy was planned. 
i
In the meantime India, which had been continuously assisting
Mujib, concentrated its Army on the borders to exert pressure
on West Pakistan. It was also a clear signal to Mujib to revolt