eee
XXVIil 
INTRODUCTION
accounts are written from a safe angle for various reasons, mostly
for personal gain. The writers have conveniently avoided
mentioning the names and misdeeds of the people who mattered
most.
Some books were written by military men as well. Crisis in
Leadership was written by Major-General (Retired) Fazal Mugeem,
who was commissioned by Mr Bhutto and General Tikka to write
the book (they had initially approached Major-General Sarfraz
but he refused). In this book facts have been deliberately
distorted. Fazal Muqeem described the battles fought in East
Pakistan while sitting in General Headquarters, Rawalpindi,
without seeing the area of conflict where the battles took place
and without talking to the people who fought those battles. He
based his conclusions on books written by Indian authors and on
statements made largely by people who had been sent back from
East Pakistan on disciplinary grounds. Major-General (Retired)
Fazal Muqeem was given a staff officer and an office in GHQ,
and it is alleged that he was provided some funds as well. He was
given access to secret and top secret material to which he had no
entitlement, whereas I was denied the material when I was writing
my report on my return. His book was given wide publicity
through the official media, and Army units were told to buy it. In
the absence of any official contradiction, the book was taken as
GHQ's version of the war. The book was approved by General
Tikka Khan to please his mentor Mr Bhutto, and in return
/ Mugeem was given the prized job of Defence Secretary.
, 
Witness to Surrender was written by the late Brigadier Siddique
Salik. He was my Public Relations Officer (PRO), as a Major. He
‘used to 
accompany me on my visits to formations and units, He
was a reporter by profession, and had neither basic training in
military matters nor any experience in warfare, and had no
understanding of military operations. Military matters of that
magnitude were entirely beyond his comprehension. 
|
Salik had written a book in Urdu, Haman Yaran Dozakh,
immediately after his return from India as a POW. The contrast
between the two books sheds light on his propensity to change
and invent events to please 
5se masters. Salik wrote against 
me,
lynch him. His “book Witness to Surrender is a pack of lies. Like
Fazal Muqeem, he too wrote the book on the instructions of