OPERATIONAL PLAN 
83
There were quite a few courses open to me for carrying out
the allotted tasks effectively, even with meager resources and a
small, ill-equipped, tired force, but political considerations tied
me down to a few obvious courses which the enemy could guess
without much difficulty. So to hide my deficiencies, weakness,
and courses of action, I had to resort to improvisation, deception,
trickery, and bluff. By subtle strategical cunning and tactical skill,
I succeeded in foxing the enemy about my strength and
deployment. The best course for me would have been to follow
closely on the heels of the beaten, retreating Mukti Bahini into
India and not to allow them to reassemble, re-group, and
reorganize, but my hands were tied by the political mission of
not losing any chunk of territory and remaining inside Pakistan.
Not following the beaten enemy into Indian territory was a grave
tactical mistake for which we paid a heavy price at a later stage.
A government which has formulated a war policy and given a
mission to an army commander has to adapt to conditions, which
often change as the war progresses. The High Command is only
required to give clearly the nature of the tasks and then not
interfere with how the commander uses his tools to achieve them,
In this case the High Command intentionally put me at the mercy
of the Indian Army. Having given them the initiative, I had to
react to their actions; I had to wait for the Indian Army and the
Mukti Bahini to start the bidding. I had to do lots of guessing
and had to remain alert and prepared for various contingencies
and eventualities, which is annoying, tedious, and distracting
during operations.
The Concept of Defence
The concept of defence was based on having different layers
which would augment each other. The concept envisaged
imposing maximum attrition on the enemy to dissipate and
weaken his forces to make him lose cohesion before he attacked
the main force and made deep thrusts in the area. A forward
defensive posture based on strong points and fortresses, which
were to be stocked, was decided upon. A detailed explanation of
this concept is attached at Appendix 7.