DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
175
had conscientious objections when his self-interest was involved.
Later Bhutto, in spite of his utter failure in East Pakistan, his
failure to launch the Reserve Army’s offensive, and his poor
performance in the West during both the national wars, made
him COAS of the Pakistan Army. Had I not refused Farman
permission to board the helicopters on 15 December, he would
have got a very rich reward. In the event, he got it on return,
when he was made Director-General, Military Training, for which
he had neither the training nor the experience. He was later
made Chief of the Fauji Foundation, when most of the other
officers who had fought heroically and faced danger were
unceremoniously retired. Farman was also made a Minister. I
later came to know that thorough planning had been carried
out. Bhutto was to look after the political side as Foreign Minister
and not let national opinion or international actions, particularly
in the Foreign Office or the UNO, hamper the break-up of
Pakistan. Lt.-Gen. Gul Hassan was to ensure that no military
support was provided to fighting formations, particularly Eastern
Garrison. Air Marshal Rahim was not to lend support to land or
sea battles. I also believe Gul Hassan had won over Maj.-Gen.
Qazi of my 14 Division who started working on his behalf,
particularly during the last stages of the war, forcing me to rehash
my operational plans. Farman was to create panic in Government
House and sabotage the war effort, which he did very cleverly
and successfully.
Farman has tried to depict himself as the key man of East
Pakistan, around whom the civil administration and military
affairs revolved. As a matter of fact he had nothing to do with
military matters and military operations. He quotes my signals in
his book, but very conveniently omits the signals drafted by him
for Governor Malik and sent to the President to create
unnecessary alarm in the West. He created such panic by painting
a gloomy picture about the war in East Pakistan and about the
danger to the President’s personal safety that Yahva had an excuse
for not coming to see his people and troops during the entire
nine months of hostilities.
As mentioned earlier, on 7 December I conveyed my tactical
concept to GHQ, which was approved vide their signal dated 8
December. Also on 7 December, a signal was sent to the President
by the Governor without my knowledge. It read as under:
nlibrary.com
a YCl
WWW.DaLO