TOPOGRAPHY AND TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
65
Confronted by insurgents from across the borders and from within,
the Pakistan Army came under great stress. With the strength of
42.000 regular troops it had to contend with a rebellion spread over
the whole of East Pakistan. Though it was able to maintain hold over
most of the province, the prolonged counter-insurgency operations
left their mark. Casualties were heavy; 237 officers, 136 junior
commissioned officers, 3,559 other ranks.
When General Hamid paid us a visit in June 1971, I submitted
to him that we had achieved a great moral, political, and tactical
victory under most unfavourable conditions and that too in a
very short time. Our spirits were high and that of the Bengalis
low. They were on the run, the Indians were in a spin, and the
Russians were wonderstruck. My troops had had their battle
inoculation, while the Indians still had to go through their
teething troubles. I argued that«we should strike while the ir6n
was hot: follow the rebels into their Indian sanctuary and render
them ineffective as a fighting force, thereby deterring the Indians
from helping them further. If we did that, millions of Indian
civilians would head for places of safety, cluttering up the
communication system, congesting public places, and creating
numerous problems for the Indian civil administration, while
also impeding any forward move by the Indian forces. Up to now
we had been fighting on our own territory and had been suffering
physically and materially, but if the Indian Government were to
see its own people suffering and its property destroyed, it would
have to put the brakes on its aggressive attitude. Furthermore, all
organized resistance by the Mukti Bahini had been crushed, they
were demoralized and in complete disarray, and most had gone
to India where they were more or less in hiding.
At that moment the Indian Army was not prepared to face a
sudden onslaught from an unexpected direction. By the time
they were organized and in a position to face my advance, I
would have done a lot of damage by destroying guerrilla camps,
driving guerrillas deep into India, and pushing back the Indian
Border Security forces deployed near the borders. By the time
the Indians had collected enough strength to start a counter-
offensive, the monsoons would be at their peak and the Indians
would be unable to use their heavy weapons and air force to oust
us from our positions, and in the meantime our Western Garrison
> 
an 
rf
{| 
{
NV 
VUaALOCHIIDI dl 
|
y 
"Ose | CLJehiiiiodi Cail