30 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
I will narrate a small incident to support my contention. After
the cease-fire [ went to meet my friend Brigadier Mahmood, one
of the Brigade Commanders under Tikka. He was sitting in a
tent. He told me to go away. I asked him why. He told me that
some visitors were coming. ‘As our division has fought no battle I
will take them to 6 Armoured Division area and show them the
battlefield. In your presence I will be embarrassed as it was the
brigades of your division which fought the battles, while we stayed
at Sialkot.’
Citation for Hilal-e-Jurat
In the recent war with India Brig. A.A.K. Niazi was in command of a
Force. In the face of heavy enemy attacks, which were supported by
armour, he organized the defence of his Bde. and held his area in a
most critical situation. It was due to his exceptional courage and
persistent determination that repeated heavy attacks were repulsed,
On another occasion he took over defence of an area which was
under heavy enemy pressure. With complete disregard to his own
safety and by skilful handling he not only enabled the fmn to repulse
heavy enemy attacks by also snatched initiative from the enemy and
forced him to retreat from the area.
For his outstanding courage, gallantry and skilful handling of his
fmn he has been awarded Hilat-e-Jurat.
After the action in the Rann of Kutch, where Tikka’s role was
nothing spectacular, he was entrusted with the command of 15
Division which was located at Sialkot. Out of the brigades under
his command, 24 Brigade was placed under 6 Armoured Division,
commanded by General Abrar, and 115 Brigade was deployed in
area Narowal. The third brigade was deployed around Sialkot.
The Divisional HQ was in Sialkot city.
General Tikka normally briefed newsmen and visitors. He
distributed the gifts sent by people to the troops. He also
explained the battle situation and battles being fought by the
brigades of 6 Armoured Division. Thus was conjured a false image
of Tikka. A misconception took root. Abrar, the hero, was pushed
into oblivion, unsung. As the historical misconception continued, 
»
Tikka basked in the glory of unfought battles. His role in the
1965 War was uninspiring. He was never the hero he was made
] 
lac) LH
VV VV VV. LU 
< A I WULLT IULAIL
P