EARLY YEARS 
*
Admiral Karamat Rahman Niazi, as Commander of the
submarine Ghazi during the 1965 War, proved his mettle against
the Indians. For his superb performance, he was awarded S]
( Sitara-eJurat). Captain Mehboob Khan Niazi won the first ever
SJ] awarded to any Pakistani Officer during the Kashmir operation.
Captain Hidayat Ullah Khan Niazi (later Major-General) and
Major Abdul Rab Niazi (later Lieutenant-Colonel) were awarded
SJs for their feats of bravery in the 1965 War. NK Abdul Sattar
Khan Niazi of the Rangers was given a military burial by the
Indians for his courage and bravery in East Pakistan. Deputy
Superintendent of Police [kram Ullah Khan Niazi was awarded
the Police Medal for showing extraordinary courage against
dacoits. As a mark of his heroic deeds a chowk near Ravi Bridge
(Lahore) has been named after him.
In sports also, Niazis have had their share of fame. Tariq and
Qayyum Niazi excelled in hockey, representing Pakistan in many
international matches. The legendary Imran Khan Niazi has no
peer in cricket. My son, Major Aman Ullah Khan Niazi, was the
top sprinter in Pakistan, and my younger son, Habib Ullah Niazi,
won a trophy in a car rally from Tehran to Dhaka.
During my days, village life was simple. The eldest male was
the head of the family, in whom was vested the power to take
decisions. At night the elders gathered in hujras gossiping over
hookahs or a pinch of naswar. Kabbadi was a popular sport.
Matches were held between villages and witnessed by young and
old alike. Hunting of quail, partridge, and rabbit was popular.
Pig-hunting with spears was 
a common sport. A catapult was the
personal weapon of the very young, either carried in the hand or
hung around the neck.
There was only one primary school in the village. The middle
and high schools were in Mianwali, about two miles from my
panes Neither the children nor the parents took an interest in
‘schooling, but every child went to the village mosque for prayers
and recital of the Holy Koran. In the village, matriculation was
considered the top rung of the ladder, as there was no college in
Mianwali District. After matric, I joined the Army as a ‘Y’ Cadet.
In the beginning the Indian Army was officered by the British.
Indians could only rise to the rank of Subedar-Major, Subedar or
Jamadar, called VCOs (Viceroy’s Commissioned Officers). After
World War I, the British Raj decided to give commissions to
W W W. b; aloc Tt Alibi 
1 ra Vv CO] mM )
eo