THE INVASION 
131
the bridges, ferries, ferry sites, dumps, railway yards, rolling stock,
and oil storage tanks were destroyed or damaged and our
positions and moves were constantly under air attack. Anything
useful to us not destroyed by Indian aircraft was destroyed by the
Bengalis. The Russians used poison gas against my troops in
Mymensingh sector.
In a nutshell, though I was already cut off and surrounded,
now I was completely isolated and had lost my freedom of
movement even inside East Pakistan to a great extent. Any move
forward during the day meant some human lives extinguished, a
boat sunk, a vehicle destroyed. 
|
The War Spreads to West Pakistan
ra
The war in West Pakistan was started despite our firm recom-
mendation that it should not be started there between October
and March, and despite our appreciation that India would not
start a war against West Pakistan when she could conduct a
limited war against us in support of the Mukti Bahini. We had
warned GHOQ that an all-out war with India would be the most
dangerous contingency. Our appreciation was proved to be
correct by the nature of the conflict between 21 November and
3 December 1971. During this period the enemy gained very
little, and sizeable attrition had been inflicted on the Indian
Army, as was known to GHQ from our intercepts of enemy
communications. Moreover, by 
1 December the fury of the battle
had subsided, the Indian troops were spent and had gone on the
defensive. The Indian Army was held up all along the front.
On 3 December 1971 I received a signal from the COS Army
advising me that, since India was likely to launch an offensive
against East Pakistan, I should deploy my forces with que regard
to the existing operational situation and, while trying to occupy
new positions, I should take into consideration areas of tactical,
political, and strategic importance. This signal was followed by
another on the same day stating that India had attacked in
Kashmir and various other places in West Pakistan. I had already
issued orders on the occupation of positions as per the plan at
the outbreak of war on 21 November 1971, followed up by
personal visits to formations. The contents of the COS Army
WWW .UdlLOUIUTOI aly COMTI)
e/
Cc