302 
APPENDIX
and live under a shelter in gross disrepair and without private
transport? Must the general and his family be punished and
condemned collectively for:
a. 
Accepting the command of East Pakistan when the
shining stars of the army would not touch it with a
bargepole and where two generals had already failed.
b. 
Keeping the Pakistan flag flying for eleven months in
East Pakistan against all odds while those responsible for
the crackdown and bunglings were conveniently shifted
to West Pakistan.
c. 
Not abandoning the command after surrender in order
to provide leadership to the troops and thousands of
West Pakistanis and millions of Biharis who would have
been murdered in cold blood and lakhs of women raped
and sold to brothels.
d. 
Suffering the humiliation of signing the surrender
documents and remaining in POW camp when I could
have escaped without any difficulty.
e. 
Being the highest decorated officer.
f. 
Being denied the Law of Equity which forms an
important pillar of justice and Islam.
g. 
<A political disaster which emerged after years of
fermentation and ultimately exploded in a military
debacle. (Niazi a coward and scapegoat).
17. What could be a better projection of a soldier than the battle-
field performance report in the form of Annual Manuscript
Report by hts C.-in-C, under whom he fought a war. [See,
Appendix 2.]
18. Mr President, my petition is not nourished with malice
towards anyone. Names came up only in order to highlight the
injustice done to me. I seek justice at the hands of the elected
President of the Democratic Islamic Republic of Pakistan, justice
denied to me for over two decades, which is the restoration of
my pension as Lt.-Gen. with retrospect. By retiring me as a
[1.Gen. (the rank which I held for four years) and giving me
pension with retrospect, the era of victimization will finally come
to a close, and justice will eclipse the period of deprivation, for
which I would be very grateful.
19. What better support can be given to me when the troops
under my command fought valiantly against heavy odds. It was
only possible by excellent leadership provided by the command
at all levels. Some examples:
www.balochlibrary.com