206 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
We had made liberal use of booby traps, punji pits, and ditches.
Some areas in front and around the positions were inundated,
and arrangements were made to inundate further areas if and
when required. This was a good deterrent to infantry, vehicles,
and tanks. Positions were properly camouflaged, and for decep-
tion, dummy tanks, vehicles, and gun positions were also
prepared.
Bulldozers, tractors, trucks, trolleys, wagons, jeeps, and boats
were collected and converted into mobile strong points by
packing them with sand bags. These were to be used to plug any
holes in the defences, to reinforce any area required, to move
troops for counter-attack and counter-penetration, for spoiling
attacks, as reinforcement for supplies, and for the evacuation of
casualties. We had also no dearth of ammunition and rations,
nor of small arms. We had a weak squadron 
of tanks deployed in
area Tungi-Demra. We had enough three-inch mortars, a fair
quantity of 106 recoilless rifles and six pounder guns, and plenty
of short-range anti-tank weapons. We had one AA regiment as
well.
I had plenty of senior NCOs, JCOs, and officers, so my
command structure was very good. For instance, sections were
being commanded by JCOs, platoons by captains with lieutenants
as 2/1Cs, and so on. In addition to myself there were three
Major-Generals, one Admiral, one Air Commodore, and many
Brigadiers to command the troops and sectors. On the whole,
my defences of Dhaka, if not impregnable, were a hard nut to
crack and fulfilled nearly all the requirements of an ideal
defensive position.
Dhaka defence was re-organized in four echelons as under:
Outer defence:
(1) 
Bera-Pabna line by 16 Division.
(2) 
Madhumati River Line by 9 Division.
(3) 
Old Brahmaputra line by 93 Brigade.
(4) 
Ashuganj-Daudkundi-Chandpur line by 14/39 Divisions.
Dhaka Triangle on Mirzapur-Jaydebpur-Narsingdi and_
Manikganj line.

DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE [INDIAN PLAN 
207
Outer defence of Dhaka city—Sawar, Mirpur, Tangi Derma-
Narayanganj line.
Cantonment and city built-up area.
The following troops were available for the defence of Dhaka
during the second week of December:
Ad hoc squadron of tanks 
, 
50
Artillery (6 LAA Regiment, all guns intact
with plenty of ammunition, HQ Artillery,
reinforcement, etc.) 
| 
700
Engineers (rear parties of various units,
HO Engineers as one battalion) 
500
Signals (3 battalion and various static units
as 3 battalions) 
2000
Infantry (31 Baluch, 33 Punjab, ex-93(A) Bde,
Commando Battalion less two Coys
and reinforcements) 
4500
Troops for Magura Sector 
900
Services (ordnance and supply
installation workshops) 
1000
Navy (marines) 
500
Air Commandos (PAF) 
500
EPCAF 
4500
Mujahids 
1500
Razakars 
700
West Pakistan Police 
2500
Industrial Security Force 
| 
1500
HQ Eastern Comd. and HQ 36 Division 
9000
30,350
Dhaka sector was under Major-General Jamshed, a brave
General who had earned two Military Crosses and a Sitara-e-furat.
Each axis was looked after by a Brigadier, sub-units commanded
by Lieutenant-Colonels and platoons by Majors and Captains.
On the night of 13/14 December, before the enemy could
contact Dhaka, the surrender orders were received. The enemy’s
first elements contacted us at noon on the 16th, when the
surrender details were being finalized. The enemy would have
taken another fifteen days to build up—this was confirmed by
4 
4 
S| 
wy 
@-
h D 
| NrRKH 
~ 
@ \ Port) a ( > 7 Aas
a 
q 
pa 
| 
| 
) | 
"45 
| 
| 
| D | 
g|
LJ CARN 
SAAR EU 
SES OU 5 
| 
Y 
eowVJASs
ye 
]
EWwrvunxy)
ee 
‘A; 
»
y 
v 
v 
4

208 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
the Indians. If the surrender order had net been received, I
could have held on to Dhaka for a long time.
The Indians were so widely spread, so badly involved, that
they were not in a position to thin out from anywhere. Bhairab
Bridge being in our hands, they could not bring up their tanks
and artillery. The strength near Dhaka was about four and a 
half
brigades without tanks and artillery, so they had no hope of
tackling Dhaka. If the war had continued they would have been
badly mauled by us.
The Indian Plan and its Execution
The Indian military plans were based not on a proper appre-
ciation but on preconceived ideas. Their plan suffered from
numerous inadequacies and flaws, failing to take into account
the terrain, the communication system, and the fighting capability
of the Pakistani soldiers. Having the full support of the local
population and access to local resources, complete up-to-date
information about us, conducive circumstances, and a
preponderance in everything, they over-assessed their fighting
abilities and their chances of gaining a quick victory.
Their political and diplomatic planning, however, was much
better than their military planning and its execution. Mrs Gandhi
succeeded in isolating Pakistan, both politically and diplo-
matically. In fact, it was the political impetus which carried the
lame military planners along. She exploited the refugee problem
effectively, signed a security pact with Russia, and was later
successful in bringing Russia openly into the war on the Indian
side after 
3 December, when Yahya erred and attacked India in
the west. The Russians used special surveillance aircraft,
sophisticated weapons, and poison gas.
India’s political aim was to prove that the two-nation theory
was wrong by establishing Bangladesh. The Indians conducted
their operation for establishing Bangladesh in three phases:
1) insurgency
2) war by proxy
3) open war
Insurgency

13. 
INDIAN PLAN
A SS AM
COMMUNICATION ZONE ( ACTINGAS )
(DIV.HQ)
MEGHALAYA
XXX
WeEsST
BENGAL a
4
CALCUTTA 
(
Oo 
:
www.balochlibrary.com

DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
209
The Indians supported 
the rebellion of the East Bengal Regiment
battalions and EPCAF with a view to dispersing and tiring out
our troops. Initially they did succeed in fomenting insurgency,
but it was short-lived. Their conduct of operations was faulty
because of voids in their plan. They had ignored our capabilities,
determination, and preparations. When I took over I ordered
the elimination of rebels and guerrillas by a speedy surprise
action and multiple thrusts. The East Pakistan borders were
restored within two months, the insurgents fled to India, and we
had near normalcy by May 1971.
War by Proxy
Having failed in their insurgency operations, they planned to
capture a chunk of territory to establish Bangladesh by launching
irregular guerrilla operations supported from across the border.
One of their generals remarked that if each guerrilla killed one
soldier, the Pakistan army would be destroyed. The Indian troops
and the Mukti Bahini forces, disguised as civilians, carried out
many acts of sabotage, destroyed road and rail communications,
and supported the rebels by fire and formation-size raids all along
the 2500-mile frontier. A brigade action which was launched at
Belonia was repulsed. Their attack again was haphazard,
disorganized, and lacked co-ordination. Had they planned in
detail, and co-ordinated their actions, we would have suffered
heavy casualties. In fact their proxy war petered out by November.
Open War
Their military plan had integrated the army, navy, and air force.
The latter two had nothing to fight against because we had no
navy and our one weak and old squadron of F-86 aircraft had
been grounded.
It was primarily the army’s battle, with close support from the
air force. Except for the destruction of ferries, small bridges, and
boats, the latter was used mainly in a ground-support role.
The Indians had a strength of twelve divisions. Their deploy-
ment by early November clearly betrayed their offensive
intentions. There was no surprise—a factor essential in war. Their

210 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
plan envisaged an encircling movement on exterior lines by
advancing on all penetrants, thus allowing us the advantage of
interior lines. In doing that they violated one of the principles of
war: they did not cater for the limitations of only one major road
and one railway from north to south and east to west, with-no
laterals and no capability of switching forces from one sector to
another, or from one sub-sector to another. They also apparently
ignored the topography, which suited the attackers in two major
sectors—because all the rivers flowed from India into East
Pakistan, they could have gone deep into our area without
crossing any obstacle. They did not even use the northern
obstacle-free approach as a main effort. Concentration of effort,
which creates local superiority, a war-winning factor, was ignored.
Maintenance of the aim is one of the principles of war, and
terrain is one of the vital factors. The Indians had the advantage
of local support. Mukti Bahini forces provided them information
about the terrain and the lay-out of our defences right down to
the location of our bunkers. In fact, Indian officers, in the guise
of civilians, were taken round the areas and shown our defensive
positions. It is rather surprising that, in spite of all the intelligence
available to them, they blundered into a conventional offensive,
showing complete disregard for the terrain, natural obstacles,
restricted manoeuvrability, and possible areas of breakout or by-
passing of our positions. Our fighting capabilities should have
been taken into account. They had been thwarted in the 1965
war in spite of the fact that they struck first, and at points of their
choosing. We succeeded in stopping them at BRB and Chowinda
and never allowed them to capture their objectives of Lahore
and Stalkot. Also, they had been fighting against us during the
insurgency and knew our capabilities. We did not allow their
support to insurgents to succeed in East Pakistan, and then we
repulsed their attacks against the borders. They assumed that my
troops were tired and would not put up much resistance, and
that they would get a walkover thanks to the weight of numbers
and steel. But instead they were badly mauled, and the heroic
resistance put up by my formations shattered their offensives. I
attribute their failure to lack of good planning, poor conduct of
operations, rigidity, and lack of initiative. Lack of concentrated
and co-ordinated effort, and not using armour boldly and
offensively, added to their weakness in carrying out mobile

DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
211
manoeuvres. I exploited their poor leadership, weak planning,
over-cautious approach, and always doing the obvious: my
formation commanders re-adjusted positions and repulsed their
offensive everywhere.
Their extreme caution and failure to advance at speed to
outflank or bypass us shows that they fought according to set
patterns given in war manuals. Their plan was obvious to us.
Arora did not have the gambler’s touch, nor did he urge his
formations to push forward at speed. He did not take even
calculated risks, so it was not difficult for us to nullify all his
disjointed and ill-co-ordinated efforts, which lacked force and
vigour. He failed to use his mobility and fire-power intelligently.
So, in spite of all our handicaps, we succeeded in tying down all
their forward moves by good planning, bluff, unorthodox
methods, good deception, and above all by the determination’ of
my troops in all sectors.
Plans generally require a change or review after first contact.
Every commander makes alternative plans in case of failure of
the original plan. We had a holding role, and our withdrawal
from the borders to the next holding or defensive position was
carried out with excellent results and we did not suffer any
setback. We were successful in delaying or containing the Indians
at every intermediate position. The Indians had no alternative
plan to meet the developing situation. They followed a set course
and mostly kept banging their heads against our positions instead
of bypassing them. In fact they were reacting to our moves instead
of seizing the initiative and exploiting any opportunity which the
battle presented to them. 
|
Instead of aiming at the destruction of our forces, they laid
emphasis on capturing territory. They failed miserably in this,
We ourselves vacated Jessore and Mymensingh; the Indians failed
to capture any other city. We succeeded in pinning down their
forces in each sector. In fact, when the time for an attack against
Dhaka came, they were left with only four weak brigades. All the
rest were fighting isolated battles against us and our well-stocked
and well-prepared fortresses, and were having a tough time with
heavy casualties. Arora could not move his troops from these
sectors to concentrate against Dhaka, his ultimate objective. As a
matter of fact, Dhaka was so strongly held at this stage that it was
impregnable, and the Indians would have needed all their

212 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
available troops to make an impression on it. Bhairab Bazar and
Narayanganj Fortresses could not be ignored when attacking
Dhaka.
Dhaka was the lynchpin, and maximum efforts should have
been directed at capturing it. But their plan was more to capture
cities, dissipating a Division to occupy them, rather than
concentrating maximum effort where the decision was to be
achieved, which was Dhaka, The Indian C.-in-C. was right when
he remarked that General Arora was no Rommel, because
Rommel or any other good general would have identified the
Schwerpunkt, the ‘point of main effort’, where the decision was to
be obtained.
The Indians raised a corps (II) of two divisions plus under
General Raina for the capture of Dhaka and this was located
opposite Jessore. 33 Corps in the north-west under General
Thapan was to capture Rangpur-Bogra-Rajshahi area. 4 Corps
under General Sagat Singh was to capture area Sylhet, Comilla,
the Mainamati and Chandpur. K (Kilo) Force was to capture the
Chittagong Hill Tracts and pose a threat to Chittagong, and 10]
Comm. Zone of two brigades plus a Mukti brigade was to capture
Mymensingh, Tangail, and Dhaka. General Arora divided his
mighty force into four parts, gave each a civil division of East
Pakistan as its area of responsibility, and that was the end of his
responsibility. He became a spectator in the battle. We did not
find any reserve unit or formation being launched anywhere to
influence the battle or to accelerate their advance on Dhaka.
Major-General Lachman Singh, Commander 20 Indian
Division, said that D-day was to be advanced to 21 November
because of Eid. The Indians therefore attacked from all directions
on 21 November. We were ready and fully prepared to receive
them. Except for the loss of our three aircraft in Jessore sector
on 22 November we did not lose any significant territory up to
3 December. Our troops fought tenaciously and the Indian
attacks were checked along all the borders. Their battles for the
frontiers remained confined to the border areas, and generally
they were pushed back; our losses of territory were negligible.
Rangpur-Hilli-Bogra-Rajshahi Sector

14. INDIAN OFFENSIVE
ENGLISH
BAZAR
11 CORPS
101 COMN
Balurghat
~*~"
pt
KAMALPUR
20 
AMALPUR
MY MENSINGH 
SILCHAR
2
RAJSHAHI 
NATOR 
PARA TROOP 
MAULVI BAZAR.
ce \\F 
iL 
” BHAIRAB BAZAR
N 
x 
16 
27
; 
US HTIA 
eS
4 
7*S> 
:
oT TS = wads e 
AGARTALA
KILO FORCE
MAGURA on p PUR
BUROWA 
oe 
ORE 
a> 
(
\ 
DAULATPOR 
HA ath 
(
’ 
107 A) 
\
HULNA 
.
EE P 
| 
K <6. 04) 
ays 
XY, panoaman :
ai 
| 
\ 
SATKHTG A 
\ 
<>
OF
PATUA KHALI
BENGAL
41(A)
& CHITTAGONG!
|
" Yeon, BAZA |
SS
x
4
www.balochlibrary.com

DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
213
This area runs along the grain of the country and the terrain is
like Punjab, ideal for tanks and mobile warfare. General Arora
put in the full 33 Corps, consisting 
of two divisions, an
independent brigade, three Mukti Bahini brigades, and armoured
regiments and many battalions of BSF. Instead of launching a
concentrated major attack against Hilli, he deployed 6 Mtn
Division against Dinajpur-Rangpur where it was pinned down by
our brigade. Thus a whole division was wasted, whereas a couple
of battalions with the support of BSF battalions and Mukti Bahini
could have done the job. If he had put in a major effort of two
divisions with the entire might of armour against our 205 Brigade,
Hilli could not have lasted nineteen days as it did. I had visualized
a withdrawal to Bogra, forty miles from the borders, in seven
days. The enemy's tank manoeuvre in the north was successfully
checked by readjustments of position by 205 Brigade.
16 Division troops fought successful delaying actions, and the
enemy contacted our defences in Bogra on 15 December, twenty-
five days after the start of the war. The average rate of advance of
33 Corps comes to less than two miles a day. The Indians call ita
‘lightning campaign’. What I do not understand is why Arora, or
Thapan, did not head for Dhaka when Sirajganj and
Bahadurabad Ghats, the main ferry station and rail junction to
Dhaka, lay in their lap. What could they achieve by capturing
Hilli, Bogra, Dinajpur, and Saidpur instead?
By their actions 20 Division’s flank from the north was exposed
and the line of communication stretched to the point of being
cut off. In fact I ordered my staff to work out a plan to contain 6
Mountain Division with one battalion and CAF and to launch
Shaffi’s 23 Brigade against 20 Indian Division to threaten their
flanks. 107 Brigade, which had not been committed so far, was to
infiltrate and attack the rear of 20 Indian Division group and
inflict maximum casualties. Had the war lasted longer I am sure
General Nazar, who, with the arrival of Manzoor’s Brigade from
9 Division, had now four brigades, two of which were
uncommitted, would have destroyed the bulk of 20 Indian
Division. No wonder General Thapan was severely criticized by
the Indian Press and, instead of promotion, was given the order
of the boot.
With a favourable terrain, and with all the logistic support

