APPENDIX 4
CONFIDENTIAL/PERSONAL
IMMEDIATE
HQ Eastern Command
Dacca Cantt
Tele : Mil — 210
005/R/GS (Ops)
18 April 1971
To: 
Comd 9 Div
Comd 14 Div
Comd 16 Div
Info: 
Comd EP log Area
Internal
Distr: 
Adm Branch
Subject: 
Discipline in the Field
I have written a couple of letters to you and J hope that you have
passed the contents to all offrs under your command. 
I 
realize
that it may be a little too early to see the results. However, it is
disturbing for me to see elementary mistakes being committed in
the field. These need to be checked and corrected. If comds and
offrs gloss over them now, we would only be encouraging offrs
and men to get into bad habits to the detriment of battle
efficiency. | would, therefore, like comds at all levels to pay special
attention to details and matters concerning battle or field
discipline.
During my recent visits to some of the units in fwd areas, I got
the impression that there is an obvious lack of battle discipline;
— 
1 — 1 cr~ rl, T - L. toy 4°X 
“7 
(~%\ 
TTY)
Oe 
OA 
6 
@A 
© 
@. 
y 
» 
D 
| 
“f° 
) 
) 
‘ 
) 
] 
7 
A 
, 
/ 
[ 
{ 
J
WWW .DalLOCILIODL dl Y VU il

APPENDIX 
285
offrs and men seem to be gradually drifting away from the
glorious traditions of the Army. What I have observed, I must
bring to your notice for immediate attention and correction:
a. Absence of battle procedures and battle drills.
b. Offrs and men are quite oblivious of the fact that they are
in battle and should, therefore, be in proper battle trim. As
I said in my conference on 1] April 1971 all ranks to be
properly dressed with 
FSMO and be properly armed on all
occasions. For obvious reasons, there has to be uniformity
of dress, including head-dress, With the exception of Gen.
Officers, all others must be similarly dressed in the field
ALL ranks must wear FSMO (either with or without pack)
and steel helmets; carry their personal wpn, Lower down
comds must carry maps, whistle, note book, compass,
binocular, pointer staff etc. Berets may be worn in offices
or when in rest areas. Peak caps must not be worn in the
field.
c. In def or at halt, proper measure are not being taken for all
round def. Whenever a new posn is occupied, proper
protective and def measures must be taken. This is nec to
guard against surprise attk, infiltration etc. On arrival in a
new posn immediate ‘stand to’ must be carried out; sentries
and outposts estb. as per battle drill.
d. There is far too much of ‘bunching’. This has already been
the cause of cas due to mor etc. fire. Further, we seem to be
getting road bound and are forgetting foot mobility, and
hardly ever seem to manoeuvre cross-country.
e. There seems to be lack of inquisitiveness, and lack of sense
of urgency and -aggressiveness. I insist upon all this and
expect subordinate commanders at all times to act in a
manner that helps to further the higher commander's
mission. Once contact is made, it must be maintained and
followed vigorously.
f. Care of arms and weapons is being neglected. These must
be properly cleaned, oiled and kept ready for battle. There
is no shortage of oil or cleaning material.
g. It seems that troops are shy of inclement weather. All ranks
must be mentally and physically prepared to op in any type
of weather; bad weather is often a boon in battle or in the

286 
APPENDIX
fd. Men must cont to be looked after. Proper rest and relief
must be organized even in the worst of circumstances.
h. Not enough efforts are being made towards the maint of
communications.
I have no doubt that there are many other weaknesses which
you yourself must have noticed. At present we are up against
disorganized rebels and infiltrators, but we might well be
committed against a well trained enemy. It is, therefore, nec that
commanders at all levels must insist on obedience and
compliance with orders, and what ts laid down in regulations.
This ts the only way to keep in proper battle trim and ensure
battle preparedness.
Sd/
Lt.-Gen.
Commander
(A. A. K. Niazi)
CONFIDENTIAL
hl;
www.balochlibrary.com

APPENDIX 5
Extracts from ‘Unsealing a sealed document’
by A. T. Chaudhri, Dawn, 23 and 26 July 1986
Prime Minister; Time for publication is not yet!
This journalistic exercise in pseudo-dramatisation—as some
might call it—is based on incontrovertible evidence gathered
from and corroborated by several sources. The object is to bring
out how a democratic regime accountable to the people tried to
muzzle and sweep under the carpet the report of a high-powered
commission it had itself set up and kept the public in the dark
on an unforgettable and unforgiveable phase of the nation’s
history.
Instead of decrying or guillotining the Hamood Report, the
former regime could have taken the plea—and that with a
modicum of justification—that since emotions were charged and
the times were turbulent, the document would be placed, under
lock and key, in the archives of the Secretariat with an embargo
on its release for two to three decades.
It is 
a normal practice in all democracies to treat historical
‘ documents as classified and confidential and to de-classify them
after an appropriate lapse of time. In Britain and America,
classified material is published after a time span of 25 to 30
years, when the chief actors of a historic drama are no more
strutting or fretting on the stage, when public sentiment has
cooled down, when Time, the great healer, has healed the
wounds inflicted on a people, and when historians and
historiographers are not too close to the march of riproaring
events to give way to subjectivism.

288 
APPENDIX
What the former regime owed to the people—the fountain of
power—was: (a) to court martial the guilty indicated by the
Commission rather than retire some generals, send others abroad
as ambassadors and kick up still others by way of a reward for
their follies and crimes; and (b) to release the Report for public
consumption in an abridged form deleting those portions which
quoted secret official documents or top-secret communications
sent by some foreign Powers, including the Super-Powers, at the
height of the national crisis. That would have taken care of
national interests involving security or sovereignty.
Rejecting these sensible options open to them, the PPP
stalwarts not only made the Hamood Report the personal
property of the Prime Minister, but also denounced it parrot-like
as lop-sided, laconic and biased. Supposing the report was
inadequate, Bhutto’s men had none but their leader to blame
for it. Indeed, he saw to it, while setting up the Commission with
a flourish of trumpets, that it should be hamstrung by its limited
terms of reference and scope of inquiry.
One can say, on the authority of unimpeachable sources, that
the probe body was specifically told to confine its investigation to
the ‘military débacle’ and not to delve into the ‘causes of
surrender’, notably its political background. Chief Justice
Hamoodur Rahman is believed to have pleaded for the
enlargement of the terms of reference to enable him to look into
the ‘totality of the situation’ before the traumatic fall of Dhaka.
But he was firmly directed not to burn his fingers with the
political nettle. The implication was clear.
This object was also reflected in the composition of the
Commission. It was, no doubt, headed by a chairman of
unquestionable integrity—though hailing as he did from former
East Pakistan, which lay shattered and tattered, he must have
been emotionally upset—and saddled with a former Defence
Secretary. But it had no neutral political figure or outstanding
military expert on its panel. Subsequently, of course, the services
of two military advisers were commissioned by the probe body—
Lt.-Gen. Altaf Qadir and another high-ranking officer who was
the author of Pakistan Army—who had close links with the regime
in power and enjoyed its confidence.

APPENDIX 
289
If the terms of reference of the Hamood Commission were
restricted...by its sponsor...the object clearly was to make the
report...{vindicate] those at the helm of power.
Yet, ironical as it is, the Commission is said to be discreetly
silent—apparently in deference to the wishes and in compliance
with the directives of the then Prime Minister—on the political
background of the military débacle and the dismemberment of
the largest Muslim State on the map of the world:
According to knowledgeable sources, the report asked for
Yahya's trial as a ‘usurper’ who had dislodged Ayub Khan and
not as the arch-criminal responsible for the premature surrender
of 1971 and the great tragedy that befell Pakistan. Nor was Yahya
put in the dock by the patriots who tried to build ‘New Pakistan’
on the ashes of the old. The question is why was the chief villain
spared? Is it because his trial would have unmasked the ‘faceless’
actors (who shoved him from behind) and opened a Pandora's
box?
Referring to the ‘major players in the grisly drama’, one of
Bhutto’s biographers significantly observes that Yahya, Mujib and
Bhutto have to share responsibility for the catastrophe of 1971.
As he puts it, ‘Many, indeed, are inclined to the view that Bhutto,
as the most sure-footed politician of the three and thus the best
equipped to assess the consequences of his actions, must accept
the lion’s share of the blame.’ (Bhutto: A Political Biography,
Salman Taseer.)
That in a way explains why the report of the Hamood
Commission, before which Bhutto also testified, was put into
cold storage. To quote his biographer again, ‘his detractors
preferred to suggest that Bhutto never dared issue the report
because he was so heavily implicated in the political chicanery
and blundering that preceded the country’s breakup’. That may
be so...Considering the circumstances in which the Commission
worked, its final report may even have erred in Bhutto’s favour.
However, if the report erred in Bhutto’s favour, and painted
his rivals or accomplices with a tarred brush, his Cabinet
colleagues would not have railed against it as they did, or voted
for its screening. The possibility is that while the Athenians of
the Commission skipped over Bhutto’s role in the final
denouement, they went the whole hog to expose Mujib and
Yahya’s chief lieutenants. Thus, Bhutto used the document for
STAAL
|
7 
:
LIDI al V.cCom
W W W . 
| 
) y ] 
| 
( VY ( Y
y v 
y 
y 
y 
) tJ St 
A 
X_ zy YQ

290 
APPENDIX
private circulation to absolve himself of all charges and to
blackmail the ‘men on horseback’ whom he wished to cajole and
browbeat at one and the same time.
This assumption does not belong to the realm of speculation.
Before the fall of Dhaka, Bhutto had openly declared that there
were three potent forces in the country: the Awami League, the
Army and the PPP. The triangle had to be broken to make the
PPP a monolith of power. It had to be broken to help the PPP
emerge as the sole inheritor of power. The process started when
two of the ‘three forces’ clashed in March 1971. It culminated,
partially though, when in December 1971 Bhutto was summoned
under the penumbra of Martial Law to hold the reins of power
in the residual Pakistan. He was virtually summoned to the
dictatorship of a country whose fate quivered in the balance.
Once entrenched in the seat of power, he began itching to
demolish the other centres of power or at least cut them to size.
For this he wished to employ two handy instruments: the POW
issue and the Hamood inquiry. First, he delayed the return of
93,000 POWs of which the soldiery was 55,000 strong and the
‘bayonet people’ not more than 25,000—a fact which was never
highlighted...
As for the Hamood Report, which is believed to have concealed
more than it revealed, Bhutto gave the impression that he was
holding a time-bomb in his clenched fist. He dangled it as a
sword of Damocles over the heads of those he dreaded as well as
cajoled. 
|
www.balocl wlibrar y.comM
l 
a

APPENDIX 6
Sardar Faroog Ahmed Khan Leghari
President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
President’s Secretariat, Islamabad.
Subject: Restoration of Pension - General Officers
Sir,
1. 
I have been encouraged to submit this petition after reading
your recent statement in the newspapers that your decisions are
taken in keeping with the tenets of Islam. I have lifted the pen
because I address the President of Pakistan, for whom all are
equal and whose prime focus is to uphold and administer justice.
I have also taken this liberty since Islam values the undoing of
injustice as and when it comes to light. I have also been
encouraged by the fact that the ‘Debacle in East Pakistan’ is
close to a quarter of a century behind us and many important
facets have come to the fore.
2. 
Asa sequel to the 1971 national tragedy and the loss of East
Pakistan I was removed from service on 05 May 1975 and my
hard-earned pension was denied to me, This denial resulted in
suffering not only for me but for my entire family and other
relations who were dependent on my financial help. The process
of law was cut short by an ‘Administrative Action’ without
assigning any cause for my removal. I had even opted for a trial
by Court Martial, which was not granted because a lot, of
unpleasant, unpalatable facts would have emerged cutting into
the failings and the overall conduct of war by the High
Command. It was to be my destiny to pay for the collective
blunders of the High Command and many others who fortunately
by and large lived happily ever after. ] was given an ex gratia
pension which is meagre and in no way substitutes for my hard-
7 
_ 
_ 
7 
7 
*1
: X ] \ r 7 
y 
) 
7 
ly ) 6 ) 
y 4 \ nn 
c 
| 
a » 
V ) C » vr X > 
ie. ‘Y f a -a
WWW UdALUULLILOIL AI YUU I n

292 
APPENDIX
earned pension and reputation and does not restore the rights
and privileges of a retired General.
3. 
My President, like so many unfortunate innocent people I
had been condemned to cover so many masked faces, but time
and again the innocent have been rehabilitated during their
lifetime, That is the core matter for the justice I am seeking at
your hands, because I have 
been punished for reasons untold,
unheard, and untried.
4. 
Listed below are events (I will try to reveal as few faces as |
can since events are more important than individuals) that will
stand in the witness box before the prosecutors in the presence
of the President of Pakistan:-
a. 
I volunteered for Court Martial because the truth would
have come out and the real culprits exposed, but I was
denied this basic right because they could not frame any
charges against me and at the same time it would have
raised eyebrows as to why operations in West Pakistan
failed at the launching pad while Eastern Command had
been fighting a protracted battle most successfully for
almost a year against 10:1 superiority of the Indian Army.
(West Pakistan ratio was 1:1).
b. 
This was the first time in Islamic history that we had
parity of forces and resources with our enemies. The
circumstances were also more conducive for us in the
West. The troops were in their battle positions according
to our over-all plan ‘Battle of East will be fought in the
West’, which meant that the Eastern Garrison with
limited resources of men and material would have a
holding role while the main and decisive battle would be
fought and won in the West where the bulk of the forces
and resources quite adequate for the job supported by a
loyal and motivated population, secure rear and flanks,
with the entire Navy and PAF were deployed.
c. 
We struck the enemy in West Pakistan at the place and
time of our own choosing but instead of capturing
territory we lost 5500 square miles of our sacred soil in
about 10 days time, a set-back militarily unbelievable,
unacceptable and unforgivable.
d. 
On the contrary East Pakistan undertook the mission
CK 7UK7TY 7 
yo) 
| ( » ( . 
\ 
| 
@ 
i 
ae 
Bf 
/ 
( 
a 
| 
| {

APPENDIX 
293
successfully with limited resources under the worst
circumstances but our High Command faltered under
most favourable circumstances and doomed Pakistan and
East Pakistan Garrison who were fighting gallantly. To
save West Pakistan from further disintegration we had to
abandon East Pakistan and face the humiliation of laying
down our arms. All those who erred and failed in West
Pakistan got away unscathed. Many were retained in
service and promoted, while others were given lucrative
jobs. No questions asked, no queries made, but General
Niazi, who completed all his given tasks most successfully,
was penalized for the sins of others.
General Tikka Khan ex COAS had given a statement that
General Niazi could not be court-martialled because no
substantive material against him was forthcoming. 
'
The Hamoodur Rehman Report is a Top Secret docu-
ment but portions of the report have been divulged
through newspapers by politicians. Salient features of the
Report are:-
(1) Disciplinary action was recommended against many
who were responsible for the débacle of 1971 but I
was made the solitary example, the scapegoat nay
the sacrificial lamb’.
(2) The surrender was executed on the order of the
President of Pakistan for fear of a humiliating defeat
in the West.
(3) The report was shelved as biased on the advice of
the ‘PPP Committee of Seven.’
(4) The report had no legal anchorage and was not
endorsed by an executive order for implementation.
(5) The Terms of Reference of the Hamoodur Rehman
Commission were inadequate (not covering all
aspects of the disaster). 
__
(6) General Yahya Khan was dubbed ‘the Usurper’ who
was the chief architect of the crisis, ordering the
crack-down instead of handing over power to the
elected representatives of the people.
Although Gen. Yahya was blamed for the vivisection of
Pakistan he lived to enjoy two pensions (President and
C.-in-C,) and was sent abroad for treatment at Govt.
y 
@4 |. Py 
vat 
> ab 
HT?
inrarv 
com
acs 
a C5 
) 
ewyV\JAASA
Lf
www naloc

