THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
16]
In the early morning of 4 December, exchange of wireless messages
between the post commander and his battalion commander were
intercepted, They indicated that the post commander had asked
permission to withdraw, but this was refused. Gurbux Singh applied
psychological warfare to the post by alternative use of stick and carrot.
About 0930 after withdrawing the troops from the close siege, he
hammered the post with seven sorties of MIG 2] Bring rockets, This
was repeated twice later in the day.
After the first strike, Gurbux Singh sent a note to the post
commander through a Mukti Bahini carrier, saying, “You have during
the last few days made frantic efforts to bring in supplies and
ammunition, and you know you have not been successful, These
supplies have fallen in our hands. The time of your post is up and
whatever you decide to do we have every intention of eliminating
Kamalpur post. It is to save unnecessary casualties, this message is
being sent to you. Since yesterday we are at war with Pakistan, and we
hope you are aware that our troops at this moment are operating
many miles to your south.’
There was no response from the post commander except in terms
of renewed intensity of machine-gun fire. The General ordered the
second air strike and pounded the post once again at about midday,
and followed it with another note, ‘You did not take note of the first
message sent to you. This is our taste of medicine administered a
short while ago [a reference to the air strike on the post]. In case you
decide to surrender I give you my assurance that you will be accorded
honours due to an enemy who has put up a gallant fight’.
There was no reply to this note either, except defiance shown by
more fire from the post bunkers. There was a further exchange of
wireless messages between the post commander and his commanding
officer, who promised the post assistance in the form of
reinforcements and retaliatory air strike, but nothing materialized.
The General was getting impatient and more belligerent. He ordered
another air strike on the post in the afternoon and followed this up
with the final message: “Please let me know definitely by 1600 hours
whether you wish to surrender. I cannot give you more time for
certain reasons. It would be much better if you come along with the
messenger. I give you my word of honour that you will come to no
harm.’ In cold contempt, the pest commander ordered the post to
open fire with all weapons with renewed vigour. This left Gurbux
Singh fuming and frustrated.
Gurbux Singh was planning a night attack when Captain Ahsan
Malik, Post Commander, came out with a white flag at about 1900
hours and offered to surrender along with his troops. He said he was
doing it on the orders of his superiors and not on account of the
www.baloc

162 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
notes sent by the General. He had put up-a courageous stand
throughout the siege, and surrendered after holding a brigade of
besiegers for twenty-one days with a company strength of a mixture
of Regulars and Mujahids totalling about 75 men. Hardly any
casualties had been suffered as a result of the Indian artillery mortar
bombardment and air strikes. The brave stand by the courageous
Baluchi Captain was recognized by his adversaries. Manekshaw sent a
personal congratulatory message to Malik, commending his defiant
stand. He instructed the formation commander to treat the Kamalpur
prisoners of war with respect and kindness due to brave soldiers."!
The Indian brigade commander, Brigadier Kler, who had also
a Mukt Bahini brigade, many BSF battalions, and divisional
artillery and air support, also met with frustration when he
attacked 31 Baluch at Jamalpur. Despite many attacks, he failed
to capture any of our positions. Kler could not move an inch
towards Dhaka. Another interesting exchange of notes took place
here, between Kler and Col. Sultan Ahmed, CO 31 Baluch.
Quoting again from Sukhwant Singh’s book:
At 1500 hours on 9 December, Kler sent a note through Mukti Bahini
courier to the officer commanding 31 Baluch at Jamalpur to
surrender as his routes had been cut and he would get an even
heavier pounding if he continued to resist. In the evening, Lt.-Col.
Sultan Mahmood [Ahmed] replied, rejecting the offer. 
A Chinese
bullet accompanied the reply: “Hope this finds you in high spirits.
Thanks for the letter. We here in Jamalpur are waiting for fight to
commence, [t has not started yet. So iet us not talk, but start it. Forty
sorties, [ point out, are inadequate. Please ask for many more. Hoping
to find you with a stengun in your hand next time instead of the pen
you seem to have mastery [of]. I am, most sincerely, Commander,
jJamalpur Fortress.’ 
|
On 9 December I was informed by Major-General Ansari that
enemy Para Brigade had been relieved from its ground role. |
made a quick appreciation as to where the para drops could take
place. Tangail and Tungi seemed appropriate because from these
places the enemy could block the withdrawal of 93 Brigade from
Mymensingh. Tungi being closer to Dhaka, the para drops could
be intercepted by Pakistani troops, so Tangail was the most likely
place for the para drops. So I allowed Major-General Jamshed to
pull back his 93 Brigade from area Mymensingh. I also told other
www.balochlibrary.com

10. MYMENSINGH-DHAKA SECTOR
TURA
JAMALPUR(@
ona 
aL Ene
101 COMMUNICATION ZO
(ACTING AS DIV. HQ)
JAMALP 
UR
O rarip 
Cy 
NARAYANG AN
HEL! 
LANDED TROOPS
BH 
ARAB BAZAR
www.balochlibrary.com

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
163
Divisional Commanders to fall back on to their main positions.
Enemy paratroops landed on the afternoon of the 10th at Tangail.
Brigadier Qadir was ordered to withdraw to Dhaka on the
night 9/10 December. 31 Baluch, which was holding Jamalpur
and Kamalpur, was successful in containing the enemy advance
for twenty-one days. They were besieged but they bayoneted their
way through the enemy encirclement. 33 Punjab, under Lt.-Col.
Razzak, also fought extremely well and kept the enemy at bay in
this sector. They had engaged in some tough battles, and survived
poison gas which was used against them. They too successfully
carried out the withdrawal to Dhaka.
Major-General Gurbux Singh was wounded and replaced by
Major-General Nagra, ex-2 Division, as 101 Communication Zone
Commander. Gurbux was an experienced and practical soldier
whereas Nagra was a boaster, a drawing-room strategist. Nagra’s
attacks were repulsed at each place during the withdrawal. Qadir
delayed the Indians for more than twenty-four hours at every
delaying position. At no time were the Indians or Mukti Bahint,
who in their thousands surrounded our troops now, allowed to
trap us. Our troops managed to extricate themselves each time,
and forced the enemy to proceed with caution. The enemy was
found to be sluggish and disorganized in their advance towards
Dhaka. 
|
93 Brigade reached Dhaka in good shape but the Brigade HQ
and its escort got entangled with the enemy paratroops in area
Kaluarkar. This small force under Brigadier Qadir delayed the
adyance of enemy paratroops for four days. Later, when they were
exhausted due to hunger and lack of rest, and their ammunition
was completely finished, Brigadier Qadir was taken POW.
Lt.-Gen. Sagat Singh airbridged the Meghna River on 11
December. The object of the para landing was to block the
withdrawal of troops coming from Mymensingh. The aim of air
bridging the Meghna by helicopter was to capture the Dhaka
side of Bhairab Bridge. Brigadier Saadullah’s brigade reached
Bhairab Bazar from Ashuganj before the arrival of the Indians
and firmed in. The aerial bridging capability was Arora’s trump
card. By withdrawing 93 Brigade from Mymensingh to Dhaka
and Saadullah’s brigade from Ashuganj to Bhairab Bazar, we
blunted the enemy move. We beat them to the draw. The enemy
failed to block the mave of both brigades.
Gh @ @ 
L. oY
J 
WW 
f 
i 
|
\ 
Vv 
sv 
e 
QS 
WAZ

164 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
General Arora’s troops around Dhaka were mostly infantry
troops, lacking the deadly tanks and their profuse artillery
support. The capture of Dhaka was not that simple a proposition.
On 12 December, Arora put all the troops around Dhaka under
Lt.-Gen. Sagat Singh’s command. He was given the task of
capturing Dhaka. This Arora should have done on 9 December,
Keeping the paratroops under his personal command, Nagra’s
division under Nagra, and heliborne troops under Sagat’s
command, involved too many commanders going for the same
objective, so the whole operation lacked co-ordination. Hence it
failed to achieve the desired impact. Sagat had asked for seven
days to prepare, recce, and collect troops and resources for the
attack. In the words of Major-General Khushwant Singh:
In the event, the Indians were able to commit no more than four
weak brigades with artillery and armour support and inadequate
logistic leading to the battle. It would have taken days to achieve the
desired build up to tackle the Dhaka defences.
The inner defence of Dhaka was in three layers held by veteran
soldiers under experienced officers. Dhaka had been further
strengthened by the induction of troops withdrawn from the
forward areas. Dhaka complex now consisted of Bhairab Bazar
fortress, Dhaka fortress and Narayanganj fortress. Narayanganj
fortress gave depth to Dhaka by covering its rear. Bhairab Bazar,
though away from Dhaka, covered the north-eastern approach
which was the main approach to Dhaka for 4 Indian Corps.
Bhairab Bazar’s position for Dhaka was the same as Kushtia’s
position was for Faridpur.
None of these positions could be attacked in isolation. The
attack had to be simultaneous. When one fortress was attacked,
it was vital to contain the others too. Dhaka was not a 
sitting
duck; it would have been exceedingly difficult for Arora to
collect enough troops to tackle the Dhaka complex. Kamalpur,
held by a composite company, pinned down two enemy brigades
for twenty-one days. Hilli, held by one battalion, held back an
Indian division of five brigades of infantry and one tank brigade.
The Indians, despite overwhelming firepower, failed to capture
Hilli. It held on for nineteen days and later the Pakistanis broke
through the Indian cordon. The same was the case in Jamalpur,

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
165
Ashuganj, Kushtia, and Daulatpur. Dhaka fortress had over
31,000 troops. The Dhaka complex was impregnable under the
prevailing situation. 
.
According to the Indians’ own account, they had only four
weak brigades out of twelve divisions left to attack Dhaka. Could
they capture such a large built-up area as Dhaka city with that
strength when I had 31,000 strong, battlehardy, and experienced
troops, which included regular troops and CAF. (breakdown given
in Chapter 12), and was personally commanding the troops with
my recently-established HQ in Government Quarters in the heart
of the city, fully determined to fight it out? NO. NEVER. From
the military point of view we had succeeded in containing and
dissipating the Indian might of twelve divisions. Practically all
airports and seaports, and all the major cities except Jessore and
Mymensingh (which we had vacated) but including the ports of
Chittagong and Chalna, were still held by us. It was through a
conspiracy that Pakistan, its glorious army and brave Eastern
Command commanders and troops were let down. We were
ordered to surrender, and thus humiliated. We were not
defeated. We were let down and cheated.
Who is responsible for the blood of the shaheeds who laid
down their lives for the integrity of Pakistan? We buried the
shaheeds as amanat. Their bodies should be brought back to
Pakistan. It is they who deserve to be honoured by mausoleums
and not those who broke up Pakistan. If the Americans can search
for their dead soldiers in Vietnam and take then back to the
USA, then our Government, which has better relations with the
Government of Bangladesh, will probably find that an honest
diplomatic approach succeeds in a similar case.
Military burial is given to a soldier on the battlefield by his
enemies when they are particularly impressed by his courage. In
World War II, in which millions of soldiers took part and which
lasted six years, there is mention of only one such burial, that of
a British sergeant who had accompanied the Commandos sent to
kill Field Marshal Rommel in the Western Desert. He fought so
well, and with such courage, that Rommel himself ordered his
military burial. As opposed to this, in East Pakistan I had only
45,000 troops and para military forces from West Pakistan. During
twenty-six days’ open war in East Pakistan, the Indians gave
military burials to four Pakistani soldiers. In my opinion no other
a 
ii
/ 
| 6 | 
YR JKT
Ve 
VWULUY
gy 
e-
ly 
< 
a 
& 
al 9 
ad 
@. 
fr i aa eo 
oo 
ae 
|
TEI 
VDIidadl V 
COLL
LBRAA OY SD AL y 
oe SY YS 
] 
A BA

166 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
army can claim any such honour. The following heroes got
military burials:
(1) Naik Sarwar of 24 Cavalry in Bogra Sector of 16 Division. The
story of his heroism was told by an Indian Lt.-Col. who
commanded a Guards battalion in that sector to Major-General
Nazar Hussain Shah in the presence of Brig. (later Mayor-
General) Tajamma] Hussain.
(2) and (3) Major Ayub of 31 Baluch and Naik Abdul Sattar Niazi of
West Pakistan Rangers were given military burial by the Indians
in Mymensingh sector. Indian Brigadier Kler (later Major-
General) told the story of their courage and devotion to duty to
Brigadier Qadir Niazi; it was confirmed by his GOC, Major-
General Nagra.
(4) Major Anis of 38 FF, of 107 Brigade of 9 Division, was killed
during an attack on Masliah. GOC 9 Indian Division Major-
General Dalbir Singh buried Major Anis with military honours
and recited fatiha himself."
The story of Hukam Dad's bravery has been given earlier. All
of them deserved to be awarded Nishan-e-Haider but were not,
because some people do not know what courage and devotion
to duty on the battlefield means. Our destiny was in the hands
of opportunists who were engaged in a fierce struggle to attain.
or retain power.
Inter-Service, Inter-Arm, and Civil-Military
Co-operation
The team work and co-operation between all services, arms, and
civilian officers serving the Government of East Pakistan was
excellent. I, as commander of these working teams, benefited
from their varied experience in my critical decisions for the
successful prosecution of the war and in dealing with both the
locals and the Indians.
It was a matter of pride for me to see my troops always cheerful
and ready to sacrifice for the integrity of Pakistan. GHQ had sent
the cream of the Pakistan Army's officers—anybody not doing
well was sent back—and they led their units and formations
valiantly during the insurgency and the war with India, with the
WWW. b a8 loc hl IT al y COM

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
167
enemy in front as well as in the rear. They displayed cool courage
and bravery against heavy odds.
Pakistan Navy
The Navy contingent consisted of only four gunboats under the
command of Admiral Mohammad Sharif. In spite of the enemy’s
superiority both at sea and in the rivers, our naval personnel
showed guts, initiative, and efficiency in the movement of troops.
They helped the army in some operations as well. In Belonia
operations, their contribution was praiseworthy. They were ably
led by Captain Zamir, a brave, capable, and conscientious naval
officer who was always willing and ready to do the job and was
never afraid of taking risks.
Pakistan Air Force
The air contingent in East Pakistan consisted only of one
squadron of old F-86 aircraft, located at Dhaka. The way Air
Commodore Inam-ul-Hag handled his brave and excellent team
was admirable. Every day they flew out and took a heavy toll of
the numerically superior enemy aircraft. The Indian aircraft were
always kept on the run. Knowing well that if shot down they
would be butchered by the locals, they still flew sorties with
courage and boldness, and some paid the supreme sacrifice.
Those who bailed out were cut to pieces by the Bengalis and no
one came back, whereas when Indian pilots bailed out they were
escorted safely to Indian-held areas. At times our pilots had to
land on damaged airfields, but they took this risk courageously.
The news of the air bridging of the Meghna River was given to
me by Air Commodore Inam, who had spotted it on his short-
range radar. On receipt of this timely news we moved Saadullah’s
brigade from Ashuganj to Bhairab Bazar, behind the enemy heli-
landed troops, who were thus sandwiched between Dhaka
position and the forward position. It is a pity that Dhaka airfield
got damaged so badly that our aircraft could not take off after 6
December, for this meant that the Indian aircraft had a free run
over the whole of East Pakistan. We sent our pilots to West

168 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Pakistan before the surrender, and the remaining Air Force
personnel were deployed for the ground defence of Dhaka.
Armour
The armoured troops under Col. Bukhari proved their mettle by
their mobile offensive actions against enemy tanks and in support
of our own infantry. Though always outnumbered and out-
gunned, they faced the enemy’s far superior tanks courageously
and by superior tactics kept the enemy armour at bay.
Artillery
Artillery Brigadier $.S.A. Qasim was my Artillery Commander.
He was a capable gunner who always accompanied me to the
forward troops. Although we did not have complete artillery
formations or units because the troops were brought in by air, he
made the best possible use of the available guns. The divisions
and brigades were almost independent, but he co-ordinated and
finalized their fire plans. Their accuracy and effectiveness was
proved during the war.
6 Light AA Regiment
This regiment was commanded by Lt.-Col. Mohammad Afzal, a
brave and courageous officer. Qasim was always around whenever
the Indians air-attacked Dhaka. The regiment remained under
constant enemy air-attacks throughout the war but our brave
gunners engaged the enemy aircraft with undaunted spirit.
I was in one of the gun pits during the air raids. There were
six enemy aircraft which attacked our three gunposts. The
gunners put up a bold and determined fight. The fight lasted for
about ten minutes. The enemy lost two aircraft, then vanished.
The regiment brought down its last Indian aircraft, a bomber,
on 16 December. This regiment performed splendidly, bringing
down more than thirty enemy aircraft. The credit for all this goes
to Afzal and Qasim who set a personal example and kept the
enemy away from Dhaka Cantonment.

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
169
Engineers
Our engineers did a magnificent job throughout the East Pakistan
crisis. There was never a dull moment for them. Many a time we
used the engineers in an infantry role—they might be given the
job of protecting a base, or guarding the flanks of infantry going
in to attack, or sweeping a guerrilla hideout. They worked very
hard and kept the troops moving by constructing or repairing
bridges and improving roads and tracks. They did a wonderful
job in the preparation and construction of strong points and
fortresses. Their commander, Brigadier Iqbal Sharif, was a brave
and willing worker who handled his troops efficiently at the most
difficult places and under enemy attack. He repaired the airfield
in the shortest possible me with no thought for the risk to his
life. He personally supervised engineer operations and was an
extraordinary example of gallantry, resourcefulness, and
improvisation. His efficiency in the most difficult task of restoring
communications, bridges, and roads was simply superb. He was
given a sector in Dhaka defences to command, and he organized
its defences most satisfactorily.
Signals
Our signals performance was very good throughout. They kept
us in communication with forward units as well as GHQ, till the
end. The credit goes to Brigadier Arif Raza, whose job was very
difficult and whose resources were inadequate, but who solved
the knotty problems of communications very efficiently,
particularly by providing signals equipment, facilities, and
manpower for newly-raised ad hoc formations. It is to his credit
that all units, formations, and GHQ remained in communication
until we shut down when the Indians came.
Helicopter Squadron
Our helicopters were under the command of Lt.-Col. Liaquat
Bukhari. He was efficient, intelligent, and a courageous
commander. The helicopters were used for reconnaissance,

