-Cuapter 9
THE INVASION
The Indians had increased border raids and artillery fire. Their
psychological warfare had already been stepped up. Pakistan had
been completely isolated diplomatically, politically, militarily, and
psychologically due to the faulty foreign policy of Yahya’s
Government and the lack of counter-propaganda. The Indian
propaganda was so well organized and so effective that it not
only won universal sympathy for the Bangladesh cause but also
made people believe in unfounded and concocted stories of rape,
arson, loot, and an influx of millions of refugees. 
|
The time for the invasion was most conducive for the Indian
Army. The monsoons were over and the ground was fit for mobile
operations in November. Furthermore, an invasion in late
November would counter the perceived Chinese threat—snow
on the mountains would be blocking all the passes. The Indian
Army kept the monsoon factor and China’s intervention options
in view before settling on a date for the invasion.
We had been getting information about the enemy’s
preparations and watching their concentration across the borders
around East Pakistan, so we too were not sitting idle, but were
organizing and deploying our troops and improving our defensive
capabilities and positions. The reorganization and re-deployment
of troops and construction and stocking of our positions were
complete by mid-November 1971. On receipt of information from
GHQ about the impending Indian attack, the troops had been
concentrated in their battle positions and were ready. We
remained busy in our prayers and kept awake on the night of
20/21 November, which was Eid night.

118 
THE BETRAYAL. OF EAST PAKISTAN
The Date of the War
Before | discuss the Indian open war against East Pakistan, it is
necessary to correct a misapprehension about the day when open
all-out war started in East Pakistan.
Guerrilla warfare and Indian sneak raids into our territory
had been going on since March 1971 and both sides were
suffering material losses and human casualties. Artillery was being
used all along on both sides, and tanks and aircraft had been
taking part since early November 1971. The only difference was
that we were using these arms and weapons from our own area
in our own defence to oust the Indian invaders or stop their
entry into our area, whereas the Indian Army were using their
weapons from both their own soil and our soil. From late August
till November 1971, there had been several battalion- and
brigade-sized raids into every sector of East Pakistan by the Indian
Army. On the night of 20/21 November 1971, the Indian Army
attacked East Pakistan from all directions. The Indian attacks
were supported by tanks, artillery, and other arms, but were
repulsed in most cases. The Indian Army, in order to prove that
their war was a ‘lightning campaign’, had been downplaying their
offensive action as a limited war and border clashes.
Even in West Pakistan not much was published about
insurgency, or Indian raids on our territory in East Pakistan.
Similarly, they did not tell the people in so many words that a
full-fledged war had been going on in East Pakistan since 21
November 1971. Some writers confuse the date with 3 December,
when our Army attacked the Indian Army in the West, the Indians
retaliated, and the Russians joined the war openly on the Indian
side. The Pakistan Government did not bother to inform the
people as to what was really happening in East Pakistan.
When open and all-out war was begun by our attack on India
in the West on 3 December 1971, we had already suffered about
four thousand dead and about the same number wounded, if not
more. From May to November we had sent one thousand nine
hundred wounded to West Pakistan. We had lost twelve tanks
and three aircraft fighting against the Indian Army prior to 3
December. ‘Two Hilal-e-Jurat, ten Sitara-e-Jurat, twelve Tamga-e-Jurat
and 
many 
more 
mentioned 
in 
despatches had 
been
recommended and awarded. To have earned these gallantry
A/S NAA,
a 10 
h | it
XT 
£m
\/ 
¢ 
€ 
>} | 
|
YeowswNJVJAASA

4, 
OFFENSIVE—EAST PAKISTAN
21 NOVEMBER 3-DECEMBER 1971
XXXIITI 
iw
CORPS x 
alg 
vf
Nay, 
COOCH
LALMUNIRHAT 
BIHAR
\ 
Ms
4 aaa 
oTURA 
101 COMN ZONE
XN
20 Ol
{} 
(AS DIV. HQ)
ee y 
8 DIV.
ULIITT ee
s¥f eis
j
& MTN/ DIV. 
= 
® MAULVI BAZAR
a
> gp 
IV CORPS
Sy" SS 
57 tw ow
K
9 MTN DIV. == 
cariteun 
fin LE
11 CORPS 
\ 
5 
BE LONIA
4 
Lay
®JESSORE 
Vv 
:
\
INDEP BDE 
y 
<> ito FORCE
\ 
( h' : 
OME OV. STRENGTH
(
‘ 
Mn 
) 
\
\ 
D lk 
.
f
“~~~ 
ee
~— ~~ Te NS | eee aes
fh Areas Under Mukti And Indian Control Dec.3
> Indian 
Advance 
From Nov. 21 To Dec.3
www.balochlibrary.com

THE INVASION 
L119
awards, obviously some actions must have been fought and
pitched and bloody battles must have taken place. These awards
were given before 3 December 197i. The list submitted for
gallantry awards for the period between 3 December and 16
December 1971 was not considered by the people sitting in GHQ.
The list had vanished when we came back from the Indian
prisoner of war camps, thanks to Gul Hassan.
General Yahya had said that an attack on any portion of
Pakistan would invoke a retaliation, but for the benefit of the
Indians, and on the advice of Bhutto, he did not retaliate
immediately when the Indian Army attacked East Pakistan on 21
November 1971. Instead he said, ‘What can I do for East Pakistan?
I can only pray,’ and that was all. Had Gen. Yahya retaliated
immediately according to our over-all plan, and if Pakistan had
reported the Indian invasion to the Security Council immediately,
the Indians would not have been in a position to confuse the
date of the beginning of open war, 21 November, with 3
December, and would not have called it a two-week campaign.
The scope of Indian military involvement increased substantially in
the first three weeks of November 1971] but in most instances the
Indian units would hit their objectives in East Pakistan and then
withdraw to Indian territory. After the night of 21 November,
however, the tactics changed in one significant way; Indian forces did
not withdraw. From 21 November several Indian Army divisions
divided into small tactical units launched simultaneous military
actions on all key border regions of East Pakistan from all directions
with both armour and air support...’ 
.
The Indian strategy is clearly described and analysed in
publications by the Indian military officers who served in
command positions in 1971, who make it clear that the ‘war of
liberation’ started for their units on about 21 November.’ One of
them says: ‘India had fixed 22 November as D-Day for the attack.
They advanced it by one day to 21 November because of Eid,
hoping the troops would be celebrating Eid, and thus unwary.”
Furthermore, my Chief of Staff, who was at GHQ, was told by
the CGS to rush back to Dhaka as the Indian invasion was
expected on Eid Day.
Without any regard for territorial integrity or the sanctity of a
neighbour’s frontiers, the Indian Army crossed the borders and
cd
»\ 
Wew 
)
j
i 
® 
| 
» 
f 
| 
rP~> 
ye 
s
WV 
VA 
Vie 
VA 
V, 
| 
ra 
a 
pe 
| 
| 
) 
| 
| 
Oa 
AX 
/ 
a 
r 
] 
| 
]
VV 
VV 
VV 
eo LJ C1. i LI id 
( J i¢d L | 
\ / 
Ww \ Jill

120 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
attacked East Pakistan from all directions on 21 November 1971.
Before the infantry and tanks crossed the borders behind a
creeping artillery barrage, the objective areas were kept under
fire for about four hours, particularly targets along the main
penetrants. The Indians entered East Pakistan with full fury, with
great pomp and show, tanks spitting fire, guns and mortars
booming, machine-guns rattling, aircraft zooming, rocketing,
strafing, and napalming. We had nothing much to retaliate with
except our infantry, whose weapons had been getting a
hammering for many hours, and a few pieces of field artillery
which too were under enemy counter-bombardment. However,
we had well-constructed and weli-developed defences, and battle-
inoculated and war-experienced officers and soldiers. With the
intensity, weight, and duration of fire, rumbling of tanks,
groaning of thousands of moving vehicles, and the sweep of
aircraft, the battle ground thundered. This was meant to terrify
our troops and stun them before the arrival of the assaulting
Indian troops. However it failed to destroy our defences or have
any psychological effect on our war veteran soldiers, who carried
on with their normal routine in defence. The so-called blitzkrieg
and ‘planned envelopment’ failed miserably due to lack of good
generalship—they did not have generals like ours. Their
‘blitzkrieg’ petered out on the borders as soon as they contacted
our screen positions. Their multiple columns were checked and
kept well away from Dhaka and from each other.
India resorted to lies about the duration of the conflict in East
Pakistan and the start of open war. The total period of conflict
was about nine months—eight months of insurgency and border
clashes and twenty-six days of open war, not two weeks.
The Invasion
Major-General Nazar Hussain Shah, GOC 16 Division, reported
that the Indians had crossed the border in strength and a full-
fledged attack was on. I asked him how he knew it was a full-
fledged attack and not a sneak raid in division rather than brigade
strength but spread over a bigger area, as the Indians had been
doing since the last couple of months. Nazar said that he had
thought the same thing when he got the report, and so had gone
forward to check it himself.

THE INVASION 
121
“There is a lot of noise of fire. It is like our fireworks at the
Horse Show at Lahore. The activity is all along the front and is
not restricted to any one particular sector.’
‘Any report of any column reported to be in a hurry and
making efforts to break through along any particular route or
sector?’ I enquired.
He replied in the negative. ‘It appears they have not found
it an easy nut to crack. Our out-posts, particularly on the main
routes, held by our regular troops, are giving them a tough
time and taking a heavy toll of the enemy. Usual Indian style,
Sir, more noise than movement—more bark than bite.’
‘It is better to have an open war than chasing sneaking
Indian raiders who, when in a tight corner, tuck their tails in
and make a quick run for their own country which we have
orders not to enter.’
Reports from other sectors confirmed that East Pakistan was
under an all-out Indian attack from all sides. The Indians used
their aircraft within about cight to ten miles of the borders, not
for deep targets like Dhaka; and their navy neither came for our
ports nor blocked our sea or air routes, It was not for fear of
international opinion because they never bothered about
international opinion: they were under the mistaken impression
that the Pakistan Eastern Garrison was spread near the borders
in a thin red line and could be crushed in a surprise attack by
sheer weight of numbers, steel, and fire using steam-roller tactics.
Again the Indian strategists and intelligence agencies had
made a mistake—the second bigger than the first. The first
mistake was in April 1971, when they had believed that I would
keep fighting around big cities and cantonments like my
predecessor Tikka, and that I was not in a position to start an
offensive with my meagre, ill-equipped, and ill-provided force
which was tied down around big cities by Mukti Bahini forces
and the Bengali dissidents; whereas I went on the offensive,
wrenched the initiative from them, and evicted the guerrillas
from the soil of East Pakistan in a lightning campaign of less
than two months. Thus we fooled the Indians a second time, this
time about our deployment. We had let it be known that due to
the nature of my mission, I had had to put everything in the
shop window and was left with nothing much in the kitty, because

122 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
all my troops had been drawn to the borders and I had no body
in reserve and only a few people in depth. On the maps we had
shown all the troops strung along the borders in a thin line and
had marked them with big circles. Actually only a few of them
were on the borders; the bulk of them were well behind. This
marked deployment pleased the Indians and also satisfied the
ego of our High Command, whose intentions were more
dangerous than those of the Indians and the Bengalis. My High
Command wanted me to be defeated in the first encounter with
the Indian Army. I was told not to lose any chunk of territory, for
which sealing of the borders was essential and which meant that
dispersal of troops along the borders was essential. As a result |
would become easy meat for the Indians. I adjusted my plans
slightly but did not give up concentration. To make it easy for
the Indians and give them time to defeat me, Yahya neither
attacked in the west according to our over-all plan (the Battle of
the East will be fought in the West), nor did he refer the case to
the United Nations.
The case was not taken to the UNO to ensure that no political
settlement took place. The retaliation offensive was not launched
from the western theatre to give Indians time to crush my tired
garrison with the weight of numbers and fire power. This was in
consonance with the Yahya-Bhutto plan to leave East Pakistan
without a successor government. This could only happen if I was
defeated. Hence this silence and passiveness on Yahya’s part.
I sent the following message to my troops on 21 November
1971:
The Indians having failed to achieve their mission of establishment
of Bangladesh and crippling of East Pakistan Garrison through
insurgency, sneak raids, tactics of attrition and war of proxy, have
openly invaded East Pakistan on the night 20/21 November. Their
onslaught has been checked along the entire front by the brave
soldiers of Pakistan. They should not be allowed to enlarge their
lodgement area. Send boys from Al-Badar and Al-Shams for deep
targets inside India. Use local guerrillas and own commandos to attack
their tank harbours, gun areas, and their lines of communication
(L of C). Jitter them at night. They have abundance of mechanical
transport (MT), tanks and aircrafts and no dearth of petrol, Don’t
allow them to resort to mobile warfare. Make intelligent use of rivers,
streams, creeks, lakes and pools and inundation to make their MT
VK 7YX7XX) 
LK = 1 ~ 7) lL ] “ kK oY) 4°X 
7 tr
LX7 [ A/ 
X \] 
| 
y? 1 I ( ¥ ( Oil D I< 1 t \ ] ( > )] nN
¥YV 
VV 
VY 
e B, CQALRIWY 
pa CRE 
eowv\Ji

Te 
i 
ee 
ee 
——
THE INVASION 
123
road-bound and bulk of the forces canalized to the required channels
and areas as planned. Good luck. Allah be with you.
The Indian plan was to attack East Pakistan from all directions
by carrying out a battle of encirclement and finally converging
on Dhaka. They entered our territory with three infantry corps
and a communication zone acting as a Divisional Headquarters.
Kilo Force of Divisional strength was used for the Chittagong
Hill Tracts. From the Air Force they used seventeen squadrons of
modern aircraft and 125 helicopters. They had airfields all
around East Pakistan, and from the Navy: twelve capital ships
including their aircraft carrier Vikrant, which could also be used
as a mobile airfield.
On 21 November my Chief of Staff rang up the Vice Chief of
General Staff at GHQ, Major-General Qureshi, and followed up
with a written signal about the Indian invasion. I tried to speak
to the Chief of General Staff, Lt.-Gen. Gul Hassan, but he had
gone to Lahore to celebrate Lid knowing full well that the Indians
_ were going to attack East Pakistan on 21 November. I tried to
' contact Gen. Hamid, COAS. He too was not available. I learnt
later that both he and the President had left for Sialkot, ostensibly
to visit troops but actually for a partridge shoot—no C.-in-C.
' visits Muslim troops on an Eid day. The callous attitude of the
three seniormost officers of the Army shows that they were not in
the least interested in the affairs of East Pakistan or the integrity
of Pakistan. Like Nero, they played while Dhaka burned.
This did not upset me because I had guessed their intentions
and had an inkling through my COS that they had decided to
quit East Pakistan and abandon us. No effort was made by either
the President or Foreign Minister Bhutto to raise the matter at
the United Nations, to internationalize the issue, or to obtain a
cease-fire and a political solution by calling all the political
leaders.
By refusing to start the new offensive in the west, Yahya Khan made
the survival of Eastern Garrison practically impossible...
It must be recorded that invasion of East Pakistan by India is
perhaps the only instance of an armed attack by one member state of
United Nations on the territory of another, which the victim did not
immediately bring before the Security Council.
haloch
ira 
\ 
AN
YTA/NUAA/ 
YN 
W,
VY 
VY 
VV
VV 
VV VV.

124 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
The Indians had promised their Russian mentors that they
would capture East Pakistan in a week, capture Dhaka in twelve
days, and destroy the Pakistan Garrison in the process, but their
attack was halted at the very outset. The Indians stretched the
time to 3 December to achieve their aim, but they were stil
helpless near the borders even after thirteen days of their attack
on 21 November 1971.
Indian Intentions and Plan
The intentions of the Indians, their plan, and auxiliary efforts
were now quite clear. They were advancing as under:
Jessore Sector: The newly-raised II Indian Corps to capture Dhaka
(Lt-Gen. Raina) comprising: 
4 Mountain Division; 9. Infantry
Division; 50 (I) Para Brigade Group; two regiments of tanks and
five BSF battalions.
Bogra Sector: 33 Corps to capture Rangpur-Bogra and cross
over to Dhaka from Sirajganj (Lt.-Gen. Thapan) with 471
Engineers Brigade and 20 Mountain Division; 
6 Mountain
Division: 340 (I) Brigade Group; 33 Corps Artillery Brigade; 69
Cavalry (PT-76); 72 Armoured Regiment (T-55); and ten BSF
battalions.
Mymensingh Sector: The Indians started their advance with 5
Independent Brigade but had to bring in 63 Brigade to reinforce
this sector. 
A Mukti Bahini Brigade under Brigadier Shah Baig
Singh of the Indian Army was also operating in this area. The
whole sector was under command of 101 Communication zone.
The sector commander, Maj.-Gen. G. S. Gill, lost his foot due to
a mine explosion and was replaced by Maj.-Gen. Nagra, ex-2
Division. In Dhaka we saw the whole of 2 Division’s staff
controlling the operation in this sector.
Sythet, Brahmanbaria, and Laxam Sector: This was the main effort
comprising 4 Corps under Lt.-Gen. Sagat Singh with 8, 23 and 57
Divisions, 
a Mukti Bahini Brigade, 471 Engineer Brigade, many
engineer battalions and seventeen BSF battalions. It was
responsible for the eastern sector and had the task of capturing
Dhaka along with their auxiliary effort from Tura-Mymensingh
from the north. 8 Division of six brigades was to secure area

THE INVASION 
125
Maulvi Bazar-Sylhet; 57 Division and Mukti Bahini Brigade area
Brahmanbaria-Bhairab Bazar-Daudkandi-Dhaka; 23 Division was
to capture area Laxam-Chandpur, Feni, and Chittagong; and a
special force (KILO) of divisional strength had also been created
by the Indians to look after area Ranga Mati-Kaptai and north-
west of Chittagong.
Our Operations from 21 November to 3 December
1971
The change of deployment from counter-insurgency to sustained
fighting from battle positions was smooth and had proved its
efficacy during Indian attacks before total war. Their attacks were
supported by artillery and mortar fire. The rebels were attacking
from behind our main positions and providing intelligence to
the enemy—in fact, it was reported that the rebels guided them
to our positions and showed them tracks and routes for advance.
Each position of ours was known to them.
In spite of the fatigue due to some eight months’ continuous
fighting, the shortages in officers and equipment, and the
difficulty of evacuating casualties, my understrength troops fought
valiantly. I visited all formations and many units and it was
inspiring to see their morale.
It is a pity that during those eight months neither the President
and C.-in-C., nor the principal staff officers, Adjutant-General,
Quartermaster-General, and Master-General Ordnance, ever
visited us. General Hamid, COS, and CGS General Gul Hassan
did not bother even to ring me up, not to mention visiting
Eastern Command when a full fledged war was being fought for
the integrity of Pakistan. This did not deter us. My troops did not
allow the Indians to capture any piece of our sacred land and fell
back to their pre-planned designated positions.
The above period was mainly devoted to the battles of the
frontiers. With the start of the war, the Indian attacks (by their
regular Army and BSF), in conjunction with Mukti Bahini
operations, started on the border, and sneak air raids were
launched to support ground troops. Activities in the interior by
the rebels also intensified. 
The pattern was that the Indians would
attack a position supported by tanks and artillery, and Mukti
>
WWVWwvyury 
L~ oY» I» 
| » 
)
YA/ AA/ 
YRAA/ 
os 
q 
ba
WAY, 
a 
/A/ 
a /R/ 
1 
ff 
| 
ia
VV 
VA Y, 
[YY 
: 
| 
I 
| RY Jry 
)
vv 
vv 
VV 
etJVY 
AAV, 
YB 
DD 
SD
| 
42 0) 
4eu 
Y 
law 
a 
2a
Kron 
nrxt 
7 
(°° fr 
y
D| 
y 
| 
BY 
i 
@¢ 
| 
|
Ji CAL 
YewV\JAid
oe

