214 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
available to them, the failure of the Indian Army in this sector
could only be attributed to bad planning, poor generalship, lack
of foresight, rigidity, and cautious approach. It shows
incompetence, lack of tactical and strategical sense, and no urge
to push on. Arora failed to take advantage of his armour and did
not make use of ferries, which could have been brought in
abundance to Sirajganj Ghat. Bridging was not possible over the
river because of its vastness. They had air superiority, aerial
bridging capability, and the support of the local population, and
should have succeeded in crossing the river within days. They
could have forced me to vacate Mymensingh area, and occupied
Tangail in Dhaka sector and Bera-Pabna in Rajshahi sector, in
the early stages of the war. Had they concentrated on containing
and bypassing General Nazar’s forces in this sector they would
have had a better chance of posing a threat to Dhaka, forcing
him to occupy Bera-Pabna line to block their move towards
Dhaka.
All kudos to General Nazar who, with meagre resources,
defeated the Indian designs by playing his cards extremely well
and succeeded in containing and mauling them. Any good
general would have gone for containing and bypassing our forces,
but Arora, by going for territory, risked the danger of being
destroyed by us while banging his head against our fortresses.
Arora should be grateful to Bhutto, Yahya, and the Indian
propaganda, for eulogizing his virtual defeat into a victory.
Otherwise, militarily it was a poor show that Arora and Thapan
put up in this sector.
Kushtia-Jessore-Khulna Sector
II Corps was specially raised under Lt-Gen. Raina to capture
Dhaka. Raina was considered by the Indians to be a brilliant
general, but his handling of the Corps belied his reputation. I
still wonder what prompted Arora and Manekshaw to raise this
corps of two infantry divisions in Krishnagar opposite Jessore.
This sector had formidable obstacles, as there were ravines every
couple of kilometres. Movement off the road was not possible 
-
because of the marshy nature of the ground. It was ideal defensive
terrain, as was proved by the fighting in the area. when 4 Indian
VWWW.DaALOCNIIOTalry.CO)

DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
215
Division, instead of going for Faridpur-Dhaka, was drawn at a
tangent into Kushtia and was still fighting there after twenty-six
days of war. Similarly his 9 Division, with the bulk of the Corps
reserves, was lured to Daulatpur-Khulna by our 107 Brigade under
Hayat, and all efforts by the Indian division to counter-attack, or
to by-pass him, dislodge him, or out-flank him failed miserably.
The bulk of this division too should have gone towards Faridpur.
Some Indian elements reached the Madhumati River but could
not advance to Faridpur. At least one Indian writer has noted
that the opportunity to reach Dhaka was lost here. It is beyond
comprehension that, in spite of all the intelligence available to
them, Raina failed in his mission. I would blame General Arora,
who apparently did not analyse the terrain of East Pakistan in
detail and blindly launched his corps as if he was fighting a war
in the Punjab. He even failed in the north-west sector, which
offered Punjab-like terrain, and his handling of 2 Corps left much
to be desired. I would call him a ‘sun’ general with not much
knowledge of tactics, let alone strategy. He should have contained
my two brigades with Mukti Bahini units and BSF beefed up by
regular troops, and concentrated on capturing Faridpur. He did
not do so.
I wonder how he would have captured Dhaka in twelve days
when he was not able to capture any border town till 
9 December,
that is, in a period of nineteen days. Even if he had been given a
free run to Dhaka he could not have done it in six weeks, let
alone two, because there were many small river obstacles which
would have required bridging and build-up to reach Dhaka.
Above all, how would he have crossed the mighty Jamuna River,
many miles wide, with no ferries? Bridging it was out of the
question. How can General Arora justify such naive orders to this
corps for the capture of Dhaka? The war proved that he did not
have a clue as to how to achieve his strategic objective.
Sylhet-Comilla Sector
The Indian 4 Corps, under General Sagat Singh, was responsible
for capturing the area up to Ashuganj, but later his mission was
extended to capture Dhaka because both 33 Corps and 2 Corps
had failed to make any worthwhile progress. The terrain in this
| 
; 
| 
“1 |
é 
y 
@ iD ' 
I~ 
'rITKAR”A 
rt 
7
\ 
ad 
a 
pa 
| 
pi 
ai 
V
Y 
7 
G 
| 
gM 
{ 
y 
I 
q 
V
e 
UY 
UA 
VS OW 
AAACLYA CAA
a
_—

216 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
area was the worst for military operations. It was full of ravines,
marshes, and lakes, and did not allow large-scale military
manoeuvre. It was more suited for defence. India launched its
main effort of three infantry Divisions, independent brigades,
and Mukti Bahini brigades, along with their specially-formed
Kilo Force with many battalions of BSF. What did Arora gain in
trying to invest Sylhet, where our two brigades were successful in
pinning down his 8 Infantry division of six brigades? Similarly,
we succeeded in containing 57 Mountain and 23 Infantry
Divisions in area Comilla-Mainamati. The Indians tried hard to
capture this area but in vain. Their advance to Chandpur was of
no value. Initially it was not in our plans to hold Chandpur, but
under orders from GHQ we occupied it to be vacated: later for
the defence of Dhaka.
Arora frittered away all his resources against unimportant
objectives. Even 57 Division got bogged down in area Bhairab
Bazar and Ashuganj. 4 Indian Corps and 101 Communication
Zone were left with four weak brigades for the capture of Dhaka.
Their helicopters could have brought their infantry across the
Meghna one section per heli-gunship, but could not lift their
tanks or guns. The railway line was within firing range of our 27
Brigade in Bhairab Bazar. They would have had to clear Bhairab
Bazar so that they could bring up their tanks and heavy and
medium guns over the bridge before moving towards Dhaka, but
Sagat Singh could not do so because his corps was spread from
Sylhet to Chandpur and he could not concentrate enough troops
to tackle Bhairab Bazar Fortress, whose back was protected by
the mighty Meghna river.
Mymensingh-Tangail-Dhaka Sector
The shortest route to Dhaka was from Tura in India. The
communications were along the grain of the country and there
were no major obstacles, though there were good defensive
positions in Madhupur Forest/Tangail. The Mukti Bahini under
Kadir Siddiqi was fairly strong and could help the Indians during
their advance towards Dhaka. I ask myself why Arora launched
only two regular infantry brigades and one Mukti brigade in the
area under 101 Communications Zone. This area required a

DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
217
concentration of armoured and infantry forces to achieve the
main aim of capturing Dhaka, but India’s poor leadership was
extremely cautious and did not storm the outpost of Kamalpur,
where one company should have sufficed, yet their one regular
brigade plus a Mukti brigade could not do anything until I
ordered my post to surrender, twenty-one days later. Even today
I still wonder why Arora failed to appreciate the importance of
this sector and why he ignored it. 
A major offensive action here
would have enabled him to pose a threat to Dhaka in the shortest
possible time and force me to adopt my alternative plan at the
very outset. The dropping of Para Brigade at Tangail failed
because its timing was wrong and thus could not block the
withdrawal of my troops from Mymensingh area. General Arora
says that he dropped only one battalion, which is even worse—
for the final objective one has to put in maximum effort to obtain
the required results. 
The Indian paratroops remained contained
around their drop zone and did little to facilitate the Indian
advance towards Dhaka. Similarly, the air bridging of the Meghna
River failed because the troops of 4 Indian Corps could not stop
the move of Saadullah’s brigade from Ashuganj to Bhairab Bazar.
Nagra’s troops were held up near Tangail because there was no
transport for them. All this happened due to lack of co-ordination
and forethought. Aerial troops are used to clinch a decision, to
assist various columns to link up, and to block the moves of
enemy columns. Arora achieved nothing of the sort by the use of
aerial troops.
It was the Indian propaganda hype, aided by our conspiratorial
leaders who ordered us to surrender, that gave India the victory,
otherwise no military scholar would give them credit. This is also
obvious from the fact that most of the generals of Arora’s
command, including General Arora himself, were not considered
fit for promotion, or even retention, in the post-war Army because
of their failure in East Pakistan—any so-called victorious general
should have reached the rank of C.-in-C. Indian Army or at least
been retained in the army as a show piece.
This war has been called the ‘Lightning Campaign’, but it was
nowhere near lightning; it was a snail's pace campaign. Had
General Arora thoroughly analysed the Germans’ Lightning
Campaign, which was a swift advance towards Dunkirk in World
War Il, and planned something similar against East Pakistan, he
ad

218 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
would have achieved better results than he gained by his
stereotyped plan based on old-fashioned tactics.
The Germans called their offensive concept blitzkrieg because
it was based on lightning mobility, by-passing of positions, and
Heating straight for their objective, achieving destruction of the
enemy's forces in the process. Later, when they amassed their
armour for the Ardennes Offensive they planned for total
mobility. Their enemy was so stunned that by the time they knew
what had happened, the Germans had already reached their
objective and the entire enemy was in the bag. Arora had enough
tanks and APCs to move at speed in at least two sectors and on
two axes where the ground was suitable for moving mechanical
transport cross country. Local help was also there to enhance his
mobility. It was not lack of resources or unsuitability of terrain
which made Arora drag his feet on the battlefield of East Pakistan,
but lack of determination, lack of confidence, lack of knowledge
of mobile warfare, over-cautiousness, and a dearth of good field
commanders, plus, of course, the stiff and organized resistance
put up by the Pakistan Army from tactically sited positions.
General Arora’s plan did not have any of the ingredients of
blitzkrieg. Instead of concentrating his forces, he dispersed them
all around East Pakistan. Had he concentrated all his armour in
Rangpur-Hilli and Tura-Mymensingh sector, which were ideal
tank terrains, he would have achieved better results. Instead of
attacking head-on in both sectors, he should have boldly launch-
ed his armour. Bypassing Rangpur-Dinajpur and containing our
forces with a minimum of his troops, instead of the full
6 Mountain Division, he could have made a breakthrough from
north of Hilli area—as he tried to do much later. Then he should
have moved straight on to Sirajganj Ghat—where there should
have been ferries available for crossing the Jamuna River—and
then towards Dhaka. Similarly in Tura-Mymensingh sector, had
he put in maximum armour and a couple of infantry divisions
and bypassed or contained our positions, he would have been in
a position to pose a threat to Dhaka within a week. Since at
Kamalpur he preferred to throw two brigades against our one
composite company, (having only one regular platoon), and put
five infantry brigades, a tank brigade and corps artillery against
Hilli, naturally it would have taken him months to capture East
Pakistan, if at all. But being held by our troops on the borders

DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
219
for about three weeks, and then being lured on to our main
defences, he could not even dream of capturing East Pakistan.
We, on the other hand, had a holding role, and were told on
5 December 1971 not to allow any Indian troops to be transferred
to West Pakistan. We succeeded admirably in that not a single
unit was moved from the Indian’s eastern sector to the west. But
our West Pakistan Army let us down by not launching the
offensive to win the battle of East Pakistan in the West, which
they were supposed to do and for which they had enough forces,
ample resource, and initiative. We at least saved West Pakistan by
pinning down twelve Indian divisions.
To capture Dhaka, the Indians would have had to fight hard
and suffer heavy losses in destroying my force, but to their good
luck, the blunders of our High Command enabled them to turn
what would have been a military stalemate into a victory. I was
just told, ‘well done blue, red is the winner’.

Cuapter 13
ENGINEERED DEBACLE
I have no intention of trying to disentangle the web of intrigues
and conspiracies concerning the separation of East Pakistan that
have been such a feature of the chequered history of Pakistan. I
will say, however, that it was a consistent policy of all the rulers to
deprive the East Pakistanis of their legitimate right of
participation in the governance and decision-making process of
the country. The results of the 1970 elections could have kept
Pakistan together if the democratic process of rule by the majority
party had been adhered to.
Yahya and Bhutto viewed Mujib’s victory in those elections
with distaste, because it meant that Yahya had to vacate the
Presidency and Bhutto had to sit on the opposition benches,
which was contrary to his aspirations. So these two got together
and hatched a plan at Larkana, Bhutto’s home town, which came
to be known as the ‘Larkana Conspiracy’. The plan was to
postpone the National Assembly session indefinitely, and to block
the transfer of power to the Awami League by diplomacy, threats,
intrigues, and the use of military force. Connected to this
conspiracy was the ‘M. M. Ahmad plan’, which aimed at leaving
East Pakistan without a successor government. As a matter of
fact, after the announcement of the date of the Assembly session
to be held at Dhaka, General Omar began putting pressure on
the politicians to boycott it. The reason he gave was that East
Pakistan had become a hub of international intrigue, therefore it
should be discarded. In the end this clique achieved its aim
when Bhutto tore up the Polish Resolution.
Mr Sajjad Haider, then Ambassador in India, had warned the
Government of Pakistan that India was preparing for an all-out
war against Pakistan with the help of the Russians after their
August 197] treaty, and that India was assembling forces strong

ENGINEERED DEBACLE 
221
enough to overwhelm our small, ill-equipped Eastern Garrison.
Mr Haider was told that he was getting unduly panicky and
imagining things. When he continued sending in reports about
Indian intentions, he was transferred to Turkey.
I came to know of the M. M. Ahmad plan from Mr Muzaffar
Hussain, who was Chief Secretary of East Pakistan at the time. He
was evacuated from Government House and brought to the
Cantonment after the surrender ceremony. In a fit of rage, he
cursed and said that the M. M. Ahmad plan had been
implemented. Mr Zafar Ahmed Ansari, a veteran politician, in a
meeting with me later, confirmed the existence of such a plan,
which is said to have been selected out of over a dozen options
presented by M. M. Ahmad.
The plan was aimed at allowing Yahya and Bhutto to continue
as President and Prime Minister of Pakistan respectively.
In addition to the Larkana Plan there were various other
intrigues between Bhutto and his cohorts. For example there was
the collusion between Bhutto, Lt-Gen. Gul Hassan, and Air
Marshal Rahim Khan, who were to be appointed Chief of Staff
Army and retained as COS Air respectively. This was initially
implemented by a coup as explained earlier. When Yahya refused
to hand over power, Air Marshal Rahim buzzed his aircraft over
President’s House. General Gul Hassan has confirmed in his book
Memoirs that he was in close consultation with Air Marshal Rahim
after the surrender. Bhutto also conspired with Tikka, who was
not retired with the other twenty-one Generals and Brigadiers in
spite of the fact that he was senior to Gul Hassan. Tikka was
apparently also promised the job of Chief of Staff Army despite
the fact that he bungled things in East Pakistan, earned the
nickname of ‘Butcher’, and was largely responsible for the failure
of Pakistan’s battle concept. I did not know of these collusions
ull much later.
After my return to Pakistan from Indian captivity in 1974,
while preparing my report on the East Pakistan débacle, I heard
persistent hints from GHQ sources that Eastern Command had
been sacrificed according to a detailed plan, and that its senior
commanders were made the scapegoats for the loss of East
Pakistan. My initial doubts turned into conviction when, over the
years, I pondered this episode and discussed it with people who
knew that HQ Eastern Command had been deliberately cheated,

222 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
tricked, and misled as part of a grave conspiracy by the High
Command. In fact it was so obvious that even the Indian Major-
General Shah Beg Singh told me in Jubblepur, ‘Your goose is
cooked, Sir. They have decided to put the whole blame on you
and your command for this episode.’
In my opinion the following happenings prove that the fall of
East Pakistan was deliberately engineered:
May 1971:
Not allowing me to enter India in pursuit of the beaten, retreating
guerillas although politically, militarily, and economically we had
every justification to enter India—the Indians had entered our
area and were still firing into our territory. My going into India
would have nipped things in the bud and Pakistan would have
remained united.
September 1971:
Follow-up of Larkana/M. M. Ahmad plans. Briefing by my COS
about new enemy deployment. Advised to cover all approaches
and seal the borders (i.e., dispersal of troops). No written orders
issued revising the original tasks.
My recommendation for grant of general amnesty and the
starting of a political process not implemented.
October 1971:
Visit of COS Army. My strategic planning is approved. He re-
emphasizes the importance of not losing any territory where a
Bangladesh Government could be established. I am told to
continue my operations in the interior and on the borders.
Mr Sajjad Haider, our Ambassador in India, persists in his
warning about India’s impending attack. He is transferred.
GHQ orders me to commit my reserves against anti-rebel
operations at all levels. This leaves me in the lurch.
Promised additional troops are not sent, nor are deficiencies in
tanks, artillery, engineers, and equipment made up, thus creating
difficulties for the successful prosecution of war.

ENGINEERED DEBACLE 
223
Governor Malik’s proposal to induct the remaining Awami
League MNAs into the government is not approved; no elections
are held to fill the seats of absconding MNAs.
15 November 1971:
Major-General Jamshed and my COS brief army top brass and
COS Navy; their request that the divisions in East Pakistan be
upgraded from light formations for law and order to proper
divisions with full organic complement of artillery, armour, and
others is not heeded. No deficiencies are made up as per COS
Army’s decision, thus leaving East Pakistan troops too weak to
face the Indian onslaught.
19 November 1971:
Information received that the Indian Army is planning a full-
fledged attack on Eid day. Eight battalions and 111 Infantry
Brigade from Rawalpindi and the Engineer Regiment are
promised for the defence of Dhaka. 111 Brigade’s allocation is
cancelled—it is to be used in the coup d'etat against Yahya. Only
two battalions reach Dhaka.in the next four days. Allocation of
the remaining battalions cancelled. The troops earmarked for
the defence of Dhaka never arrived.
21 November 1971:
The Indians attack East Pakistan. Only VCGS is available to
receive the news. CGS Lt-Gen. Gul Hassan is enjoying Eid at
Lahore, knowing full well that war is imminent on Eid Day.
22 November 1971:
The President and COS Army leave for hunting in Sialkot area
and decline to attend the briefing at GHQ. Notorious remark of
the President: ‘What can I do for East Pakistan? I can only pray.’
Pakistan is under attack but the President does not move the
Security Council to stop the Indian aggression. Nor is the
offensive started from the west according to the plan ‘Battle of
the East will be fought in the West’.
22 November 1971 to 2 December 1971;
Neither diplomatic nor political action, nor any other move to

