188 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
I was unaware of the Governor’s flash message of 13 December
referred to. Neither the Governor nor Farman had told me about
it. Apparently a desperate situation had been painted for the
President, which had resulted in the above signal. But what
intrigues me is that, such an important message was sent as an
open unclassified signal, not top secret. Was this a part of the
conspiracy? The signal was probably intercepted by the Indians
mn clear.
Our first reaction was that it might be an Indian plant.
However, I wanted to confirm its authenticity and also its
implications. For one thing, I was not fighting an independent
war as commander of an independent army of a different country,
so I wanted to check about the overall GHQ plan for a cease-fire
with India and its terms, etc. For another, if I was to negotiate my
independent cease-fire, it would not be from a position of
strength. [t would be tantamount to surrender.
My COS therefore contacted Brig. Janjua, who confirmed that
this signal was meant to be unclassified. Instead of repeating
these thoughts in a signal, we asked GHQ to clarify the later
portion of the President’s signal and made efforts to contact
COS/CGS on the telephone. By about noon on 14 December,
i.e., nine hours after the receipt of the President’s signal, I got
through to the CGS, Lt-Gen. Gul Hassan, and told him about
the President’s orders. He asked me what signal and what cease-
fire I was talking about. When I explained to him, he replied
that he did not know about these orders and, since the President
had issued them, I should talk to him.
Earlier that day, Governor A. M. Malik had talked to me on
the telephone about the President’s order. I told him that I had
asked for clarification of the signal from GHQ. He asked me
whether I was going to agree to stop the war or not. I replied
that I still had every intention of fighting on. I heard about the
Governor's resignation that afternoon, and soon after that about
the strafing of Governor's House. The Governor vacated
Governor’s House the same day. He wrote me the following
letter on 15 December:
My dear Niazi,
May I know if any action has been taken, from your side, on Pak
Army signal No. 0013 dated 14.12.71 from the President to you and

DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
189
to me as the Governor. This message clearly said (that) you should
take all necessary measures to stop the fighting and preserve the lives
of all armed forces personnel, all those from West Pakistan and all
loyal elements. The signal also says ‘you have now reached a stage
where further resistance is no longer humanly possible, nor will it
serve any useful purpose’. Hostility is still continuing and loss of life
and disaster continue. I request you to do the needful.
With regards.
' 
Yours Sincerely,
A. M. Malik
After my talk with the CGS on 14 December, I sent a signal on
15 December at 0910 hrs telling the President that my decision
to fight it out still stood. I made efforts to talk to either the
President or the COS. In the evening General Hamid contacted
me from President’s House. In the meantime, Malik had probably
talked to the President about my reluctance to implement the
orders. I asked my COS, Brigadier Baqir 
* Siddiqui, to listen to
what General Hamid had to say and 
to take notes. COS Army
emphatically ordered me that I must ‘act accordingly; stop the
war and contact somebody in Dhaka whom I know’. I argued
against this order. He repeated it three or four times and said
that West Pakistan was in danger, the situation was bad, and I was
to surrender. I asked to speak to the President. General Hamid
told me that he was in the bathroom. Actually he was not in the
athroom; he had passed out, being too drunk. Air Marshal
him Khan, who seemed drunk to me, then spoke to me and
insisted that I must obey the President's orders.
As a soldier I believed in obeying orders and it was only when
COS Army and C.-in-C. PAF had repeatedly ordered me to obey
the President and act accordingly, about eighteen hours after
receipt of the President’s orders to surrender, that I decided to
approach the American Consul-General. General Farman insisted
that I should use Russian channels but I decided otherwise. My
message to the Indian C.-in-C. conveyed my request for.a cease-
fire under the following conditions:
a. Regrouping of Pakistan Armed Forces in designated areas
to be mutually agreed upon between the commanders of
the opposing forces.
b. The safety of all military and para military forces
guaranteed.

190 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
c. Safety of all those who settled in East Pakistan since 1947
guaranteed.
d. No reprisals against those who had helped the adminis-
tration since March 1971.
Under these conditions, the Pakistan Armed Forces and
Pakistan Para Military Forces would cease all military operations.
A copy of these proposals was transmitted to GHQ. I still did
not issue orders to formations because I was determined to fight
if COS India did not agree to my conditions.
The reply from the COAS Indian Army, General Manekshaw,
was received at 2330 hrs on 15 December 1971, and is reproduced
below. He acknowledged my communication regarding cease-
- fire but insisted on surrender as already communicated by him
to General Farman Ali in his two messages—of which I was not
aware. I did not know why and how and under whose orders
Farman was communicating directly with General Manekshaw.
For Lt.-Gen, Niazi from Sam Manekshaw, Chief of the Army Staff India.
Firstly, 
| 
have received your communications of cease-fire, in
Bangladesh at 1430 hours today through the American Embassy at
New Delhi.
Secondly, I had previously informed General Farman Ali in two
messages that I would guarantee (a) the safety of all your military and
para military forces who surrender to me in Bangladesh (b) complete
protection to Foreign Nationals, ethnic minorities and personnel of
West Pakistan origin no matter who they may be. Since you have
indicated your desire to stop fighting I expect you to issue orders to
all forces under your command in Bangladesh fo cease fire immediately
and surrender to my advancing forces wherever they are located.
Thirdly, I give you my solemn assurance that personnel who
surrender shall be treated with the dignity and respect that soldiers
are entitled to and I shall abide by the provisions of the Geneva
Convention. Further, as you have many wounded I shall ensure that
they are well cared for and your dead given proper burial. No one
need have any fear for their safety, no matter where they come from.
Nor shall there be any reprisals by forces operating under my
command,
Fourthly, immediately I receive a positive response from you / shall
direct General Arora the Commander of Indian and Bangladesh Forces in the
_ Eastern Theatre to refrain from all air and ground actions against your
forces. As a token-of my good faith I have ordered that no air action
shall take place over Dacca from 1700 hours today.
wwfmwy) 
wy 
L oO) | I» 
h \ | Ar O11 ¥°XTM 7 
4 v CY ] 4 a ae |
Vv Vv VV V Vv a L J aA I LJ Wil I I LU yf Al y ewVUIiIli

11. SITUATION ON 16 DECEMBER 1971
BALURGHAT SA
Nn / 
20 INDIAN = 
-)
HET 
N.
Bocra) 
YMENSINGH 
— 
a)iNoiAN ovv
202(A\
hea 
marine S
TANGAIL 
SRE DE
NATOIR 
:
34 
Pgh 
SHaInA 
BAZAR 
~
kB 
HELIO J ><]
—ELEMENTS 57 INDIAN DIV
cm"
* & INDIAN DIV. 
= panty = 
-
a 
1 
nl
23 INDIAN
) 
JESSORE 
pa 
EKO FORCE
Ex 
gaan 
|
RAMGARH
9 INDIAN DIV. 
x 
(
r(ay |
k—S 
107 
'
CALCUTTA 
oe
J 
DAUTATPUR 
')
b<J 
| 
KHULNA 
r
X—41(A) 
{
TAG ONG
ba, \
www.balochlibrary.com

DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
19]
Fifthly, I assure you I have no desire to inflict any unnecessary
casualties on your troops as I abhor loss of human lives. However
should you not comply with what I have stated you will leave me with
no other alternative but to resume my offensive with the utmost
vigour at 0900 hours Indian Standard Time on 16th December.
Sixthly, in order to be able to discuss and finalize all matters
quickly I have arranged for a radio link on listening from 1700 hours
Indian Standard Time today 15th December. The frequency will be
6605 (6605) KHZ by day and 3216 (3216) KHZ by night. Call signs
will be Cal (Calcutta) and Dac (Dacca). I would suggest you instruct
your signallers to restore microwave communications immediately.
(Emphases added)
I sent a copy of this reply to GHQ and received a signal from
COAS, vide 0015 of 15 December, suggesting that I should accept
the terms laid down by C.-in-C. India.
Farman is no doubt a very intelligent person, which is why he
succeeded in misguiding and hoodwinking people about his
secret messages to Sam Manekshaw. He says in his book that the
BBC announced that I had left East Pakistan and that he had
taken over. The Indians knew that I was in Dhaka and very much
in command. I was visiting Governor’s House regularly until the
Governor resigned. The route to Governor’s House from the
Cantonment went along the city’s main roads and J was seen by
everybody. In addition, I was visiting the units around Dhaka,
and. was for a number of times with 6 LAA Regiment, which had
shot down a record number of enemy aircraft. I also held a
couple of press conferences, and my ‘tanks over my chest’
statement was made on 13 December to reporters at the Hotel 
—
Intercontinental. I also visited the Hotel Intercontinental on 14
December to persuade the civil officers to shift to the
Cantonment. Farman’himself mentions many of the above events
in his book, yet he still thinks the Indians were foolish enough to
accept the BBC's disinformation. Farman knew I was in Dhaka,
so he should have brought Manekshaw’s signals to me. The
secrecy on his part raises serious doubts. 
—
The Indians had launched an intensive psychological warfare,
spreading rumours through All-India Radio, the BBC, leaflets,
and the locals, from 5 December. The message from Sam
Manekshaw was forcefully addressed to all soldiers, commanders
and officers, giving his personal assurance for their safety and
Se ee 
1 
7 
2 | 
S
YA 
/ 
YN 
) { 
7] 
XY 
X 4 
rTM~ C) 
I~ fy» 
wa 
sg 
te 
se 
no 
wew 
> 
» 
_ 
a
\ / VV VW 
I ) a | q 
) ( \ 
\ } 
| 
| 
I \ Vv a r XT) 
a CVT N)
v 
\ 
v 
V 
VV 
et(VaAUAala 
DASE EC ERS I CAi 
y . 
/N J 
|
heh 
Y 
eoWrVYJALE
+ 
|
|
|
A 
J

192 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
safe conduct to West Pakistan. The leaflets were dropped to units
in all areas.
Farman writes on p. 143:
On the morning of 11 December Mr. Popus, the Consul General of
the USSR came to see me. He said that the proposals given by the
Governor's signal were acceptable to his Government.
In the next paragraph he writes that General Peerzada rang
him up at 0900 hrs on 11 December and said that the Governor’s
proposal (see, p. 183 supra)had been approved with some minor
amendment; the amended draft was being sent to him. When it
arrived, he saw that the ‘amendment’ was that the clause about a
political solution had been deleted. This further proves that he
had already given it to the Russians and the UNO without waiting
for the President’s approval.
It was well known that the Russians were openly providing
information to the Indians and had supplied the latest bombs
that caused irreparable damage to the airfields. It was also known
that they were flying air sorties with the Indians. Russian advisers
were also reported to be working with the Indian armed forces.
Their Deputy Minister had positioned himself in the Indian
Operations Room. In spite of that they were extra kind to
Farman. 
| 
|
Farman writes about his conversation with Mr Popus!, the
Consul-General of the USSR:
Then he said ‘May I make a personal suggestion? Mukti Bahini is
going to kill you. I have a special room prepared for you. Come and
stay in that. We will get you out of Dacca safe.’
In the meantime I had sent another signal advising the
President to release Mr Mujib-ur-Rahman to keep Pakistan intact.
My COS, Brigadier Bagir, tried to contact General Peerzada, but
he was not available. Brigadier Ejaz Azeem unofficially told him
that the President had written NFA (no further action) on that
signal. On return I asked for it, as well as other nationally
important signals sent by me and the Governor, for my report 
_
and presentation to the Hamood Commission. I was told they
were with Bhutto and that 1 could ask him myself. They were
never given to me.

DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
193
On the night of 15/16 December, I ordered our helicopters
to Burma. Some interested persons started a controversy about
General Rahim Khan’s evacuation by helicopter to Burma. He
did very well during the insurgency operations as GOC 14
Pivision and was awarded Hilal-e-Jurat. During the war he was
commanding an ad hoc Division at Chandpur when the enemy
broke through nearby and threatened his HQ. He was ordered
to fall back on his designated positions for the defence of Dhaka.
During evacuation of his HQ some of the ferries got stuck in the
chars and were delayed. As a result, on their way back to
Narayangan] they were attacked by the Indian Air Force. His HQ
boat was sunk and we lost many brave soldiers and officers.
General Rahim was wounded and was evacuated to CMH Dhaka.
He was evacuated under my personal orders with some important
papers to be delivered to GHQ. These papers reached President
Bhutto's house and were never made available when required.
Separate helicopters were allotted for the nurses. In the darkness,
however, the nurses reached the wrong helipad and could not
get to the designated one. Their seats remained empty and the
helicopters were flown to Burma without them.
Maj.-Gen. Farman insisted that he should also be evacuated
to Burma or West Pakistan on the night 15/16 December
because the Mukti Bahini would kill him for his alleged massacre
of the Bengalis and intellectuals. It was pathetic to see him pale
and almost on the verge of a breakdown. I gave him my solemn
assurance that I would protect him from the Mukti Bahini and
the Indians even at the cost of my life. I only hope that he would
acknowledge that, in spite of persistent demands from the
Indians and the Mukti Bahini, I emphatically refused to let
anybody touch him. 
-
It will be seen that at the end of the war I was sull in control of
the following:
a. (1) Dinajpur-Rangpur, Saidpur, Bogra, Nator, Rajshahi,
Pabna, Bera, and most of the ferry sites.
(2) Chalna, Khulna, Faridpur area.
(3) Bhairab Bazar, Sylhet, Mainamati (Comilla).
(4) Chittagong, Chittagong Hill Tracts, Cox’s Bazar,
Teknaf, Noakhali.
b. Dhaka Triangle on Mirzapur, Narsungdi, and Manikganij.
c. Sarwar-Mirpur, Tungi, Dewra, and Narayangan}.

= 
"Sipatewraa
194 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
d. Cantt and city built-up areas for final fight to the finish.
I never wanted, asked for, or gave any indication for a cease-
fire or surrender. My important signals ended with the assertion
‘will fight to the last man last round’, and my resolve is indicated
by the setting up of HQ Eastern Command with communications
in the Government Quarters, 
and by my pleas to COS Army that
I could fight it out. It was General Hamid’s and GHQ’s orders
that I should surrender to save West Pakistan.
Henry Kissinger records: ‘There was no question of saving
East Pakistan. Both Nixon and I had recognized for months that
its independence was inevitable.” He further states: ‘We
recognized the Indian occupation of East Pakistan as an
accomplished fact, our objective was to scare off an attack on
West Pakistan.’ The Indians were in occupation of Shakargarh,
ready to break out towards Gujranwala-Wazirabad. They were a
couple of miles from Marala Headworks and could destroy
Pakistan’s economy and infrastructure. Knowing this fact I then
decided to obey orders and face the ignominy of surrender—
which suited all parties: Mujib, Bhutto, the Indians, the
Americans, and the Russians. 
me ' Gre ther 24 
a4
_I quote from the book Jron Bars of Freedom by Matiur-Rahman +
oe 
=
and Waseem Hassan: ‘Aiding India in her expansionist venture
were a motley collection of friends. First and foremost among
them was the Soviet Union, followed by the United States and
other lesser powers such as Israel and Afghanistan, all plotted to
dismember it.’ The French writer B.H. Levy rightly observed:
‘The die was cast, the plot was laid, Pakistan was condemned to
die, because the great powers had decided unanimously to
assasinate her.’ Dr Safdar Mahmood quotes Levy in his own book
and writes, ‘the plan was hatched between India, Russia and USA
to break Pakistan.’
No outsider can break up a country without the assistance of
the people of that country. The disintegration of Pakistan was
the result of various conspiracies, but in the final analysis the
break-up was due to Yahya’s desire to retain power, Bhutto's
treachery and greed for power, and Mujib’s dubious activities in
quest of power.
Eastern Garrison was used as an expendable pawn in a game
of power-politics. I was made the sacrificial lamb. My position in
East Pakistan can be compared with that of the Japanese Pacific

DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
195
Force in World War I[—their fifty-eight divisions, with naval and
air support, had to surrender unconditionally to save Japan when
the Americans dropped atom bombs on Hiroshima nad Nagasaki.
Syed Alamdar Raza, the last 
Commissioner of Dhaka, wrote in
his book, Dacca Debacle. ‘He wanted to fight till the end’—‘he’
meaning myself, General 
al Niazi. -% Amir -Abdadtal « CLan -Niqzt
NOTE
1, Ata function I had challenged Mr Popus to a duel for calling the President
of Pakistan a drunkard. Most of the diplomats present came and stood behind
me. I think it was the American Consul-General who said, ‘Well done,
General, now forget it, the matter is settled.’ I have narrated this incident to
reflect the inimical attitude of the Russians, whom Farman had befriended.
tar ATT CH
LLL JIT al y Com
a4

CuarTer 12
DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION
AND THE INDIAN PLAN
Dhaka Bowl Misconception
The rivers Padma, Brahmaputra, and Meghna join below Dhaka
and form two sides of an irregular triangle. The third side of this
triangle, which is the northern side, is obstacle-free. This area of
Dhaka and its suburb has been referred to by the Indians as
PBM, after the three rivers, or Dhaka Bowl. The point under
discussion is that according to the Indians I should have deployed
my troops in the area of PBM and not beyond the rivers.
Before I comment on this misconception, it is pertinent to
find out how this question cropped up: the idea that I should
have deployed my troops behind instead of across the rivers.
Had I adopted this unworkable, politically unacceptable, and
tactically unsound idea, I could not have carried out any one of
the tasks given to me and would have had to hand over to the
enemy on a platter whatever it wanted, without a fight. How
could I have stopped the Mukti Bahini from entering East
Pakistan without blocking the routes of ingress and infiltration
from India? I had to keep communication routes open by
securing communication centres, ghats, bridges, and ferry sites.
How could the borders have been secured and restored unless
we were there? We could not have kept the Provincial
Government functioning by vacating more than three fourths of
the provincial territory which, with the exception of Dhaka,
contained all division, district, and tehsil headquarters and police
thanas? How could I have stopped the Government of
~ 
Bangladesh from being established in the vacated area. I could
not have prevented the Indians from moving their troops from

