TOPOGRAPHY AND TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
59
3,000 miles (2,500 miles land and 500 sea). The frontage is not
in one line or in a semicircle as in West Pakistan, but makes
more or less a complete circle which is divided into four sectors
by mighty rivers. Therefore, to hold a continuous defensive line,
even with gaps between defensive localities and areas, was not
possible. Even Divisional defensive areas could not be organized.
At most battalion, and at places Brigade, localities could be
organized in Divisional defensive areas.
I inherited General Tikka’s deployment. I wanted to evict the
guerrillas and I had two courses open to me:
a. Start pushing them towards the borders and eventually destroy
them or push them across India. This would have taken a long
time and would have been expensive in men and materials. |
would have been fighting on ground of their choosing, and
their routes of reinforcement and withdrawal would remain
open till the end.
b. Without caring for flanks and rear, shoot out with multiple
columns for the borders and seal the routes of reinforcement
and withdrawal. By our fast move and multiple thrusts we
would be able to achieve surprise and thus create panic among
the guerrillas, and the fear that they were being isolated.
Hence they were likely to leave their prepared positions and
safe areas and run for India for security and safety.
I decided to adopt the second course.
General Tikka’s deployment was mostly of a defensive nature.
For an offensive, some changes in grouping and deployment
were required, but as I wanted to achieve surprise and wrench
the initiative from the enemy, speed was most essential to reach
the borders quickly. So I made minimum changes, gave new
tasks to formations, and told them to shoot out. I just told them
to ‘reach the borders fastest with the maximum speed’.
I issued directives which were to be carried out in the following
four phases:
Phase 1: clearing of all major border towns and sealing of the
routes of infiltration, exfiltration, and smuggling, and
clearing Chittagong base and keeping it safe from
artillery and mortar fire.
Phase 2: opening of essential river, road, and rail commu-
nications.

60 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Phase 3: clearing of all towns in the interior and coastal areas
of Mukti Bahini.
Phase 4: combing of the whole of the province and eliminating
rebels /infiltrators.
The tasks were to be completed by 15 May 1971 at the latest. Ir
was emphasized that speed and multiple thrusts would pay
dividends. 
;
The troops and the tasks
16 Division under Major-General Nazar Hussain Shah was
responsible for Rajshahi Civil Division. Dinajpur, Rangpur, Bogra,
and Rajshahi were to be held. Due to the closeness of Indian
cantonments, and the area being flat and suitable for tanks in
dry weather, the only tank regiment in East Pakistan was given to
this Division.
9 Division under Major-General Shaukat Riza was responsible
for Dhaka and Khulna Divisions. Dhaka, being the provincial
capital and an international airport, was vital.
There were no obstacles on the northern side of Dhaka, but
there were good covering positions in area Madhupur Forest and
around Tangil city. Mymensingh was to be held in strength.
Khulna Division was the next priority after Rajshahi Division,
again due to the proximity of Indian cantonments—it was
comparatively easy for the Indian Army to concentrate troops in
front of this position. Jessore was to be held in strength; Faridpur
was also to be held as it gave depth to Jessore and assured
protection to Dhaka as well.
The waterlogged areas of Chalna, Barisal, and the Sunderbans
were given to CAF.
14 Division under Major-General Rahim Khan was responsible
for Chittagong Division. Sylhet, Brahmanbaria, Comilla, and
Chittagong were to be held. Chittagong was vital. Commandos
were deployed in the Chittagong Hill Tracts.
After allocating areas and tasks to the Divisions, I visited them,
and then I started preparing my detailed plans, further groupings,
and the allocation of new boundaries to formations.
It is a historical fact that no aggressor can survive in a hostile

TOPOGRAPHY AND TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
61
land, where the population is against you and friendly to your
opponent. Similarly, where traitors have co-operated with the
enemy, nations have gone down in spite of the heroism and
gallantry of the armed forces. We had to face both these elements
on a rather large scale. After General Tikka Khan's harsh and
haphazard military action, the getting away of the Bengali armed
personnel and politicians, their forming into Mukti Bahini and
establishing a Bangladesh government-in-exile in Calcutta, and
the local population turning against us, we became like a foreign
army in a hostile land. The Bengalis used to call us the “Army of
Occupation’. Mukti Bahini had the support not only of the local
Bengalis and the Indian Army, but of the whole of the Indian
economic, political, and military set-up, in addition to advisers
from Russia. 
‘ 
‘
Although the opposition was numerically superior, accustomed
to the local climatic conditions, familiar with the battle area, and
held the initiative, we still completed Phases 1 to 3 successfully in
record time. By the end of April 1971 we had cleared and
occupied all border towns and BOPs, sealed the routes of
infiltration, and re-established the boundaries of East Pakistan,
which had vanished during the time of General Yaqub and
General Tikka. By the beginning of May, the river and sea routes
to Chittagong, Chalna, and Khulna had been cleared, and traffic
to and from these ports had been started. Rail communication
too had been restored in the province.
On 13 May 1971 I sent a signal to GHQ Rawalpindi in which I
explained the latest situation, the. pattern of rebel activities, the
extent of Indian involvement, the change of boundaries, and the
new areas of responsibility for the various formations in tackling
the situation more effectively. The rebels, after having been
defeated in the towns, had retreated into inaccessible areas in
the interior or across the Indian border. Approximately 30,000
rebels had been either killed or made ineffective, and the rest
crossed over to India.
The new deployment was as under:
16 Division of three Brigades and an armoured regiment under
Major-General Nazar Hussain Shah in area Dinajpur, Rangpur,
Rajshahi, Pabna, and Bogra. 
.
9 Division of two Brigades under Major-General M. H. Ansari
to be responsible for area Kushtia, Faridpur, Barisal, Bhola Island,

62 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Patuakhali, Khulna, Jessore, Chauhadanga, and Mehrabpur.
Paksey Bridge was included in the area of 9 Division.
The waterlogged areas of Chalna, Barisal, and Sunderbans
remained with the CAF.
14 Division of three Brigades under Major-General Rahim
Khan became responsible for Mymensingh, Sylhet, Comilla up to
and including River Feni, Noakhali, and Dhaka. Bhairab Bridge
was included in the area of 14 Division.
Chittagong and the Chittagong Hill Tracts were made the
responsibility of an independent brigade and commandos under
Eastern Command. 
|
In the new deployment the following changes were made:
Major-General Shaukat Riza was removed from the command
of 9 Division for inefficiency and buckling under stress of war
conditions, and Brigadier M. H. Ansari was promoted and given
the command of 9 Division. This Division was originally
responsible for the civil divisions of Dhaka and Khulna. Now a
Division less one brigade was made responsible for Khulna
Division only.
14 Division was responsible for Chittagong civil division. This
was too big an area for one Division so the area was split into
two. Area Feni, Chittagong, and the Chittagong Hill Tracts were
taken away from them and a compact area north of Feni was left
with them.
There was no change in. 16 Division Area.
This deployment and readjustment of boundaries was
considered operationally more effective. Formation commanders
were told to go ahead with the planning of their future tasks, the
development of communications, and the selection and
preparation of defences. Defences were to be based on the strong-
point system and the position was to be stocked with ammunition
and rations.
By the end of May 1971, the rebel resistance had been broken
with heavy losses to both men and material. The rebels were
demoralized. They were forced to take shelter in inaccessible
areas or were licking their wounds in sanctuaries provided by the
Indians on Indian soil. There was no let-up by the Indians, and.
to ensure that the insurgency did not die down, they stepped up
their support of the rebels by boosting their strength and giving
them modern weapons and equipment. The Indians supported

TOPOGRAPHY AND TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
63
their activities by fire from across the border and by physically
-aiding our positions near the border. But the demoralized rebels
used to run away as soon as they contacted our troops or were
out of sight of the Indians.
During these operations about forty thousand rifles, sixty-five
machine guns, including ten heavy machine guns, one hundred
and fourteen light machine guns, thirty-one mortars, twelve
recoilless rifles, and great quantities of ammunition fell into our
hands. The heavy casualties and the loss of so many weapons by
the enemy were due to the break-neck speed and boldly-
conducted operations at all levels. The speed with which these
operations were conducted may not have a parailel in the history
of guerrilla warfare. It was due to this speed that the enemy was
shaken. They lost their nerve and ran helter-skelter for safety,
leaving behind a vast quantity of weapons and equipment and
transport. 
Their move back was not an organized withdrawal but
a disorganized retreat. In the short space of less than two months,
the rebels were beaten hollow at their own game, in their own
areas, in spite of the fact that they had the physical support of
the local population and the Indians.
This campaign can rightly be called a ‘lightning campaign’. I
sent the detailed report of the operations to GHQ and asked
permission to enter India to follow the beaten Mukti Bahini now
taking refuge on Indian soil. General Hamid told me on the
telephone: ‘Both the President and I are very happy with your
wonderful achievement. Don’t enter Indian territory. I will discuss
with you your future course of action soon.’ That was that.
Our fast movement, the sealing of borders, and the
establishment of communications had upset the timetable of the
Indian Army. They had anticipated that Mukti Bahini would keep
the Pakistan Army engaged inside the province around the big
cities and cantonments and make it ineffective after a few months
due to the shortage and irregularity of supplies and transport. The
€asy formula worked out by the Indian strategists would have
succeeded if Tikka had remained or if I had acted on General
Tikka’s plan, which was of a defensive nature. The Indian Army
had worked out that, if each guerrilla killed one Pakistani soldier,
the Pakistan Garrison would be eliminated in a few months.
Major-General Fazal Muqeem Khan (Retired) writes in his
book, Pakistan’s Crisis in Leadership, that the rebel forces had

64 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
retreated into India, demoralized and in complete disarray. Whit
doing so they had destroyed lines of communication, river crag. 
|
and vehicles. What they could not drive into India they had.
destroyed or damaged. 
a
The armed forces had acted swiftly. The break-neck speed with which
they operated surprised friends and foes alike. Their action dete
India from attempting any serious adventure in East Pakistan at 
th
time. They had achieved the objectives given to them. Now it was 
3
to the government to produce a lasting solution to the East Pakistan
problem. 
id
On page 125 Fazal Muqeem says: 
=
During September there was comparative calm all over East Pakistan
and the province seemed to be getting under control. The indications
were that the well-advertised monsoon offensive of Mukti Bahini had :
failed. [There were] reports of mutinies taking place in rebel camps
in India and Mukti Bahini was said to be absolutely at a low ebb, and’
on the point of giving up. But again no political advantage of the:
situation was taken, 
|
Major-General Shaukat Riza (Reured) writes in his book, The
Pakistan Army 1966-71: 
;
Summary: in eight weeks the Pakistan Army, in spite of many
handicaps, had re-established government authority in almost all the
towns. The insurrection had been apparently crushed. The rebels
were in a sorry state. Some Bengali leaders were open to political
settlement. It was the most opportune moment for such a settlement.
We let the opportunity slip away. Thereafter, the going became hardef
by the day.
The Government authority had been restored in almost all the
towns. The mutinous troops had either been killed, captured or had
escaped. The political leadership of Awami League had gone
underground or escaped to India. The Bengal Police and Civil
Servants gradually returned to their posts and were co-operating with
military authorities.
On page 437 of The Indian Army After Independence Maj.-Gen-
Khushwant Singh writes:

TOPOGRAPHY AND TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
65
Confronted by insurgents from across the borders and from within,
the Pakistan Army came under great stress. With the strength of
42.000 regular troops it had to contend with a rebellion spread over
the whole of East Pakistan. Though it was able to maintain hold over
most of the province, the prolonged counter-insurgency operations
left their mark. Casualties were heavy; 237 officers, 136 junior
commissioned officers, 3,559 other ranks.
When General Hamid paid us a visit in June 1971, I submitted
to him that we had achieved a great moral, political, and tactical
victory under most unfavourable conditions and that too in a
very short time. Our spirits were high and that of the Bengalis
low. They were on the run, the Indians were in a spin, and the
Russians were wonderstruck. My troops had had their battle
inoculation, while the Indians still had to go through their
teething troubles. I argued that«we should strike while the ir6n
was hot: follow the rebels into their Indian sanctuary and render
them ineffective as a fighting force, thereby deterring the Indians
from helping them further. If we did that, millions of Indian
civilians would head for places of safety, cluttering up the
communication system, congesting public places, and creating
numerous problems for the Indian civil administration, while
also impeding any forward move by the Indian forces. Up to now
we had been fighting on our own territory and had been suffering
physically and materially, but if the Indian Government were to
see its own people suffering and its property destroyed, it would
have to put the brakes on its aggressive attitude. Furthermore, all
organized resistance by the Mukti Bahini had been crushed, they
were demoralized and in complete disarray, and most had gone
to India where they were more or less in hiding.
At that moment the Indian Army was not prepared to face a
sudden onslaught from an unexpected direction. By the time
they were organized and in a position to face my advance, I
would have done a lot of damage by destroying guerrilla camps,
driving guerrillas deep into India, and pushing back the Indian
Border Security forces deployed near the borders. By the time
the Indians had collected enough strength to start a counter-
offensive, the monsoons would be at their peak and the Indians
would be unable to use their heavy weapons and air force to oust
us from our positions, and in the meantime our Western Garrison
> 
an 
rf
{| 
{
NV 
VUaALOCHIIDI dl 
|
y 
"Ose | CLJehiiiiodi Cail

66 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
would have achieved its given tasks according to our concept of
fighting the main battle in the West. 
4
My second suggestion was that if the deficiencies of my
Divisions, particularly in tanks and artillery, were made up, and if
I were given one squadron of modern aircraft and some anti-
aircraft resources, and one Infantry Brigade Group, I would.
capture Agartala and a big chunk of Assam, and develop multiple
thrusts into Indian Bengal. We would cripple the economy of.
Calcutta by blowing up bridges and sinking boats and ships in.
the Hoogly River and create panic amongst the civilians. One air
raid on Calcutta would set a sea of humanity in motion to get out
of Calcutta, as happened during World War II when a Japanese
Zero fighter raided Calcutta.
My third suggestion was: Make up my deficiencies, send me
two more Divisions, some aircraft, and some anti-aircraft artillery.
(which can easily be spared without weakening the defenses of ’
West Pakistan), and I can fight not only the batde of East Pakistan |
but of Pakistan in the East and on Indian soil. Against our five
Divisions they will have to bring about fifteen Divisions, and the —
bulk of their air force and navy. They will have to leave some
Divisions against China and some for internal security, which will
leave them weak on the Western Front, and in such a case there 
_
should be no problem for us to liberate Kashmir and Gurdaspur.
If they remain strong in the West they will be weak in the East.
They cannot be strong everywhere. We are in touch with Mr Lal
Danga, leader of the Mezo freedom fighters, Mr A. Z. Phizo,
leader of the Naga freedom fighters in Assam, and Charu
Mauzumdor, leader of the Naxalites of West Bengal. They will
join hands with us. Our own Bengalis too are likely to join us in -
great numbers once we start fighting on Indian soil. It is 
a God-
sent opportunity, let us avail it. Morally, politically, technically,
and militarily we are justified in entering India because they
have entered our territory and are still firing into our territory,
raiding our posts, and giving sanctuary to our enemies.
General Hamid pointed out that all my suggestions meant
open war with India. I agreed, but argued that merely our entry
into their territory would force them to seek peace. The Indians
would be unlikely not to resort to open hostilities when they
were in a position to do so—they had not accepted the creation
of Pakistan, they had neither‘any sympathy with Pakistan nor a
y 
f 
| 
f 
» 
f 
|
| 
wg 
(| 
BI 
y,
’ 
' 
ce. 
\
| 
Bam 
Cc 
i 
i
1 
2 
A 
@ 
a 
5

2 
TOPOGRAPHY AND TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
67
corner for Muslims, Bengali or non-Bengali, and they would
‘ke us any tme they were in a position to do so without any
a 
and without rhyme or reason, India had never been a
sence country since 1947. She had already conducted seven
wars and she was now fighting a proxy war against us in East
pakistan. | said we should strike now and make them practise
what they preach—Ahimsa.
After listening patiently, General Hamid said, ‘Niazi, your
suggestions are good, your arguments sound, they carry weight,
and are workable. I can come here with a skeleton staff to help
you and advise you and we can fight the battle of Pakistan in the
East. 
| would love to conduct this operation on Indian soil, or
carry out your last suggestion without much difficulty. No doubt
about it. But our Government is not prepared to fight an open
war with India and is in favour of carrying on fighting as we afe,
in which you are doing a wonderful job. Now listen carefully.
Your task is not to allow the Indians to establish a Government of
Bangladesh on the soil of East Pakistan, and if you can accomplish
that we will be happy and satisfied with your work, with you and
your troops. To sum it up, you will neither enter Indian territory
nor send raiding parties into India, and you will not fire into
Indian territory either. You should evict any hostile element
entering East Pakistan.’
I said, ‘What about a political settlement, for which Bengalis
are ready?’ He said, ‘Tiger, you should not worry your head
about political matters, they are very complicated.’
‘Wilco, Sir’ (it will be done).
That was about the end of my thinking of any offensive action
against the rebels by entering India, and it also shattered my
dream of carrying the war onto Indian soil.
Major-General Kushwant Singh writes, on page 65 of his book,
The Liberation of Bangladesh:
soft
Yahya had valid reasons for crossing International borders’ in the
fastern wing in pursuit of guerrillas as well as to overrun their bases
in India about the end of May 71, and of the opportunity to enlarge
conflict into a full fledged war by hitting India also in the West. That
was Inclia’s worst hour, its reserve formations were in the hinterland,
It had serious shortfalls of war material and soldiers and civilians
were not mentally attuned to immediate war. If Yahya had struck at

68 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
that time, he could have gained profitable objectives both in the
Western and Eastern theatres before the onset of monsoons.
Not only were the Indian formations scattered, they had not
yet signed a defence pact with the Russians. If Yahya had struck
at that time Pakistan would have remained united, India would
have been dealt a staggering blow, and the Pakistan Army would
have remained unbeaten.
www.balochlibrary.com

