234 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
according to the code of conduct and professional ethics,
protection could only be given to the negotiating teams, not to
unauthorized entrants, while hostilities were continuing.
We also objected to the idea of a surrender ceremony. I
refused to have such a thing but our discussions were to no avail.
The Indians were adamant. They blackmailed us by threatening
to kill the loyal Bengalis. In fact many young men were butchered
and we were told that all the civilians would be handed over to
the Mukti Bahini. The question of the surrender ceremony
should have been decided in consultation with the civilian
authorities of the East Pakistan Government, but they had
resigned and gone to the neutral zone. Thus, since I had been
abandoned by the Central Government and deserted by the
Provincial Government intentionally, I had to take the decision.
Major-General Jacob and Brigadier Bagir Siddiqui then started
working out the details for the concentration of civilians in pre-
designated areas and other administrative problems affecting the
cease-fire, the concentration of troops in other sectors, and their
move direct to Wagah.
The most difficult task was to collect the troops, civil officers,
civilians, and their families staying in and around Dhaka. There
were Civil Aviation, PLA, Customs, and other Federal Government
employees who had to be moved to the Cantonment area. There
was confusion in the city. 
The Mukti Bahini forces were very
active and were attacking the civilians. My Chief of Staff, by his
indomitable spirit and courage, and by working day and night,
organized the evacuation of these people and assembled them in
the Cantonment area. This was all done withm three days before
our departure from Dhaka.
The plight of the Biharis and other loyal elements was heart-
rending. Their cries at being left to the vultures for ethnic
cleansing were most depressing and embarrassing. Reports of a
massacre had started pouring in. Young loyal East Pakistanis were
made to stand for target practice and were bayoneted by the
Mukti Bahini. Maulvi Farid Ahmed, a respected leader, an ex-
MNA, and a loyal Pakistani, was killed and his body, along with
many others, was dragged through the streets of Dhaka. We told
the Indians that it was a violation of the agreement, but they
were using such incidents to force our hand,

SURRENDER AND POW CAMP NO. 100 
255
The squadron of F-86 Sabre aircraft had been grounded since
6 December, as the intensive bombing by Indian aircraft had
damaged the runway, making it non-operational. The aircraft
themselves had been rendered unusable by Air Cdre. Inam. The
pilots, who under the prevailing conditions had ceased to be
operational, were despatched to West Pakistan to save their lives.
Only Commodore Inam-ul-Haqg, the Commander of the mini
airforce, stayed behind in captivity. The Army Aviation heli-
copters, loaded with children, women, and wounded, flew to
Pakistan via Burma.
The surrender ceremony took place on 16 December 1971.
Major-General Farman and Admiral Sharif witnessed the
ceremony. As I signed the document with trembling hands,
sorrow rose from my heart to my eyes, brimming them with
‘unshed tears of despair and frustration. Before the ceremony, a
French reporter came to me and said, ‘How are you feeling,
Tiger?’ I replied, ‘Depressed.’ Arora, who was standing nearby,
remarked, ‘He had an impossible task under extremely difficult
conditions. Any other general in these circumstances could not
have done better.’
The destiny I could not evade was not of my choosing or
making. Ordered to lay down arms by the President to save West
Pakistan, my mind swung between the two options—risk West
Pakistan being further overrun, or jeopardize my reputation, my
career, my future, and the high tradition of the Pakistan Army by
submitting to the orders. I had accepted a task beset with hazards
and difficulties, when East Pakistan was in disarray and disorder.
Two senior generals had refused to. accept the responsibility on
various pretexts, one had resigned when raging torrents of
insurgency became obvious, and another had bungled the
situation. I was twelfth in seniority when I was selected for the
third senior post in the Army. Deciding to agree to the second
option, I had swallowed my pride and made the supreme sacrifice
of forfeiting reputation and honour, and the honour of my
gallant troops, in the national interest.
After the ceremony, many of the Bengalis, although jubilant
and joyous at the outcome of the war, approached me and said: 
|
‘We craved maximum participation in decision-making and more
funds for development, but not at this cost.’ Some appeared to be
genuinely sad and touched. This display of sentiment by people

236 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
who had been thirsting for our blood hours earlier showed that
affection still flowed under the thick layer of hatred. I told them,
‘Much blood has flowed under the bridge and it is too late to be
remorseful. We were pawns used by our leaders, who chose the
path of violence to reach the crown. They watched from outside
the arena, like Roman Emperors watched gladiators fight.
Whatever the outcome of the clash, they would be the winners.’ I
wished the Bengalis success and expressed the hoped that, if not
in our time, maybe in the time of our grandchildren, the wounds
would heal and a better relationship between the two countries
based on amity and brotherhood would be established.
After deliberations, hectic efforts, and exhaustive discussions
between the Indian and Pakistani teams, the move to evacuate
the Pakistani personnel, both civilians and uniformed, was worked
out. The move was to take place by trains, direct to Wagah border.
According to the move plan, I gave directions that the first to
move would be the civilians, followed by civil armed forces, the
police, and then the armed forces. The senior officers of the
three forces would be the last to leave after every soldier was
across the border, safe and sound. The first train full of joyous
civilians started off amidst high hopes. It continued without
mishap until suddenly the destination was changed and the train
was diverted to Allahabad. The joy turned to despair. Bhutto had
released Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman unconditionally. With Mujib,
thousands of Bengali soldiers in West Pakistani camps, Indian
POWs, and a sensitive Indian area like Ferozpur Headworks, all
in Pakistani hands, Pakistan had been in a strong position
regarding an exchange for 
the POWs in India. With a single
stroke, Bhutto had undermined Pakistan’s situation. Now on a
tightrope, Pakistan’s position of strength was reduced to a
position of extreme weakness.
Bhutto was shrewd and not naive. What had prompted him to
jeopardize the repatriation of the Pakistan Army, bearing in mind
that 5,500 square miles of West Pakistan was in Indian hands?
Sheikh Mujib represented tremendous leverage for extracting
maximum benefits from the Indians and the Bengalis. With Mujib
in our hands, international pressure would have dictated an early
settlement. The bargaining card at the negotiating table was
purposely destroyed. Why was Bhutto in a hurry to release Mujib?
Why was the Shah of Iran, who was coming to discuss matters

SURRENDER AND POW CAMP NO. 100 
237
with Muyjib, deprived of the chance to convince him about the
future relations of Bangladesh with Pakistan? Why was Mujib
flown to England before the Shah of Iran’s arrival?
The humiliated Eastern Command made POW would be taken back
by Bhutto but not immediately and so Mujib was released without
any quid pro quo and the POWs had to stay in India till Bhutto had
successfully passed the blame for political failure to Yahya and for
military disaster to Niazi.
(Syed Alam Raza, Dacca Debacle, p. 111)
Bhutto even inflated the strength of the fighting troops from
45,000 to 96,000, and at Simla raised it to 100,000. Never before
in history has such misrepresentation been made by a country’s
own President. This gross concoction was not even corrected by
Gul Hassan or Tikka, who each in his own sphere were great
contributors to the catastrophic set-back. The strength of the
Pakistani Army was 34,000 troops; Rangers, scouts, militia and
civil police came to 11,000, thus the grand total came to 45,000.
If we include naval and air force detachments and all those in
uniform and entitled to free rations, e.g., HQ, MLA, depots,
training institutes, workshops, factories, nurses and lady doctors
non-combatants like barbers, cooks, shoemakers, and sweepers,
even then the total comes to about 55,000 and not 96,000 or
100,000. The remaining were civilian officials, civilian staff, and
women and children. Whereas the Indians tried to reduce their
twelve division strength to eight, Bhutto increased our 45,000
troops to an imaginary 96,000. If the objective was to ridicule
Eastern Command and its troops, it wasn’t achieved. It was the
whole nation that was being ridiculed, and the Indian
propaganda strengthened, by our so-called ‘leader’ claiming that
they had defeated a big army of 96,000.
It should be kept in view that in the west all decisions were
made by General Yahya as President and head of the
Government, and not by COAS as head of the Army, But in the
east I had been abandoned by my High Command and deserted
by the Provincial Government. I was left alone to make decisions
regarding both civilian and military matters. If the Governor had
still been holding his office, he would have signed the instru-
ment of surrender as the head of the administration and
representative of the President, not I as commander of the troops

238 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
and answerable to the Governor. In the west, Yahya signed for
everything where required, not General Hamid as COAS, who
was acting as C.-in-C. Army or Chief of the General Staff.
The army POWs and civilians were moved to camps in various
parts of India. Lt.-Gen. Sagat Singh informed me that the party of
senior officers would be moved to Calcutta on 20 December 1971,
although the Indians were insisting on retaining Maj..Gen Farman
Ali for intensive interrogation. Having been the military adviser to
five Governors, he had fingers in every pie, influencing the
‘decisions of the Governors considerably. It was alleged by the
Indians and the Bengalis that he had played a decisive role in the
conduct of elections, and in delaying the Assembly Session. In
fact, he was instrumental in blocking the transfer of power. His
role had infuriated the Bengalis. He had also played a major role
in the planning and conduct of the 25 March action, They were
not ready to forgive him. But I insisted, that no Pakistani soldier
be handed over to the Indians for investigation, in accordance
with the assurance given by Gen. Manekshaw. Any enquiry into
alleged conduct would be submitted to a Pakistani court for
decision. Similarly, the officers working in the intelligence and
security set-up were not allowed to be detained. We also had with
us some of those members of Al-Badar and Al-Shams who had
assisted us during the war and were wanted by the Bengalis.
On the morning of 20 December, the day we were to move to
Calcutta, 
I went to my command post area where a few West
Pakistani civilians had been collected. I explained to them that arms
had been laid down on the orders of the President who, fearful of
further incursions into West Pakistan by the Indians, was determined
to save West Pakistan, our base where our families lived.
Maj.-Gen. Farman, Admiral Sharif, Air Commodore Inam-ul-
Haq, Brigadier Baqir Siddiqui, my COS, Brigadier S. S. Qasim,
my Commander Artillery, myself, our ADCs and batmen left
Dhaka by Caribou aircraft 
for Calcutta. As I did not want to leave
Major Siddique Salik, my PRO, at the mercy of the Bengalis—he
was wanted by the Indians and the Bengalis for investigation into
his misdeeds—I took him along as Farman’s ADC. Lt.-Gen. Sagat
Singh, the Military Governor of Bangladesh, saw us off at Dhaka
airport. We landed at Dum Dum airport, Calcutta. From the 
—
helipad we were driven in two staff cars to our living quarters
inside Fort William.

SURRENDER AND POW CAMP NO. 100 
239
The living accommodation was a three-storey building, newly
constructed, clean, and properly furnished. One room was
converted into a dining room, where all officers had their meals.
We were allowed a sepoys’s rations. The food was prepared by
the Indian cooks but served by our orderlies. Exercise, reading
books, and listening to the radio became regular means of passing
the time. When we heard on the radio that Bhutto had taken
over, Farman remarked that the coup had been late by a few days.
After some time, we were joined by Major-Generals Nazar
Hussain, Muhammad Hussain Ansari, and Qazi Majid. Major-
General Jamshed had not yet arrived. Worried, I asked Colonel
Khara, who was looking after us in Calcutta, about Jamshed. He
informed me that he was still in Dhaka helping in administrative
matters, He was keeping good health and there was nothing to
worry about. I came to know later that he was not in Dhaka but
in Calcutta Jail enduring solitary confinement. He was taken away
without my knowledge.
POW Camp No. 100
From Fort William, Calcutta, we were moved to Jubblepur to
Camp No. 100, which was known as the Generals’ Camp. Our
batmen remained with us but our ADCs were moved to a separate
location. Brigadiers Baqir Siddiqui and Qasim were shifted to
Bareilly and Salik moved with the ADCs. Focus was again riveted
on Farman. The Indians again wanted to retain Farman for
interrogation, in contravention of the Dhaka agreement. I called
Col. Khara and protested in strong terms. In the light of the
Geneva Convention and the Dhaka agreement, I told him, their
proposal was a clearcut infringement, and in the garb of
interrogation reprisal was certain and victimization bound to take
place. Khara informed me that the Bengalis had become
extremely demanding after Mujib’s release. Furious at his excesses
against Bengali interests, they wanted to try Farman as a war
criminal. Khara also mentioned the diary recovered from
Farman’s office on 14 December, when the civil officials stopped
functioning and moved to Hotel Intercontinental. In the diary
‘Green land will be painted red’ was written in Farman’s
handwriting. When I returned to Pakistan, I had an interview
with Bhutto, during which he also asked me about that remark.
| 
| 
“1 |
r~> CO) 
| I» fr 
)) 
| 
J 
rTM~ 
F2 
Or 
Y°XU 
7 
Lr» fT») { 
V— 
\
| 
Pd | 
a 
ba 
| 
45 
(( 
q 
»-
JG) 
WA 
DC 
y 
( 
‘ 
» 
&_ 
N
[ASR EVACSZ 
SSCS EELS 
Y 
@ 
W& 
J

240 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Although Farman insists that he opposed the use of force, his
active involvement in the planning and conduct of the 25 March
operation reflects his hypocritical attitude. Farman had never
contradicted government policies; logically, therefore, we must
assume that he supported them. He was considered to be an
expert on East Pakistan. The government valued his advice and
acted on his suggestions and recommendations. He can never be
extricated from his involvement in East Pakistan’s amputation.
I explained to the Indians that despite Farman’s involvement,
the agreement forbade any action against him. It was the
Government of Pakistan which would decide his fate. I asked
Khara to remind General Arora of his pledges. Khara went away.
He returned after a few hours and told me that Farman could
leave. When I informed Farman of the news he was joyous and
thanked me profusely. He said ‘Sir! I am extremely grateful to
you for helping me. Please also help me when we go back to
Pakistan.’ I gave him a commitment, little knowing that in
Pakistan he would be rewarded. Ironically, he needed no help
from me in Pakistan. The man who had placed his country and
army in such a predicament was highly rewarded—initially with a
job in GHQ, then he was made Chairman, Fauji Foundation,
and later a Minister.
Our living accommodation was'in the BOQs (Bachelor
Officers’ Quarters) of some unit. One set was given to each
officer, consisting of one bedroom with attached bathroom and
a sitting room with a front verandah. The accommodation had
been recently constructed and the furnishing was adequate.
There was a surplus of accommodation, so we decided to convert
one room into a mosque, one into a Mess, and we gave one
quarter to our orderlies. The diet was monotonous—boiled rice,
chappaties, vegetables, dal, and only occasionally meat.
Our camp was surrounded by barbed wire about fifty yards
deep, an effective obstacle to anyone trying to sneak in or out of
the camp. On the four corners were look-out posts about twenty
feet high, with searchlights which were switched on at night to
flood the area with light. A patrolman with an Alsatian dog
patrolled the camp area round the clock. This formed the inner
protective circle. A battalion strength was deployed outside the
inner circle and formed the outer circle. Thus, adequate
measures were taken to ensure that no breakout could take place.

SURRENDER AND POW CAMP NO. 100 
24]
After some time General Jamshed joined us, so now the group
consisted of the same people as in Calcutta, minus our ADCs and
the two brigadiers. Our camp came directly under the station
commander for administrative and other matters. Major-General
Padda was the station commander, a Sikh Cavalry Officer, smart,
intelligent, and immaculately attired. His attitude was dignified
and his behaviour sympathetic, which made the atmosphere
tolerable and amicable. The camp commander was a major, and
a captain medical officer catered to the medical needs of the
camp. Medical facilities were adequate, and serious cases were
referred to CMH Jubblepur. Some of us did visit CMH Jubblepur
but no one was ever admitted or detained. On the whole, the
behaviour of the camp staff was respectful and no arrogance was
ever visible in their attitude and behaviour.
With the passage of time, we settled down to an established
routine. In adversity or times of difficulty, God occupies the
foremost position. Therefore, we regularly offered our prayers,
which were led by General Ansari. Although I was regular in my
prayers even before captivity, prayers and complete engrossment
in the Koran became a total obsession. We exercised in our rooms
and walked in the camp compound, which not only kept us
occupied but also helped in defusing tension. We read numerous
books and magazines, which were either purchased or loaned
from the station library. Besides books and magazines, the daily
newspapers kept us abreast with the current situation and
prevailing conditions the world over. Time passed very slowly.
Tokens were given to us instead of cash. Every month I
received Rs 140 as pay. Although it was a very meagre amount,
yet the paltry sum helped a lot under the circumstances. We
used to buy books, writing material, and edibles with this money.
An Indian Havaldar, especially detailed for our shopping, used
to visit us daily, and anything needed from the market was
purchased by him and delivered to us.
The days of captivity were long and no immediate signs of an
early return were visible. Parted from loved ones and friends,
letters were the only means of communication with them. We
liked receiving and writing letters. Nothing could bring more
ecstasy and delight than reading letters from home. The
consolation and love transmitted through the letters was
tremendous. Initially the Indians provided us with writing

242 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
materials, but later they discontinued the provision, and we had
to buy our own supplies. Our mail was collected daily and we
always waited in a state of expectancy to receive the mail.
Censorship was heavy and at times the main theme of the letter
was axed by the censor. I received a lot of mail, sometimes bitter,
but mostly letters of encouragement which fuelled my resolve to
face the dire circumstance of captivity with courage and
determination. I always made it a point to reply to the letters,
even if only briefly. Food, gift parcels, and letters were also sent
from abroad; the parcels mostly contained chocolates, toffees,
shaving materials, perfumes, and such like. Had it not been for
the encouragement from Pakistan and abroad, the two and a
half years of captivity could have been hellish. Our attitude was a
deterrent to the Indian diplomats and pro-Indian Muslims who
were pestering the other camps with distasteful philosophy. The
junior Pakistani officers viewed their lectures with contempt and
distaste, and displayed a hostile attitude towards their professed
opinions. The concerted efforts of the Indians to brainwash our
officers and other ranks proved a dismal failure, and their efforts
to find agents to spy for them proved equally futile.
Whereas visits by Indian officers were not relished, those from
Red Cross teams were truly cherished. They imposed checks and
balances on the Indians and made efforts to ensure that no
excesses or irregularities were committed by them on Pakistani
POWs. Any complaint forwarded to them was pursued with
diligence. They praised the Pakistani soldiers’ dignified
behaviour in captivity.
At one stage the Indians started building a wall around the
camp. I protested but was informed that it was meant to obscure
the view of two persons sent by the Pakistan Government to
eliminate me. General Padda told me that he had been called to
GHQ Delhi and informed that Indian intelligence had captured a
Pakistani by the name of Jamshed from Calcutta, who divulged
that he and another man had been sent to liquidate General
Niazi. Indian GHQ had instructed him to take protective measures
to foil any attempt on my life. These were lots of bushes around
the camp, affording good cover to anyone armed with a telescopic
rifle. After the construction of the wall, whenever I came out,
certain posts on the outer circle were alerted, taking defensive
position in the trenches. Early in the mornings the area

SURRENDER AND POW CAMP NO, LOO 
243
surrounding the camp was searched by armed patrol. When I
returned to Lahore, two further attempts were made on my life.
Major-General Padda was replaced by Major-General Shah Beg
Singh. I had met Shah Beg in Dhaka when he was a Brigadier.
He was very friendly, and expressed his bitterness against the
Hindus. He openly claimed that the Sikhs had been given a raw
deal and had been made to disperse so that they were not a
majority even in East Punjab. Initially I thought it was a ruse, but
later I became convinced of the genuineness of his feelings. He
showed me a sketch of the area included in Khalistan, including
the whole of East Punjab and extending a little into Jammu. He
later died fighting in Amritsar along with Sant Bhinderwal during
the storming of the Sikh shrine by the Indian troops.
In the meantime, changes in the Pakistan Army had taken
place. Lt.-Gen. Gul Hassan had been appointed COAS, although
he was not promoted. All the generals senior to Gul Hassan
asked to be sent on pension, Only Tikka Khan, who was senior to
Gul Hassan, continued to serve under him, which was
unprecedented. It should be remembered that Gul Hassan had
declined to serve in East Pakistan. His role as Chief of the General
Staff, responsible for launching the formations and controlling
the war operations, was far from satisfactory, losing 5,500 square
miles of territory in West Pakistan despite our having the initiative
and more tanks, and parity of troops with the enemy. He was also
instrumental in sending a false message to Eastern Command
and painting a false picture to General Yahya.
Shah Beg Singh informed me that according to Indian
intelligence, this was a stop-gap arrangement and eventually Tikka
Khan would replace Gul Hassan. I did not believe him, because
Gul Hassan had helped Bhutto come to power. But how right
was the Indian assessment! It appears they had penetrated deep
into our ranks to obtain information which even Pakistani citizens
never had. Apparently they were aware of Bhutto’s intentions,
because traitors are not trusted even by those who benefit by
their treachery. Bhutto knew of and benefited from Gul Hassan’s
treasonable acts, but he acted on the proverb, ‘once a traitor,
always a traitor’, and shunted Gul Hassan unceremoniously out
of the army shortly after taking over the job of COAS.

