178 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
I tried to contact the Chief of General Staff, Lt-Gen. Gul Hassan,
but again he avoided talking to me. The Director of Military
Operations, Brigadier Riaz, never once communicated with me
or my staff officers throughout the war. His deputy, Colonel
Qureishi, appeared to be in charge, but he was not capable of
handling the situation. The Chief of Army Staff was mostly in
the President's House. Therefore, I could not discuss my
problems with any responsible person.
The so-called action on the political level was a farce. We had
a number of friends in the UNO, but no one from our side
showed any interest in raising the matter in the Security Council
when India attacked East Pakistan on 21 November. If the
agerieved party itself was not interested, why should anyone have
come to the rescue? The high-powered delegation being rushed
to New York, led by Mr Bhutto, apparently got entangled in the
traffic jam of his ambitions, and the urgency and gravity of the
situation was not its concern. Bhutto wanted it to be that way so
that he could accomplish his “‘M.M. Ahmad’ plan. He first went
to Frankfurt via Kabul and Tehran, then to Rome, and finally to
New York, reaching there on 10 December, thus taking three
days instead of a few hours, and feigned sickness on arrival (with
a common cold). En route he met the wife of Mr Muzaffar
Hussain, the Chief Secretary of East Pakistan, in London and
told her that she would not see her husband for a long time to
come. No wonder: he was forcing surrender which meant that
the men would become POWs, not working for an honourable
cease-fire which would have saved Pakistan the ignominy of
surrender. Surrender was intended, to smear the army’s image
and to shatter its credibility to such an extent that people would
clamour for Yahya’s removal. By his masterly stroke Bhutto killed
two birds with one stone and sacrificed Pakistan to his ambition
of being the number one man in the country.
With this sudden increase in the Governor’s signals, in which
he was painting a drastic situation, and Farman’s efforts to
demoralize him as well as to spread despondency among my
staff, the fog was lifting. The conspiracy which my Chief of Staff
had indicated earlier appeared to be taking final shape. I became
cautious. One of my staff officers told me that on 9 December,
Maj.-Gen. Farman had told him that there would be a cease-fire
the next day. Our signal to GHQ on 7 December clearly showed

DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
179
my resolve to fight to the end. There was no such talk or
consideration. by any one, either in Eastern Command or
elsewhere. At least the Governor had neither mentioned it to
me, nor had he taken action on the subject at that point.
Many things have been revealed in Maj.-Gen. Farman Ali’s
book of which I was unaware, and most of what concerned me
was never conveyed to me. I was kept in the dark. It appears that
he was running a parallel set-up dealing with the Indian C.-in-C,
as well as the Russians. Otherwise how could he tell my staff
officer on 9 December that the cease-fire would be effective the
next day, when the Governor’s note for the UNO was sent to the
President on 10 December? His book confirms what Maj.-Gen.
Nagra of the Indian Army told me, namely, that they knew on 9
December that the end of the war was coming soon. Apparenjly
Farman had been dealing with the Indians through the Russian
communication channels. These are the messages which General
Manekshaw referred to in his reply to our messages of 15
December when he said that he had already told Farman in his
two messages that the troops would have to surrender. General
Farman had no authority to deal with any of my Division
Commanders, not to mention with an enemy who was out to
destroy our armed forces. Why did he then keep his contacts
secret from me, the Governor, and GHQ?
GOC 16 Division Maj.-Gen. Nazar Hassan and Brigadier
Tajammul Hussain were ambushed on 7 December in area
Plasbari but miraculously escaped. Nazar was given protection by
a civilian. 
A counter-attack was launched to save them, in which
CO 32 Baluch, Lt.-Col. Sultan Mahmood, was killed. The attack
delayed the enemy for twenty-four hours. Maj.-Gen. Jamshed was
sent to take over the division during the night but was unable to
land and returned to Dhaka. I had wanted to send Farman, but
he hid himself and could not be found, so I sent Jamshed, my
21/C. Thus, on the only occasion in the entire war when I
required Farman’s services, he vanished into thin air—otherwise
he was always to be found at Governor’s House.
On 9 December I informed GHQ that the population was
becoming hostile and even night movement was impossible. The
locals were providing all help to the Indians and were guiding
them through the gaps and the rear. The jetties, ferries, and
tivercraft had been destroyed by the IAF. There was extensive

180 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
damage to heavy weapons and equipment by enemy air attacks.
Due to fatigue and lack of sleep for twenty days, the troops were
exhausted. In spite of the critical situation in certain areas, |
intended to go on fighting and would do my best. I asked for
airstrikes and airborne troops for Dhaka, because GHQ had told
me that the Chinese had begun to support us. But that proved to
be a lie. In a bid to get American naval support, I stretched my
resources and kept the seaports of Chittagong and Chalna in my
possession, but no American help came. I could have easily
abandoned Chalna and brought troops towards Khulna.
On 9 December the Governor originated another signal, in
which he proposed to declare Dhaka an open city. This had
many implications, as I could not leave my troops outside Dhaka
in the lurch. It should not have been suggested in the first place,
and I told the Governor that I did not agree, In all fairness, and
for the sake of objectivity, Farman should have published this
signal also but he did not do so. The signal from the Governor to
the President read as under:
A 4660 of 091800. For the President. Military situation desperate.
Enemy is approaching Faridpur in the West and has closed up to the
River Meghna in the East bypassing our troops in Comilla and
Laksham. Chandpur has fallen to the enemy thereby closing all river
routes. Enemy likely to be at the outskirts of Dhaka any day if no
outside help forthcoming. Secretary-General UN's representative in
Dhaka has proposed that Dhaka city may be declared as an open city
to save lives of civilians especially non-Bengalis. Am favourably
inclined to accept the offer. Strongly recommend this be approved.
General Niazi does not agree as he considers that his orders are to fight to the
last and it would amount to giving up Dhaka. This action may result in
massacre of the whole army, WP police and all non-locals and loyal
locals. There are no regular troops in reserve and once the-enemy
has crossed the Ganges or Meghna, further resistance will be futile
unless China or USA intervene today with massive air and ground
support. Once again urge you to consider immediate cease-fire and
political settlement otherwise once Indian troops are free from East
Wing in a few days even West Wing will be in jeopardy. Understand
local population has welcomed Indian army in captured areas and
are providing maximum help to them. Our troops are finding it
impossible to withdraw and manoeuvre due to rebel activity. With
this clear alignment sacrifice of West Pakistan is meaningless.
- 
~~ 
. 
J > seo) 1° 
Y 
y, 
TM 
,
> 
wy, 
| 
Y ey | 
| f° | | 
] | 
| 
\) 
wT | 
| 
\ f 
{ 
a 
) 
| 
|
M/ 
l 
4 
| 
a, 
} 
r 
/ 
oN 
7
j 
»i/YUAANY 
WAAAA 
WU i 
~t 
A 
y 
e wy \S 
1 
AB 
A

DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
18]
The President replied with signal G 0001 dated 9 December
1971 in which I was ordered by the President to accept the
Governor's decision, and arrange things accordingly. The
message to the Governor reads:
Your flash message A 4660 of 9 Dec received and thoroughly
understood. You have my permission to take decision on your
proposals to me. I have and am continuing to take all measures
internationally but in view of our complete isolation from each other,
decision about East Pakistan I leave entirely to your good sense and
judgement. I will approve of any decision you take and I am
instructing General Niazi simultaneously to accept your decision and
arrange things accordingly. Whatever efforts you make in your
decision to save senseless destruction of the kind of civilians that you
have mentioned in particular the safety of our armed forces...you
may go ahead and ensure the safety of our armed forces by all political
means that you will adopt with our opponent.
No political solution was offered at the UNO. What political
action could the Governor take in the matter? His jurisdiction
was limited to East Pakistan, where there was virtually no
government. The political means, 1.e., the Awami League MNAs,
were in Calcutta, and the most important person, Sheikh Mujib-
ur-Rahman, was in West Pakistan. A deal could have been struck
with him. A confederation would have been acceptable to him.
Why was no suggestion made to haye political parleys with him?
Apparently the decision about East Pakistan was being left to
the Governor who, due to the preyalent situation, could not do
anything in East Pakistan because the only other party was India.
Foreign affairs is 
a federal subject and the President should have
instructed our mission at the UNO to seek a political solution. He
did not do so. Apparently they wanted to fire the gun from my
shoulders. How could the Governor have ensured the safety of the
armed forces, and from whom? The armed forces were fighting
the rebels, the Mukti Bahini forces, and the locals in the interior,
and the Indian Army in the battlefield, thus protecting themselves.
On 10 December I received the following signal from COS
Army:
For Comd from COS Army. President’s signal message to Governor
copy to you refers. President has left the decision to the Governor in
< 
= | 
; 
7 
- 
—~ 
1a’
XK7UX7UN7 
Lh 2 | OVO’ Ir VI 11 1 b Tc }AT WU CC) f 1 |
YA/ 
AA/S 
AA 
} 
4 
Y 
JX 
D_ ATs 
FF 
!
vv 
y 
Vv 
O S, LA L NZ we 
uf a 
/

182 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
close consultation with you. As no signal can correctly convey the
degree of seriousness of the situation I can only leave it to you to
take the correct decision on the spot. It is however apparent that it is
now only a question of time before the enemy with its great
superiority in numbers and material and the active co-operation of
rebels will dominate East Pakistan completely. Meanwhile a lot of
damage is being done to the civil population and the Army is suffering
heavy casualties. You will have to assess the value of fighting on tf you
can, and weigh it, based on this you should give your frank advice to
the Governor who will give his decision as delegated to him by the
President. Whenever you feel it is necessary to do so you should
attempt to destroy maximum military equipment so that it does not
fall into enemy hands. Keep me informed. Allah bless you.
It is worth noting that in the 9 December signal the President
was authorizing the Governor to take a decision about East
Pakistan through political means and to ensure the safety of the
armed forces, and in the 10 December signal the COS was hinting
that I should accept surrender and destroy maximum military
equipment so that it did not fall into enemy hands. This meant
that the buck was being passed to me and the Governor so fhat
we take the blame.
10 December 1971 was the most ominous day in the history of
Pakistan, when one of the conspirators discarded the mantle of
hypocrisy and came out in his true colours, On this day Maj.-Gen.
Rao Farman Ali, responsible for Civil Affairs, took it upon himself
to initiate an international action without the approval of the
President and handed over a top secret signal to Mr Paul Henry,
the UN representative at Dhaka, about the dismemberment of
Pakistan. It came to be known as Farman’s Signal because it had
not been authorized either by the Governor, who quite rightly
had referred it to the President for his consent, or by the
President, who countermanded it straightaway.
The Chief Secretary and Farman came to my Command Post
on 10 December around noon and conferred with me about the
situation on the ground. They told me that since the President
had authorized the Governor to take a decision, the latter had
sent them to discuss a note intended to be sent to the UNO after
the President’s approval. I was extremely unhappy with the ©
contents of the note. It meant the death knell for a united
Pakistan and great ignominy for the country, the Pakistan Army,

DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
183
and my troops, who were fighting valiantly to save the integrity of
the country. 
— 
|
After a great deal of discussion and consultation, it was decided
to await the President’s reaction to this signal. I unambiguously
told Farman that I should be kept abreast of written or oral
discussion with Rawalpindi. I insisted on seeing the President’s
approval, Finally it was agreed that, instead of communicating
my disagreement, it would be written that, ‘General Niazi submits
himself to your command’, meaning that I would only agree to
the proposal after the President had approved it. The signal sent
to the President from the Governor read as under:
For President of Pakistan. Your G 0001 of 092300 Dec. As the
responsibility of taking the final and fateful decision has been given
to me I am handing over the following note to Assistant Secretary-
General Mr Paul Mark Henry after your approval. Note begins. It was
never the intention of the Armed Forces of Pakistan to involve
themselves in all-out war on the soil of East Pakistan. However a
situation 
arose which compelled 
the Armed Forces to take defensive
action. The intention of the Government of Pakistan was always to
decide the issues in East Pakistan by means of a political solution for
which negotiations were afoot. The Armed Forces have fought
heroically against heavy odds and can still continue to do so but in
order 
to avoid further bloodshed and loss of innocent lives I am
making the following proposals: As the conflict arose as a result of
political causes, it must end with a political solution, I therefore
having been authorized by the President of Pakistan do fhereby call)
upon the elected representatives of East Pakistan to arrange for the
peaceful formation of the Government in Dhaka. In making this
offer I feel duty bound to say the will of the people of East Pakistan
would demand the immediate vacation of their land by the Indian
forces as well. I therefore call upon the United Nations to arrange
for a peaceful transfer of power and request: One. An immediate
cease-fire. Two. Repatriation with honour of the Armed Forces of
Pakistan to West Pakistan. Three. Repatriation of all West Pakistan
personnel desirous of returning to West Pakistan. Four. The safety of
all persons settled in East Pakistan since 1947. Five. Guarantee of no
reprisals against any person in East Pakistan. In making this offer, I
want to make it clear that this is a definite proposal for peaceful
transfer of power. The question of surrender of Armed Forces would
not be considered and does not arise and if this proposal is not
acceptable the Armed Forces will continue to fight to the last man.

184 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Note ends. Gen. Niazi has been consulted and submits himself to
your command, Request immediate approval.
Farman reproduces the above signal in his book on page 130,
but he has wilfully omitted ‘request immediate approval’, which
shows his guilty conscience. Apparently he did not want to wait
for the President’s approval. The omission should leave no doubt
that he disobeyed both the Governor’s wishes and my instructions
to inform me of the President’s decision. In this signal, the
President's approval had been requested twice, first at the
beginning of the text, and again at the end. It should also be
noted that Farman has omitted the date, time, and group (DTG)
from his signal, unlike others replicated in his book. The reasons
are obvious. It was typed at Governor’s House and signed by
Farman. He has tried to confuse the readers, and even the
Hamood-ur-Rehman Commission, by indicating that he
authenticated it as this was necessary for army communications.
This is wrong. Our signals are signed, and not authenticated as
in the US Army. Apart from this, senior civil officers were allowed
to use the military communications network for security reasons.
The Chief Secretary could have signed it. Farman also says that
when they returned after visiting me, Mr Paul Henry was waiting
for them. Why? Apparently he had already been told what was
coming. Nobody believes that the Governor told Farman to give
the signal to Mr Paul Henry straightaway without awaiting the
President’s response, because he himself had written ‘after
approval of the President’.
How is it that a top secret signal, without the approval of the
President, was handed to an unauthorized person, who then sent
it to the UNO, thereby compromising secret army codes also?
When this signal was broadcast, I rang up the Governor, who
expressed his surprise and said that he had not yet received the
approval. [ tried to contact, the Chief of Army Staff but he could
not be found, and it was impossible to reach the President.
The President countermanded the signal to the UNO. (I did
not receive a copy of the President’s signal.) A subsequent
broadcast specifically blamed Farman, with the Government
saying that Farman was not authorized to send this signal to the
UNO as it required the President’s approval, which had not been
forthcoming. Hence his handing over of the signal to Mr Paul

DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
185
Henry was unauthorized, and a dangerous act. Neither the
Governor nor myself could hand over the signal to the UNO
representative without the President’s approval. Why did he not
wait for it? What was the hurry? According to his own observation
on p. 144 of his book:
| pate
The plan was to blame others and to stay on in power. This was an
ignoble and ruthless campaign to divert the wrath of the nation on
to those who could not defend themselves. The whole drama was
staged to cover up their misdeeds and evil intentions.
Farman was being caught in the web of his own intrigues and
conspiracies. From the beginning right to the end, the GHQ
signals were vague and non-committal so that I could be blamed.
The signal had tragic effects on the operations in East Pakistan.
In most places the troops were fighting tenaciously according to
the plan. Once the signal went to the UNO and was broadcast by
the world news media, it had an adverse effect on the fighting
because very few soldiers were prepared to give their lives when a
cease-fire was imminent. After the cancellation, I had a difficult
task in recreating their spirit. The 
psychologically adverse blow
had been struck. I kept GHO and the COAS informed of the
situation as it was given to me by my divisional commanders, and
each report to the COS or GHQ contained my resolve to continue
fighting to the last-man, last round. Even after 10 December
there was no indication given by us to GHQ that Dhaka was
about to fall, or that we were incapable of fighting in and around
Dhaka. Even when the Indian heli-landed and para-landed troops |
were approaching the outer defences of Dhaka on 13 December,
they would have required a minimum of two weeks to build up
because their lines of communication and routes of supply to
Dhaka were still blocked at various places. The only land route
available to the enemy was Tura-Mymensingh-Tangail. There were
sufficient troops of all categories, well over 31,000 all ranks, to
defend Dhaka. The Urdu-speaking East Pakistanis and the loyal
Bengali citizens were also armed. All preparations for fighting in
the built-up area had also been completed. It was this confidence
which led me both to issue my statement about ‘tanks over my
chest’ to the foreign correspondents and to send two signals:
G-1282 at 1530 hours on 13 December, in which I said ‘Dhaka

186 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
fortress defences well organized and determined to fight it out’:
and G-1286, about 2300 hours 13 December, that said: ‘moving
to built-up area for final battle’. Of course, there were some
among the officers who seemed to be a little demoralized at the
impending battle of Dhaka.
The CGS, Gul Hassan, had telephoned me on 12 December
1971, saying in Pushto, ‘yellows coming from the north and whites
from the south’ (referring to possible assistance from the Chinese
and the Americans). I do not understand why the CGS was
bluffing me, but it shows how the plan to blame me for the
defeat was being built up.
On 11 December, the civilian officers had moved into
Governor’s House. They had done a good job of keeping the
fabric of civil administration intact. Against heavy odds and in a
hostile atmosphere, they stuck to their places of duty without a
murmur. They faced grave danger to their lives but they bore all
the hardships with fortitude.
On 13 December, at 7.30 am, Farman met the Red Cross and
the UN Relief Commission. His book states clearly that he
requested the Red Cross ‘to establish an international zone by
taking over Hotel Intercontinental’ and signed the relevant
documents. He did so without the Governor’s or my approval.
He did 
not 
even bother to inform me_of his action. He was
behaving as if he wer 
were both Governor and Commander Eastern
“Command. Our civilian officers moved to 6 Hotel Intercontinental.
A curfew was clamped in Dhaka.
Farman has concocted another lie, saying that I wanted to
send a cease-fire message from Governor’s House as I did not
want my troops to know about it. He is contradicting himself—
he knows full well that the signal would have been passed on by
army communications, as his signal about approaching the UNO
had been, and the troops would know in any case. My signal in
fact conveyed my resolve to fight to the last.
The IAF bombed Governor’s House on the morning of 13
December. At 1230 the Governor informed me that he was
resigning as the President was not listening to him—by then it
had become evident that the Governor was pressing the
President hard to end the war. I therefore conveyed my resolve
to defend Dhaka and to fight it out, vide my signal No. G 1282
of 131530 December:

DISMEMBERMENT OF PAKISTAN 
187
Alpha. Enemy build-up at Matia sq. 7344 by heliborne troops
continues. Enemy at Matia now advancing along road Matia-Darma.
Bravo. Details contact by paratroops awaited. Charlie. Enemy conc.
also reported at Daud Kandi and two helicopters also landed south
of Narayanganj. Details awaited. Delta. Enemy making all-out efforts
to capture Dhaka ASF. Dhaka fortress defences organized and
determined ta fight tt out.
The war in the west was also not going according to plan.
There was a feeling of disquiet and despondency. The spirit of
1965 was nowhere to be seen. The army in the west had already
lost 5,500 square miles of territory. My COS, Brigadier Baqir
Siddique, was constantly in touch with Brigadier Amir Gulistan
Janjua, Private Secretary to the COAS, There was no satisfactory
action or direction from the Chief of General Staff down to the
Military Operations Directorate. In fact, the Director of Military
Operations did not contact us even once. Therefore, our contacts
perforce went up to Brigadier Janjua, who was helpful. He was
enthusiastic in the beginning but after a few days of fighting in
the west he told my COS that the offensive had failed. This was
despite the fact that West Pakistan had superiority in armour and
parity in infantry and had the initiative. The failure was
unexpected and militarily unforgivable.
On the night of 13/14 December 1971, within a couple of
hours of my signal to fight in built-up areas, PS(C) Brigadier
Janjua rang up my COS to warn him that an important flash
signal was coming. It came at midnight and read as under:
For Governor and General Niazi from President. Governor’s flash
message refers. You have fought a heroic battle against overwhelming
odds. The nation is proud of you and the world full of admiration. I
have done all that is humanly possible to find an acceptable solution
to the problem. You have now reached a stage when further resistance
is no longer humanly possible nor will it serve any useful purpose. It
will only lead to further loss of life and destruction. You should now
take all necessary measures to stop the fighting and preserve the lives
of all armed forces personnel, all those from West Pakistan and all
loyal elements. Meanwhile I have moved UN to urge India to stop
hostilities in East Pakistan forthwith and to guarantee the safety of
the armed forces and all other people who may be the likely target of
miscreants.

