> “Se 
5 oe”
"©
q
a
, <<
~d
=
x
©
z
CHITTAGO
2
oO
ma
0%
<TMm
Oo

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
153
Muzzafarganj by 6 December and succeeded in capturing the
major portion of 25 FF, including its commanding officer. The
CO had lost his nerve. He was in a position to hold on, but
surrendered without putting up a fight. 
| recommended his court-
martial. On return, he was forgiven because he toed the
government line. Major-General Rahim, meanwhile, was
ambushed at Muzaffarganj while he was on his way to Laxam to
visit his forward troops.
Brigadier Aslam, Commander 53 Brigade, made frantic efforts
to reach Chandpur. A fierce battle took place at Hajiganj. Both
sides suffered casualties. Hajiganj fell on 8 December 1971, after
halting the advance of the enemy for thirteen days. Aslam withdrew
to Lalmai position to join 117 Brigade under Brigadier Ant.
I ordered General Rahim to vacate Chandpur and fall back on
Dhaka with his entire Chandpur garrison. The ferries to bring
him to Dhaka were placed at Chandpur in the early hours of the
night. Some of the ferries got stuck on the chars (islands), thus he
had to move during the day. Some of them were intercepted by
the Indian Air Force, and we suffered some casualties, including 
|
General Rahim. The casualties were given initial medical treatment
at the HQ Civil Armed Forces at Feelkhana, Dhaka, and were later
shifted to the CMH Dhaka. I sent Major-General Rahim to West
Pakistan with important papers. Brigadier Mian Mansoor
Muhammad took over command of Rahim’s troops, who were
deployed in Narayanganj area. Some Indian heli-borne troops
under Brigadier Sodhi attempted to make headway in the area but
were foiled. Encountering resistance here as well as at other places,
they did not make any further efforts.
By then we had placed enough troops in Narayangan} and
Mirpur. To attack Dhaka the Indians would have to build up
first. But before this could happen surrender orders came.
Lt.-Gen. Sagat Singh, who was given the task of attacking Dhaka
on 11 December, had asked for seven days to complete his
preparations, According to my assessment he required much
more time. As a matter of fact the Indians were so badly involved
all over East Pakistan that they could not pull out troops from
anywhere. If the war had continued I would have chased out the
troops deployed in Dhaka area without tanks or heavy or
medium artillery,
1a 
OA 
@ 
@A @O @. 
_~ : | ~ 
2 | _ 
-
VV 
WW 
A / 
{ 
/TM {> 
@ 
| 
ytrare OY’ WU 
1% 
irr
vV 
VV W.U ld LOUULLILDI aT V.com
WAAAALYA UAL 
Y 
, 
VUZE

154 
THE BETRAYAL. OF EAST PAKISTAN
Comilla-Mainamati
Comilla was not to be held permanently, After initial battles, 117
Brigade was to fall back to Mainamati Fortress which had been
organized into three layers behind artificial obstacles to face
enemy attacks from all directions. The enemy, despite their
concerted efforts, could not penetrate the Mainamati defences.
Brigadicr M. H. Atif, Commander 117 Brigade, had repeatedly
refused the Indian demand to surrender. He made this fortress
impregnable and, like his victory as hockey captain in the 1964
Olympics, he fought hard and was still fighting when hostilities
ended on 16 December. After the withdrawal of 53 Infantry from
Laxam, Atif’s troops, phis 53 Brigade’s troops, swelled to four
thousand regular troops, with four Chafee tanks and a battery of
artillery. The Indians could not capture or penetrate our strong
defensive positions. The attacks proved expensive for the Indians,
both in life and in material. The enemy therefore decided to
invest the fortress, but it held till the ceasefire was announced.
Thus Atif succeeded in pinning down two enemy brigades, leaving
only one division plus to General Sagat Singh for the capture of
Dhaka. He had also to tackle Bhairab Bazar and Narayanganj
Fortresses with his small force. His area of responsibility included
even Chittagong.
Sylhet-Akhaura
Qazi Abdul Majid, General Officer Commanding 14 Division,
had organized his defences in Sylhet-Akhaura-Brahmanbaria.
After fighting the Indians in the delaying positions, strong points,
and fortresses, he was to withdraw and fall back to Dhaka. Sylhet,
was defended by 313 Pakistani Brigade, commanded by Brig.
Rana. 8 Indian Mountain Division, under General Krishna Rao,
attacked Shamshernagar and Kalaura with a brigade each. 81
Mountain Brigade advanced along Kailashabar—Shamsher-
nagar—Maulvi Bazar axis. Our troops, consisting of one company
each of 22 Baluch and Tochi Scouts in Shamshernagar and
Kalaura, fought back heroically and held the enemy brigade
advance for a long period. The Indians suffered 31 killed and 87
wounded, On the other axis 69 Indian Brigade attacked
6 
OA 
6 
CGA @ @ lL rp | ] 
ot 
| kh TORTXT (’°Dr.TY?
WWW .DALOCNIIDIalry.COmMm

9, 
SYLHET SECTOR
F
MEGHALAYA 
irr]
SHILLONG
TURA
|,JAMALPUR 
to
MYMENSINGH 
©
MAULV!I BAZAR
ow! q
SHAIBTAGANJ _ 
° 
°
fond 
*KAILASAHAR §
, Lf
° 
KAMALPUR 
5
DO KHOWAI
TRIPURA
www.balochlibrary.com

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
155
Kulamura but failed to capture it till 
6 December. It was captured
after extensive use of napalm bombing.
81 Indian Mouniain Brigade attacked Munshi Bazar on 5
December 1971. One Rifle company of 30 FF put up a brave
fight defending the town, suffering some twenty-two killed,
including the company commander. Meanwhile, the Indians heli-
lifted two battalions to the south-east of Sylhet town. Our 202 ad
hoc Brigade, under Brigadier Salimullah, had occupied the town.
He had converted it into a fortress with the remnants of units
falling back from the front. Our 313 Brigade, now commanded
by Brigadier Asghar Hassan, who had relieved Brig. Rana, also
pulled back to Sylhet from Maulvi Bazar where it had been sent.
Its move was not impeded by the enemy. Maj.-Gen. Krishna Rao
besieged the town with his division of six brigades. In spite of
napalm bombing and air support, he could not move forward or
make a dent in the Sylhet defences.
It was remarkable that despite battle fatigue and the prospects of an
unequal fight, 
a company each at Shamshernagar and Kualaura, with
a few paramilitary troops and very little arullery and air support, held
Krishna Rao’s brigades for days and in spite of the great odds against
them, they managed to slip away to Sylhet."
The credit for putting up such a strong resistance goes to
Brigadiers Salimullah and Asghar Hassan in their respective areas.
Their valiant efforts had nullified an entire enemy infantry
division which had been earmarked for the capture of Dhaka.
Brigadier Saadullah, Commander 27 Brigade, was defending
Bhairab Bazar sector with his brigade. Saadullah was a brave
officer, an inspiring leader who was always in the forefront of
brigade troops during attacks. He evicted the enemy from a few
places by personally joining the bayonet-charging counter-attacks,
He was recommended for a Nishan-e-Haider but was awarded Hilal
e-Jurat instead. It is unfortunate that such an excellent officer was
not promoted, He was considered a fundamentalist.
Saadullah’s brigade was deployed in Akhaura-Brahmanbaria
near Agartala. Our defences were mainly based on the Tista River.
It was flanked by many jheels (lakes). The other important town,
about five kilometres north of Akhaura, was Ganga Sagar. Both
places were held by us with a battalion each. The Indian airfield
3
: 
°1
WWW.D alocl We Drary.cOmM
e/
Cc

156 
THE BETRAYAL. OF EAST PAKISTAN
at Agartala was under our constant artillery fire after hostilities
started. 27 Brigade put up a tenacious fight, and the Indians
could not capture any positions between 21 November and 5
December 1971. For fifteen days 27 Brigade repulsed their
attacks, until we ourselves decided to withdraw to our next
defensive position of Ashuganj and then to Brahmanbaria.
On 5 December, the forward elements of 311 Indian Brigade
began the move towards Brahmanbaria. The next day 73 Brigade
also commenced its advance. 
A Mukti Bahini force under Maj.-Gen.
Gonsalves had been operating in the Akhaura area since 2]
November 1971. The Indians were given tremendous help in their
advance by the Mukti Bahini, who also provided detailed
intelligence about our dispositions, strength, weaponry, etc.
Here, as elsewhere, a horde of local inhabitants volunteered to obtain
information of enemy dispositions, whenever necessary. At great
personal risks (the Pakistanis tortured and killed any local they
suspected of gathering information for the Indian forces) they would
melt away into the night and then return with the details of location
of enemy strong points before the morning. In this way our troops
were enabled to keep moving forward, working round the enemy
positions, always forging ahead. Where guns and ammunition had to
be taken across country, there were always Bengali villagers, resistance
fighters, school boys—all ready to help.’
Sidney Schaumberg of the New York Times, who was with the
leading brigade at this stage, describes a scene where twenty
local inhabitants were ‘pushing and pulling a 5.5 inch medium
artillery gun across a boggy rice field while others ferried the
ammunition, *
The Indians sent a column towards Comilla from south of
Agartala, with the aim of confronting the strong Pakistani
garrison holding the defence in the Mainamati cantonment and
working behind it to cut the L of C, The enemy planned to
capture the bridge at Ashuganj as quickly as possible, but we
frustrated their efforts. We did not allow their division to build
up at Brahmanbaria; we damaged the bridge at Ashuganj; and
we made the bridge west of Akhaura unfit for use by heavy
vehicles. Our 27 Brigade was well dug in at Ashuganj by the time
the leading elements of 311 Indian Brigade reached the area on
9 December 1971. The Indians were allowed to advance from
wwermvweweiyew«t) 
1. 6 
N h 
/ 
ay a
WWW. Valo yC Ad Ve by if wi T Vy m Ore OM
eo

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
157
Brahmanbania to Ashuganj, where a trap had been set for them.
Fire discipline in the formations was excellent—we let the Indian
troops come into the built-up area, then hell was let loose. Due
to our effective firing the Indians lost 120 men and four tanks.
The enemy was reinforced by another battalion. A strong counter-
attack led by Brig. Saadullah forced them to fall back. At this
stage, General Officer Commanding 14 Division, Qazi Majid,
ordered the blowing up of Ashuganj Bridge while 27 Brigade was
sull on the east bank of the Meghna River and when there was
no immediate danger to the bridge. The brigade managed to
cross over and reach Bhairab Bazar.
The [Indians started crossing the Meghna by using helicopters
south-west of Bhairab Bazar. The Indian build-up at Narsingdi
was slow, in spite of the fact there was no interference from our
side. Ferrying tanks and artillery across the Meghna was a difficult
task. I lacked the long-range capability to disrupt their landing
plans because we did not have medium and heavy artillery guns.
Similarly, if I had had my Recce Regiment (tank) and long range
artillery, the enemy would have resisted the temptation to resort
to aerial bridging or landing para-troops at Tangail. Also, if I had
had a few squadron of modern aircraft, I could have successfully
interfered with enemy tank movements, para drops, heli landings,
and river crossing operations.
Within the overall defensive plan of the sector, 14 Division had
been entrusted with the task of defending Narsingdi-Narayanganj
sector. They were to fall back when ordered from Sylhet and
Ashuganj. Sylhet brigade had come down to Maulvi Bazar. Majid
was ordered to send the troops to Dhaka; instead, for unknown
reasons, he pushed them back to Sylhet. Majid had been given the
mission to fall back on Dhaka after the destruction of the Bhairab
Bazar bridge. 1 ordered him to fall back to Narsingdi. He regretted
his inability to do so. He was specially given six ferries for the
move to Dhaka, and the railway line was also available to him—it
was later used by the Indians, and his troops watched the spectacle.
He could easily have reached Dhaka, but he never even made the
attempt. It appears his disobedience was part of the plan to let
East Pakistan Garrison face ignominy. He knew that the defence
of Dhaka was vital. Sull he failed to obey. I therefore removed him
from the command of his Division and put his troops under the
command of 36(A) Division. Sylhet-Chittagong and Comilla

158 
THE BETRAYAL OF EASF PAKISTAN
Garrison were placed under Eastern Command. After the failure
of 14 Division to reach their allotted positions in Dhaka perimeter
I had to re-adjust the positions, which fortunately could be done
without much difficulty.
I had no time to take disciplinary action against Majid, as the
war was at its peak. Saadullah had fought very well throughout
the war, He should have been allowed to fall back to Dhaka. Had
his troops reached the allocated area in Dhaka perimeter, the
enemy would not have successfully landed heli-borne troops in
the Narsingdi. The fact that Maulvi Bazar brigade and Saadullah’s
brigade were not sent to bolster Dhaka's defence created a firm
suspicion in my mind about Majid’s links with the coterie at
GHQ led by Gul Hassan that intended to let down Eastern
Garrison. I submitted on adverse report on him, projecting his
unsolidierly qualities and disobedience of orders, due to which
the operations in his area for the last stand suffered immensely.
He could easily have attacked Indian heli-landed troops near
Bhairab Bazar, but he neither engaged them with artillery nor
attacked them physically to eliminate them. Heli troops when
landed are in a vulnerable position, a prompt action can trap
and destroy them. GHQ, instead of punishing him, exonerated
him, and he was provided a lucrative job after retirement.
14 Division and 27 Brigade in Bhairab Bazar had earlier asked to
attack the Indian para troops dropped behind them and come to
Dhaka to help in defending it. The attack was disallowed."
Fazal Muqeem was subsequently hired by GHQ to write their
version of events. Qazi Majid was a brother of Lt.-Gen. Hamid
(Bhopali), the General who was later detailed by Tikka to call
officers in Lahore and tell them to testify against Eastern
Command and myself. This was a deliberate attempt to absolve
Majid and throw the blame on Eastern Command.
Majid’s order to blow up the bridge when Saadullah's brigade
was still on the other side of the Meghna River, when there was
no immedtate threat to the bridge, is indeed baffling.
Furthermore, no general needs permission to attack in his area
of responsibility. Majid had been given orders to_ fall back on
Dhaka, so why did he need permission to come to his allotted
area of responsibility? I fail to understand where Mugeem got
i | 
@-
_e@ 
OA @ 
GA 
@ 
@, 
kK SD |
WWW .Dal
qe
|
TM la’ ] ) |: lh; 26) rt 7 
a) f ~ 
Von \
LJ Ul LJ ] Ul ¢ LU y eo Oil i

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
159
this information from, because when he completed his book we
were POWs in India, including Qazi Majid. Furthermore, Majid’s
masterly inactivity in dealing with the heli-borne troops does not
speak well of his intentions.
As Mugeem was a hired writer who had sold his pen and
conscience, he had to write what he was told to write. Behind
Majid were not para-troops but heli-landed troops. Para-troops
had landed a day earlier near Tangail, many miles away from
Majid, which he could not have seen or reached. Like the fall of
Hilli, this is another of Mugeem’s white lies, written to cover up
the lies and sins of those in league with Bhutto, Gul Hassan, and
Tikka who plotted to dismember Pakistan.
The crossing had taken place about two miles south of the bridge
site. The strong enemy garrison at Bhairab Bazar made no move to
oppose the crossing though they could not have helped observing
the helicopters in the action. Fear of Mukti Bahini, as well as their
own demoralized state, kept them in the bunkers."
This 1s the only occasion when an Indian writer has
commented adversely on the courage and morale of our troops.
This was all due to Qazi Majid’s treacherous role in keeping the
troops passive and inactive. These were the same troops who had
held an enemy division at bay for fifteen days, and who had
evicted an enemy supported by tanks from Ashuganj with their
bayonets. The troops were full of zest, eager to perform any task
assigned to them by their commanders. It was all due to Majid’s
bloody-mindedness and cowardice that Indian heli-landed troops
escaped their destruction. 
|
Mymensingh-Jamalpur
This sector was under the command of General Jamshed, GOC
36 ad hoc Division. It was defended by 93 ad hoc Brigade of two
battalions, under the command of Brigadier Qadir Niazi. A war
veteran, full of zeal, this valiant commander can be credited with
performing miracles with only two battalions on divergent axes.
It was due to his superior ieadership that he encouraged Capt.
Ahsan, one of his ad hoc company commanders, to hold on to his
position, thus delaying the advance of the Indian 95 and 167
em 
¢€ 7 
~ » 
hi ~ \ f Mm 
{ 
La 
on »7 \A Xt 7 fr ff’ Tw,
VW 
.OALOCNIHDrary.cCOMm
v 
Y 
eCUWUALVVJINoiLL 
JARUAA 
oe WwW VL 
AA
]
[4

160 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Mountain Brigades for twenty-one days. They would otherwise
have contacted the Dhaka defences much earlier because this
was the shortest route with not many river obstacles. This brigade
fought tough actions in the Mukti Bahini areas where the
population was hostile in the extreme. Everyone put up a heroic
resistance. This formation was created by grouping two regular
battalions, 31 Baluch and 33 Punjab paramilitary forces,
consisting of two wings of the newly-raised West Pakistan Rangers
and some Mujahids. It also had a battery of mortars.
Qadir had organized the main defensive positions behind the
Brahmaputra obstacle at Jamalpur and Mymensingh with
approximately one battalion strength. He had placed screens
and delaying positions north of the river on the expected
approaches of Hatibara-Sherpur-Jamalpur axis. The Mukti Bahini
forces were very active in this area, continually harassing our
posts at Kamalpur and Hatibanda. This axis was the responsibility
of 31 Baluch, under Lt.-Col. Sultan, SJ, while Dalu-Haluaghat-
Mymensingh axis was the operational responsibility of 33 Punjab
under Col. Razaq, another brave officer.
Delaying positions were prepared at Haluaghat, Phulpur,
Gobrakura, Sarchapur, as well as Durgapur, Bisisiri, and Prueb
Dhala. The actual occupation was confined to Haluaghat. This
ad hoc brigade had no tanks or field or medium artillery guns.
Due to lack of firepower, the defence potential was considerably
reduced. Their task was to delay the enemy as long as possible
and then fall back to Dhaka fortress main defences. .
The Indian Army launched its attack with Logistic Area, 101
Communication Zone. It was given a divisional strength of two
Mountain Brigades plus, with one Mukti Bahini Brigade attacking
our troops deployed in Tangail-Mymensingh districts to facilitate
the capture of Dhaka. 101 Communication Zone was commanded
by Major-General Gurbux Singh. When war started on 21
November 1971, Major-General Gurbux Singh personally laid the
siege of Kamalpur post. It was held by one platoon of regular
troops, the rest were Mujahids, Opposed to Captain Ahsan Malik,
the company commander, were a regular and a Mukti brigade
which made continued attacks in strength on the post. A very.
interesting battle was fought by our young Captain against an
Indian General.

