30 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
I will narrate a small incident to support my contention. After
the cease-fire [ went to meet my friend Brigadier Mahmood, one
of the Brigade Commanders under Tikka. He was sitting in a
tent. He told me to go away. I asked him why. He told me that
some visitors were coming. ‘As our division has fought no battle I
will take them to 6 Armoured Division area and show them the
battlefield. In your presence I will be embarrassed as it was the
brigades of your division which fought the battles, while we stayed
at Sialkot.’
Citation for Hilal-e-Jurat
In the recent war with India Brig. A.A.K. Niazi was in command of a
Force. In the face of heavy enemy attacks, which were supported by
armour, he organized the defence of his Bde. and held his area in a
most critical situation. It was due to his exceptional courage and
persistent determination that repeated heavy attacks were repulsed,
On another occasion he took over defence of an area which was
under heavy enemy pressure. With complete disregard to his own
safety and by skilful handling he not only enabled the fmn to repulse
heavy enemy attacks by also snatched initiative from the enemy and
forced him to retreat from the area.
For his outstanding courage, gallantry and skilful handling of his
fmn he has been awarded Hilat-e-Jurat.
After the action in the Rann of Kutch, where Tikka’s role was
nothing spectacular, he was entrusted with the command of 15
Division which was located at Sialkot. Out of the brigades under
his command, 24 Brigade was placed under 6 Armoured Division,
commanded by General Abrar, and 115 Brigade was deployed in
area Narowal. The third brigade was deployed around Sialkot.
The Divisional HQ was in Sialkot city.
General Tikka normally briefed newsmen and visitors. He
distributed the gifts sent by people to the troops. He also
explained the battle situation and battles being fought by the
brigades of 6 Armoured Division. Thus was conjured a false image
of Tikka. A misconception took root. Abrar, the hero, was pushed
into oblivion, unsung. As the historical misconception continued, 
»
Tikka basked in the glory of unfought battles. His role in the
1965 War was uninspiring. He was never the hero he was made
] 
lac) LH
VV VV VV. LU 
< A I WULLT IULAIL
P

THE 1965 WAR 
4]
out to be. Abrar fought the battles, Tikka bagged the credit. At
times history is unkind. It creates giants out of pygmies and titans
e not given their due share.
ar
After the War
The 1965 war with India came to a halt. ‘The transition from war
to peace took place. The reshifting and readjustment of officers
started. 
I remained with 14 Para Brigade, the Brigade I
commanded during the operations in Azad Kashmir and Sialkot,
after the cessation of the hostilities. Then my posting order came.
I was posted back as Commandant of the School of Infantry and
Tactics, Quetta, from where I had been posted to 14 Para Brigade
before the outbreak of the 1965 War. I was happy with the
posting. As Commandant of the training institution, I had started
a few projects which had been left half-way, 
| wanted to complete
the unfinished tasks.
After staying in the School of Infantry and Tactics for a few
months, I was posted to 8 Division, located in Sialkot, on
promotion, On 18 October 1966 I took over the command of 8
Division from Major-General Muzaffar-ud-Din. I knew the
operational area to a certain extent as I had fought in this area
in the 1965 War. To further familiarize myself with the area, I
carried out detailed reconnaissance. At times we camped in the
area for several days to maintain continuity. I prepared the
defence plan of the division. Defences were based on the strong-
point system. Company strong points were prepared within the
Battalion’s defensive framework. In fact, 
1 walked the complete
Divisional front. Each and every machine-gun and anti-tank
position was critically examined and selected after ascertaining
its fire effectiveness. The defensive layout was inspected and
greatly admired by senior officers. It left 
a deep impact on the
Corps Commander, Lt.-Gen. Abdul Hamid. General Yahya Khan
was also profuse in his praise. On completion of 8 Division's
defensive positions, I was transferred to command 10 Division,
located in Lahore.
As 
[had sweated and toiled to complete the task, I was curious
about my posting from one division to another, I asked General
Hamid about it. He told me there were two reasons for my

32 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
posting to 10 Division. Firstly, the C.-in-C. wanted a similar
pattern of defensive layout in the 10 Division area as prepared
in 8 Division. The second reason was the Martial Law duties.
Lahore was a difficult and volatile area. Judging from my
experience and performance in Karachi as MLA, I had been
selected to move to Lahore.
I took over 10 Division from Major-General Khuda Dad on 22
June 1969. I started the reconnaissance of the operational area
on priority basis and organized 10 Division’s defensive layout. It
was an improvement over the 8 Division defences. Drawbacks
and shortcomings envisaged in the Sialkot defences were removed
in the 10 Division set-up. The defences prepared were strong
and the siting of weapons effective, keeping in view the quantum
of troops in relation to the space. More than twenty-five years
have passed, yet no General has modified the positions or made
any radical change in the set-up.
Both the divisional fronts withstood the brunt of the 1971
War. In the 1965 War, the Indians had forced us to deploy along
| the Bambanwala-Ravi-Bedian Link Canal (BRB), the 10 Division
area; all the area beyond the BRB was occupied and devastated
by the Indian Army without any fierce fighting, in fact no fighting
at all. To leave miles of area undefended, to be occupied by the
enemy with little resistance, creates an adverse psychological
impact on both the Army and the civilian population. In my
rehashed plan, we moved our defences beyond the BRB to halt
the enemy on the border and to carry out maximum attrition
before they contacted the troops on the BRB, which became the
second line of defence. The enemy had thus to build up a line of
defence three miles behind his territorial borders.
In addition, I planted kikar and rubber trees all along the
bank of the anti-tank ditch in front of 10 Division positions.
These have become thick jungle, providing shade, cover, and
camouflage to the troops.

| CHAPTER 3
EVENTS LEADING TO
SECESSION
Fate and a common religion had tied together the Muslims of
East and West Pakistan. Keeping the geographical configuration
in view, the union was considered unnatural by foreign experts!
During partition the majority of the Hindus living in West
Pakistan migrated to India. This did not happen in East Pakistan.
The rich and powerful Hindus stayed on, The Muslims were in
the majority but were mostly subservient to the Hindu landlords
and businessmen. Due to the higher incidence of education
amongst the Hindus, the vast majority of teachers in schools and
colleges were Hindus. The teachers played an important role in
moulding the ideas of the youth in their formative years. The
West Pakistanis were painted as imperialists, exploiters, and
tyrants. The seeds of discontent were sown.
Except for religion there was hardly anything in common
between the Muslims of East and West Pakistan. The distance
was an impediment, hindering rapport between the two
provinces. The language was different. Customs and traditions
failed to merge. The diet was different. The dress was not the
same. The culture of East Pakistan clashed with the culture of
West Pakistan. Each believed in its own values, traditions,
customs, and social set-up. 
.
West Pakistan was a bastion of landlords, known variously as
Khans, Chaudhris, Mirs, and Waderas. They were all-powerful,
tuling feudals. The peasants were completely subservient to them.
In East Pakistan, by contrast, power was vested in the hands of
the educated middle-class. The influence of the intellectuals, the
teachers, and the lawyers on the masses was considerable.

34 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
With the passage of time, certain issues became controversial
between the two wings. The most explosive issue was that of
language. The Bengalis were reluctant to adopt Urdu as the
national language. They felt it was being imposed on them, even
though Urdu had been declared the national language by Quaid-i-
Azam in a mammoth gathering in Dhaka on 19 March 1948. The
East Pakistanis wanted Bengali to be the national language. They
wished to retain their cultural identity through language. Also,
they did not want to be hampered by the lack of proficiency in
another language, which could place them at a disadvantage
against the West Pakistanis, who already had the edge in the armed
forces and the civil services. The Bengalis were adamant in their
demand. hey turned it into a political movement, voicing their
disenchantment. Thus a confrontation with the Centre took place.
The movement continued until the Bengali demand was accepted.
Bengali was declared as one of the state languages in 1954. The
issue was resolved, but the scar remained. The drift had started.
The West Pakistanis, on the other hand, were concerned that
the Bengalis, if given majority representation according to their
population in the federal set-up, would eventually edge them
out. They were also apprehensive about the Hindu influence on
Bengali politics. With twenty per cent of the population being
educated Hindus, and given their dominance in all facets of life,
who could have stopped them from dictating the national
policies? The government would be formed by Bengalis, the iron
fist in the velvet glove would be that of the Hindus. To ensure
that the Hindu influence was nullified, the parity system was
evolved, meaning equal representation between the two wings.
This was aimed at protecting the interests of the West Pakistanis
from exploitation by the Hindu-controlled Bengalis.
The removal from office of Khwaja Nazimuddin, the Prime
Minister and a Bengali, by Ghulam Muhammad, a West Pakistani,
created turbulence. The Bengali leadership in East Pakistan
launched a campaign. Most of the parties formed a united front
to express their discontent. A twenty-point agenda was formulated
which included autonomy of the province in accordance with
the Lahore Resolution, with only defence, currency, and foreign
policy under the direct control of the Centre.
In October 1958, General Ayub Khan, the Commander-in-
Chief of the Pakistan Army, was appointed Martial Law

EVENTS LEADING TO SECESSION 
35
Administrator by Iskander Mirza, the Chief Executive of Pakistan.
Ayub Khan chose his priorities with clarity. He strove to preserve
what we had inherited, the values and concepts, and planned to
implement a national reconstruction programme with special
emphasis on the development of East Pakistan. His first and
foremost alm was to address the ills, both social and economic,
which were rampant in Pakistan. To fulfil this aim, the eradication
of smuggling, hoarding, and corruption was accorded top
priority. His second aim was to restore political stability, which
had been eroded by inept leadership. Ayub Khan’s dedicated
efforts to boost industrialization achieved considerable success.
After the 1965 War, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto made a statement in
the National Assembly which caused a furore. He said that East
Pakistan had been ‘saved by China’. This was not a simple
statement, but one which had far-reaching consequences. The
Bengalis’ thinking underwent a radical change. It began to
appear to them that if the bulk of the forces were located in
West Pakistan, and there were hardly any troops in East Pakistan
to defend it, then the union with Pakistan held no practical
advantages. This feeling soon gained strength. The diffident
attitude of the West Pakistan leadership failed to justify their
strategy. The Bengalis were convinced more than ever before
that they were being neglected. To a certain extent their anxieties
were not unfounded,
The discontent kept simmering. Sheikh Mujib carried out overt
and covert activities to meet his objectives. In 1966 the Agartala
Conspiracy was unearthed. Sheikh Mujib, in connivance with civil
and junior army officers, had conspired with Indian agencies to
bring about a revolt in East Pakistan. The meetings had taken
place in Agartala, India, hence the name. Mujib and the other
conspirators were arrested.
_ 
The Agartala Conspiracy was not a fabricated story created to
implicate Sheikh Mujib. Indian intelligence activities in East
Pakistan had started with the inception of Pakistan. They were
actively aided by the Hindus settled in East Pakistan. This has
been confirmed by Mr Ashok Raina in his book Inside RAW: The
Story of India’s Secret Service (Vikas Publishing House, New Delhi,
1981), in which he has highlighted the meetings which took
Place between pro-Mujib factions and the Indian Intelligence
Bureau Operation (IIBO). Mr Raina names Mr M. K. Sarkaran

36 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Nair, who later became the Second-in-Command in RAW, as the
liaison with the pro-Mujib group. The Pakistan Intelligence
caught up with their activities when the pro-Mujib group made
an unsuccessful raid on the East Bengal Rifles’ armoury in Dhaka,
President Ayub Khan called a Round Table Conference (RTC)
to which all the prominent political figures, including Mujib 
and
Bhutto, were invited. Meetings was held on 26 February and
subsequently on 10 March 1969. From the very outset Bhutto’s
animosity towards the conference was obvious. He not only failed
to participate in the conference, but issued statements against it.
Similarly, Mujib was adamant in his six-point demands. Despite
friendly persuasion by other politicians, he was not to be moved.
Ayub Khan contended that the six points meant confederation
and not federation and would subsequently lead to the division
of Pakistan. The politicians failed to contribute toward the success
_ of the deliberations. Mujib’s rigid attitude, Bhutto’s nonchalant
stance, and the meek role played by other participating politicians
were the major reasons for the failure of the conference.
People by then had started resenting Martial Law. Due to his
ill-health, President Ayub had to rely on the Army, and Yahya
Khan, the Commander-in-Chief, took advantage of the political
turmoil. He encouraged Mujib and other leaders to disagree
with the RTC’s proposals. He assured Mujib that Martial Law
would not be imposed and the Army would not interfere in the
demonstrations against Ayub Khan. He kept his word and did
not intervene until he succeeded Ayub Khan.
Ayub Khan resigned on 25 March 1969, abrogated the
Constitution and asked Yahya Khan to assume power. Yahya had
decided to hold elections. Yahya, Mujib, and Bhutto were the
three men who were in a position to create an impact on national
politics. General Yahya, with the backing of the Army, was the
most powerful. Mujib was an accomplished politician and an
orator par excellence who could arouse the masses by his emotional
speeches. Bhutto was a fledgling, and had previously been
roosting under the protective wings of Ayub Khan. He was
sophisticated but arrogant, polished but brutal, he could speak
the poor man’s language but was egocentric, intelligent but
emotional. The trio was involved in a desperate tussle to achieve
political ascendancy. Each was ambitious, each wily, each trying
to elbow the other out.

EVENTS LEADING TO SECESSION 
37
Yahva moved ahead with his plans to hold the elections. He
held discussions with his coterie of generals and the political and
bureaucratic elite, and took decisions which had far-reaching
repercussions. On 28 November 1969, he abolished One Unit
and adopted the principle of one-man-one-vote. With this one
stroke Yahya destroyed what we had been striving to preserve for
so many years. The principle of parity was considered to be a
geo-political compulsion and was a part of the Constitution. It
had been incorporated with the due consent of East Pakistan’s
elected representatives. Yahya also gave the Bengalis equal
representation in Central Government administrative jobs. The
Bengalis were not satisfied. They demanded representation in all
walks of life based on their population. The more Yahya gave
them, the more the Bengalis clamoured for. Yahya touched all
subjects except regional autonomy. This was exploited by Muyjib
in the elections.
On 1 January 1970, Yahya Khan allowed the political parties to
start their election campaign. Elections were to be held by the
end of 1970. On 30 March, he promulgated the Legal Framework
Order (LFO).
The election campaign started at a vigorous tempo. Both Mujib
and Bhutto made concerted efforts to woo the public, Mujib as
the champion of East Pakistan and Bhutto the favourite of the
West Pakistanis. Mujibs’s strength, and his insistence on the Six
Points, increased day by day; meanwhile he conducted a smear
campaign, castigating and criticizing the people of West Pakistan,
who he blamed for all conceivable ills that might befall East
Pakistan.
In the meantime floods hit East Pakistan. The cyclone in
November 1970 brought in its wake miseries and disaster. Villages
were devastated, leaving people homeless. Many lives were lost.
Admiral Ahsan, the Governor of East Pakistan, needed heli-
copters and trained manpower to carry out relief operations. He
made a desperate appeal to Lt.-Gen. Sahibzada Yaqub, the
Commander Eastern Command, to provide army helicopters and
manpower to carry out the relief operation. During riots, civil
disturbance, or national calamities, it is one of the constitutional
duties of the Army to give support to the Government in dealing
with the problem. Yaqub, despite Mujib’s pleas and Ahsan’s
request, was adamant about not providing troops for flood relief

38 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
operations. No circumstances, except when a country is engaged
in war, can rationalize a military commander's refusal to provide
the necessary help during natural calamities. When Yaqub stalled,
and Yahya procrastinated, American and British relief teams,
without Islamabad’s knowledge, arrived in East Pakistan to carry
out relief operations. The Bengalis were outraged and Mujib
furious with the government’s inability to provide help. He said:
‘It took British soldiers to bury our dead’. Yaqub’s indifference,
and his failure to contribute towards the amelioration of human
suffering, aggravated the already tense situation.
I have known Sahibzada Yaqub since 1949, when we did the
staff course together at Quetta. Taciturn by nature, he chose to
remain silent during the class and model discussions. During
World War II, he surrendered and was taken POW. When his
fellow officers escaped from camp, he made no attempt to do so.
During staff course, he strongly opposed the Two Nation Theory,
which he termed a political blunder. During the 1965 War, he
commanded an Armoured Division, which was not committed to
battle during his command. Being polished and well versed in
English, his promotion to higher ranks was smooth.
Yaqub was posted as Commander Eastern Command in 1969.
He reorganized and regrouped the troops under his command,
in consonance with the Army War.plan, “The Battle of the East
will be fought in the West’. He was the author of security plan
‘Blitz’, evolved to combat the Bengal uprising. As Martial Law
Administrator he developed friendly relations with Mujib and
had a rapport with Nurul Amin and Bhashani.
In the meantime an important development was visible on the
political horizon. Two parties, the Awami League and the PPP,
dominated the election front. Each was concentrated in its own
area, with no influence whatsoever in the other province. During
the 1970 elections, Yaqub’s tilt towards Mujib was conspicious.
He turned a Nelson’s eye towards the pressure tactics of the
Awami League toughs. This may have been by way of
compensation for his uncompromising attitude during the floods,
but was more likely due to his lack of will power and inner
strength to confront Mujib’s arm-twisting tactics.
Mujib achieved an astounding victory in the elections. He won
160 out of 162 seats in East Pakistan, while Bhutto’s PPP
completely outdid its rivals by securing 81 out of 138 seats in

EVENTS LEADING TO SECESSION 
39
West Pakistan. I was told by Fazal Qader Chaudhry, Maulvi Farid
Ahmed, and a few other leaders who were pro-Pakistami, that had
the MLA done his job with dedication and honesty of purpose
and not given a free hand to the AL to rig the elections, the
other parties would have won at least sixty to sixty-five seats in
the cities, thus constraining Mujib’s activities. The pre-election
report prepared by various agencies was negated by the results.
According to their assessment, no party would achieve an absolute
majority, thereby placing the Yahya government in a strong
position to play the role of godfather.
The situation after the elections became pregnant with
dangerous overtones. As no party had a majority in both wings,
the struggle for power between Yahya, Bhutto, and Mujib
intensified. Powerful impulses took over. Overbearing attitudes
and inability to adjust their roles within the frame-work of the
emerging political scenario gave new colour to the already
complicated situation. The leaders on’ both sides of the divide
adopted a confrontation course. The will to compromise and act
in conformity with the norms of political ethics was missing.
Bhutto was not willing to sit on the Opposition benches. He
suggested separate Constitutions for East and West Pakistan. He
started behaving like a leader whose party had won the majority
and was about to form the government. On the other hand Mujib,
after his victory in the elections, was even more confident. He
hardened his stand on the six-points issue. Bhutto in return failed
to acknowledge Mujib’s victory. He declared that Punjab and
Sindh were the bastion of power in Pakistan, therefore complete
co-operation of his party was vital for the formation of the
Constitution and in forming the Central Government.
Thus the national cart was pulled in opposite directions. Mujib
was defiant, Bhutto power-hungry. Yahya tried to appease Mujib
by acclaiming him the future Prime Minister. Mujib was not
swayed by empty words. He was not ready to accommodate Yahya,
who was aspiring to stay on as President of Pakistan. Disillusioned,
Yahya flew into the waiting arms of Bhutto. He along with his
coterie went to Larkana for a duck shoot, where the Larkana
conspiracy was planned. 
i
In the meantime India, which had been continuously assisting
Mujib, concentrated its Army on the borders to exert pressure
on West Pakistan. It was also a clear signal to Mujib to revolt

