40 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
against the Centre. On 30 January 1971, an Indian plane was
hijacked to Lahore. Emotionalists as we are, we welcomed the
two Kashmiri hijackers without delving into the issue. The
Kashmiris were given asylum. Pakistan had fallen into a 
trap,
since this gave the Indians a strong reason to suspend the flights
of Pakistani aeroplanes over Indian territory. Later, when sanity
prevailed and emotions cooled, an inquiry was conducted which
revealed that the hijacking was planned by India to give them an
excuse to suspend flights between East and West Pakistan. 
:
On 11 February 1971, Bhutto met Yahya. The next day PPP
| aastom attacked the Awami League office at Lahore and burnt
its flag. Later Yahya announced that the National Assembly would
meet in Dhaka on 3 March. Bhutto was not receptive to the
announcement. He said: “We cannot go there only to endorse the
Constitution already prepared by a party, and return humiliated.’
On 15 February, Bhutto told his followers at Lahore that he would
launch a protest movement if the Government backed Mujib. He
also said that either East Pakistan should be allowed independence
or Mujib should be arrested and taken to task.
On 22 February 1971, Yahya had a meeting with the Provincial
Governors in Islamabad. Lt.-Gen. Yaqub, Commander Eastern
Command and MLA, also attended. It was in this conference
that the plan for military operations was approved. Yaqub was
given a carte blanche to execute plan ‘Blitz’, in case Mujib failed to
modify his stance on the Six Points. After the conference, Yaqub
visited General Hamid in GHQ, who offered him an extra brigade
to deal with any new development. He refused the offer,
professing that adequate troops were available in East Pakistan to
deal with any contingency. When he reached Dhaka, he changed
his mind and requested the promised brigade. When two
battalions of the brigade reached Dhaka, he again telephoned
Gen. Hamid and informed him that Mujib was perturbed about
the troop build-up and had requested that further air-lifting of
troops be stopped. Gen. Hamid, normally ugruffled and quiet,
lost his cool and told Yaqub to be firm. The third battalion was
despatched according to plan.
The Awami League was so alarmed by these divaloonienis
that they even agreed to be flexible on the Six Points. On 27 
|
February 1971, Governor Ahsan informed Mujib of the decision
to postpone the National Assembly session until a date to be

EVENTS LEADING TO SECESSION 
4]
' notified. On 28 February, Bhutto repeated his threat to launch a
movement if the National Assembly session was called. He warned
that if any member of his party attended the session, he would
be liquidated. He urged that either the Assembly should be
delayed or the 120-day time-limit for framing the Constitution be
withdrawn. This was of course an empty threat, because the
Awami League, with its two-thirds majority, could have had the
Constitution passed any time. Postponement of the Assembly was
announced on | March. The grounds given were the boycott of
the Assembly by the PPP and the tense situation created by India.
It is on record that Yahya had closed-door meetings with Bhutto
on 11, 19, and 26 February. The postponement was the outcome
of the devious game played by Yahya and Bhutto.
The civilian Cabinet was dissolved. Admiral Ahsan was removed
from the post of Governor. Sahibzada Yaqub took over.-the
additional duties of Governor of East Pakistan—all Generals
appointed as governors relinquished the command of troops,
except Yaqub. Mujib issued a call for a general strike on 2 March
to protest the postponement of the Assembly session.
Immediately, the Awami League toughs went on the rampage in
various parts of Dhaka and many shops were looted. During this
period of chaos, armed Indians penetrated East Pakistan. Non-
Bengalis were attacked and killed. Army units were also attacked.
Yahya looked on with too placid an attitude. He called for a
Round Table Conference on 10 March, little realizing that the
time for parleys had passed.
On 4 March 1971, Mujib launched a civil disobedience
movement. The Awami League again went on the rampage. Army
Commander General Yaqub was silent, in no mood to move. The
postponement of the Assembly session was the main reason which
precipitated violence. Bhutto and Yahya were equally responsible. !
They stalled the transfer of power. Yaqub’s inactivity also_
contributed towards the killings and other heinous crimes
committed by the Bengalis. Yaqub could have nipped the
insurrection in the bud, it being in its nascent stage. The Bengali
troops had not yet mutinied. All Yaqub faced was a rag-tag mob,
lacking the skills of trained soldiers. With an intelligent mixture
of force and persuasive diplomacy, the march towards total
defiance could have been halted, and Mujib forced to adopt a
more amicable attitude towards the problem.

49? 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
In the beginning of March, Mujib announced his plan to run a
parallel government, in defiance of Martial Law. The atrocities
committed by Mujib’s Awami League during the first fortnight
were too brutal to be described. In Bogra 15,000 persons were
killed in cold blood. In Chittagong, thousands of men and women
were bayoneted or raped. In Seraj Ganj women and children were
locked in a hall and set on fire. The target of these brutalities were
West Pakistanis and Biharis. Also, West Pakistani officers serving in
the East Pakistan Rifles were killed, their wives raped and made to
serve food to Bengali officers naked. The later propaganda about
atrocities by West Pakistani soldiers was deliberately spread to
discredit the Pakistan Army, contrary to the facts.
Admiral Ahsan was replaced by Lt.-Gen. Yaqub as Governor of
East Pakistan on | March 1971. Within four days, he resigned as
Governor and Commander, Eastern Command, saying that he
‘could not kill his Pakistani brothers’. The Bengalis were
exhilarated, the West Pakistanis dismayed. His decision had far-
reaching consequences. Yaqub witnessed the horrors of
holocaust, the genocidal destruction by the Bengalis, yet he
remained silent. His indecisiveness emboldened the Awami
Leaguers who continued with the mayhem. The hawk had
mellowed into a dove. His attitude is reflected in General Sher
Ali’s book, He writes: ‘I know in principle he did not disagree, in
fact at one stage he was being a hawk, and Yahya asked me to
speak to him on the subject.’
Again, according to General Sher Ali, ‘It is tragic for me to
record that the commander in East Pakistan at the time of crisis,
because of political involvement took a decision contrary to the
conduct expected of him as a soldier, standing by his men in
crisis. Instead of standing by his troops, he resigned and left.’ He
further writes: “The reason given was conscience. He said he
could not do what he had been ordered to kill his brother
Pakistanis. What is to be examined is, whether he was against the
use of troops on principle from the beginning or was he against
it at that particular time, The excuse of “conscience” is acceptable
only if he had resigned and gone much earlier.’
After resigning, Yaqub went to Karachi, where he was attached
to Station Headquarters. He was demoted to the rank of Major-
General and pensioned off. Keeping the grave nature of the
offence in view, Yahya was inclined to court-martial him, but as

|
EVENTS LEADING TO SECESSION 
43
the issue could have been given a political colour, he was given a
mild punishment. In Bhutto, Yaqub found his guardian angel.
On assuming power, he not only restored his rank but also
appointed him as Ambassador to France and later USA. With one
stroke, Bhutto exonerated Yaqub from his unsoldierly conduct of
reneging on a national commitment during active service. If
destiny has ever been kind, he was its greatest beneficiary.
His excuse for resigning is self-negating. When thousands
perished in the floods, their cries went unheard. He was unmoved
when Biharis, West Pakistanis, and army officers serving in the
East Pakistan Rifles were ruthlessly murdered. His conscience
slumbered when officers’ wives were dishonoured. He failed to
lift even a proverbial finger when Tikka used three divisions in
Balochistan to crush the so-called insurgency, although in
principle he should have resigned his ambassadorship in pretest.
But tucked away in a safe haven, his thinking had undergone a
change. When Bhutto, his benefactor, fell to the hangman’s
noose, he joined Ziaul Haq’s cabinet, although he had openly
expressed his distaste for dictators. After Zia’s death he climbed
aboard the PPP bandwagon, and after Benazir’s removal he
slipped into Nawaz Sharif’s government, though he saw through
his craving for power and removed him. Never before has a
person with such a blemished record, especially deserting during
active service, been elevated to such high posts. A general cannot
get away with the single word ‘conscience’, for it changes with
the changing situation, as witnessed in the case of Yaqub.
The pressure against the Armed Forces continued to be built
up. The Awami League put into effect their plans spelt out as
under:
(a) denial of all logistical support to the Armed Forces;
(b) disruption of all troop movements;
(c) disruption of water and power supplies to all Cantonments;
(d) stopping all civilian employees from working for the
Armed Forces. 
|
Mujib declared: ‘Pakistan as it stands is finished. There is no
longer any hope of a settlement. I will break them and bring
them to their knees.’ It was clear that Bangladesh had come
into existence. Mujib had become the de facto ruler and his
home had turned into the Presidency. Orders from the Central
Government were defied.

td 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
General Tikka Khan was sent as Yaqub’s replacement on 7
March 1971. Tikka arrived in Dhaka by air and took over the
duties of Commander, Eastern Command, MLA, and Governor
of East Pakistan. He was not welcomed; in fact he was presented
with a garland of shoes at the airport. To top it all, the Chief
Justice refused to swear him in as Governor. Tikka was a straight-
forward, hard-working, and unassuming person. He lacked
Yaqub’s slick and suave manner; in fact he was not the sort of
person to inspire confidence in others. He lacked strategic insight
and tactical flair, yet a halo of grandeur and vicarious heroism
had been woven around him.
On taking over the command of Eastern Garrison, Gen. Tikka
tried to meet Sheikh Mujib. Although Mujib had met Yaqub, he
refused to meet Tikka. Gen. Tikka issued a directive to the troops,
based on the mission spelled out to him; this included: disarming
of the East Bengal Regiment, battalions of the East Pakistan Rifles,
and the police; security of Chittagong naval base; control of air-
fields including Lal Munir Hut and Ishurdi; security of towns.
Looking at the directives, except for the disarming of regular
and irregular Bengali troops, the stress was on the defensive side,
i.e., security of cantonments, etc. During implementation of the
plan the main task given to Tikka—disarming of the armed
Bengalis—was forgotten and he went off at a tangent. The result
was that we lost not only the initiative but the whole of the
province, except for a few garrison towns.
Another wrong step General ‘Tikka took was that he uncere-
moniously turned out of East Pakistan all foreign correspondents,
newspersons, reporters, and I'V crews. Some of them were
manhandled, their higgage searched, and films removed from
cameras. They all moved to India eventually. So the foreign media
turned against us and started reporting twisted versions of events
in East Pakistan, their source of information being the Indians
and the refugees fleeing from East Pakistan. Their twisted and
exaggerated accounts and false stories did a lot of damage to
Pakistan and its armed forces. Our Government did not bother
to counter them, and as a result even our own people started
believing the false and exaggerated accounts of the foreign Press.
On 14 March Bhutto suggested two Prime Ministers, he himself
for West Pakistan and Mujib for East Pakistan, and his utterances,
e.g., Udhar tum, idhar hum, clearly meant two Pakistans. Gen.
ey

EVENTS LEADING TO SECESSION 
45
Yahya flew to East Pakistan on 15 March. Bhutto also went there.
There were discussions between the three parties, but they were
meant only to gain time, because the Awami League had reached
the point of no return. Mujib asked Yahya on 22 March 
to
transfer power to the two wings as had been demanded by Bhutto.
On 23 March, resistance day was observed in East Pakistan.
The flag of Bangladesh was flown on Mujib’s house. The British
Deputy High Commission and the Soviet Consulate also hoisted
Bangladesh flags. Colonel Osmani was appointed by Mujib as the
overall commander of operations. Ex-servicemen were enlisted
under the supervision of Major-General (Retd) Majeed. Arms
and ammunition were transported from India to East Pakistan.
The East Pakistan Police and East Pakistan dissidents were fully
armed. With the active help of the Indian Army, who had
infiltrated thousands of troops in civilian clothes, the plan's for
armed struggle were complete.
On 25 March General Tikka Khan had available to him for
military action only 14 Infantry Division, under the command of
Major-General Khadim Hussain Raja. It consisted of four
brigades, located in different cantonments and camps all over
East Pakistan. In the division there were twelve infantry battalions
(all West Pakistan), seven infantry battalions (all East Pakistan)
and one commando battalion (mixed). These battalions had
officers from both West and East Pakistan. In supporting arms he
had one light tank regiment, five regiments of field artillery, one
regiment of light anti-aircraft artillery, and two mortar batteries.
Troops in these units were mixed, West and East Pakistanis. There
were sixteen wings of the East Pakistan Rifles, about sixteen
thousand strong—these were all East Pakistanis except a few
officers and junior commissioned officers from West Pakistan.
There were also naval and air force troops, some of which could
be used in a ground role in Chittagong and Dhaka.
It should be borne in mind that the Bengali troops had not
yet mutinied. General Tikka had enough strength available to
complete his task. The requirements were proper planning,
intelligent conduct of operations, and patience, because facing
him was not a regular army but dissident armed civilians. More
tact than tactics was the order of the day.
On the night between 25/26 March 1971, General Tikka
struck. Peaceful night was turned into a time of wailing, crying,

46 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
and burning. General Tikka let loose everything at his disposal as
if raiding an enemy, not dealing with his own misguided and
misled people. The military action was a display of stark cruelty,
more merciless than the massacres at Bukhara and Baghdad by
Changez Khan and Halaku Khan, or at Jallianwala Bagh by the
British General Dyer.
General Tikka, instead of carrying out the tasks given to him,
i.e., to disarm armed Bengali units and persons and to take into
custody the Bengali leaders, resorted to the killing of civilians
and a scorched-earth policy. His orders to his troops were: ‘I
want the land and not the people.’ These orders were carried
out in letter and spirit by Major-General Farman and Brigadier
(later Lt.-Gen.) Jahanzeb Arbab in Dhaka. Major-General Rao
Farman had written in his table diary, ‘Green land of East
Pakistan will be painted red.’ It was painted red by Bengali blood.
This diary was found by the Bengalis when they occupied
Government House on 14 December 1971. Mujib showed the
diary to Bhutto during his visit to Bangladesh. Bhutto inquired
from me about this diary during my meeting with him. I told
him I had heard about it when I was in India but I had no
knowledge of it as I had nothing to do with the civil affairs of
East Pakistan.
As General Tikka deviated from his given mission, nearly all
the Bengali armed personnel and units slipped away with their.
arms, ammunition, equipment, and transport and joined the
Mukti Bahini forces, where they were soon joined by the Indian
Army officers and men. Similarly, all the leaders, except Mujib,
escaped and established the Government of Bangladesh in exile
in Calcutta.
On the night between 25/26 March 1971 Yahya sneaked out
of Dhaka before the start of military action. He told Tikka before
{leaving Dhaka, ‘Sort them out.’ Bhutto had remained behind to
see what Tikka did. Bhutto saw Dhaka burning and heard the
cries of the people, the crackle of burning material, the roar of
tanks, the boom of guns and rockets, and the rattle of machine
guns. In the morning, it is alleged, Bhutto patted Tikka, Farman,
and Arbab on the back, congratulated them for doing exactly
what was needed, and assured them that their future was secured.
Bhutto kept his promise. Tikka secured the coveted post of COAS.
Farman was made Chairman, Fauji Foundation, and Brigadier

EVENTS LEADING TO SECESSION 
47
| Arbab, despite the corruption charge proved against him, was
promoted as Major-General and later Ligntenantteneral, On
reaching Karachi on 26 March, he told the people, ‘Thank God
Pakistan has been saved.’
Tikka could have done his job without much difficulty and
without resorting to bloodshed. It only needed careful planning,
intelligent conduct, and patience. It would not have been difficult
either to take the politicians into custody or to arrest the Bengal
Army officers from their homes and messes. If the unit kotes had
been captured in time and blocked, railway stations, bus stands,
and bridges manned, trucks, buses, and ferry boats stopped, the
bulk of the armed personnel and politicians could have been
arrested. Those armed personnel who did escape would have
gone without heavy weapons and transport, and with limited
ammunition, and as such it would have taken a long timé to
organize them to be of any use. Similarly there was no need for
General Tikka to take such swift and severe action against the
rebels’ so-called strong points. These could easily have been
surrounded, their electricity and water supply cut, and supplies
stopped. There was no danger of an attack from outside to help
the rebels, nor were they in a position to start attacks from inside.
With a little patience, they would have surrendered after a couple
of days.

CHAPTER 4
COMMANDER EASTERN
COMMAND
The military option to remedy the political dilemma failed to
produce viable results. Yaqub’s untimely resignation and Tikka’s
inability to turn goals into achievement was an unexpected
setback. It was decided to remove Tikka from the command of
East Pakistan Garrison. I was commanding 10 Division located at
Lahore. On 2 April 1971, I was summoned to GHQ by the COAS,
General Abdul Hamid Khan.
I reached GHQ the next day and went directly to General
Hamid 
’s office. He told me that the President was dissatisifed with
Tikka’s conduct of military operations. He further told me that
although | was junior to'several generals, yet in view of my past war
record and performance during periods of crisis, the President
had decided to post me as Commander Eastern Command. ‘Any
questions?’, he asked. I answered, ‘The duty of the soldier is to
obey orders, not to ask questions or offer excuses. The President
makes political decisions, the Army Commander executes the
orders.’ I further said that I would try to come up to expectations
and thanked him for the trust reposed in me. He bid me good luck.
I reached Dhaka on 4 April 1971, one day after my meeting
with the COAS. When Tikka heard about the change, he was
stupefied. To be changed, or removed from command during
active operations, is a matter of deep chagrin for the commander
being relieved. Tikka used all methods to put off handing over
command. His attempts to retain command included requesting
that I be made his subordinate. This was firmly turned down by
the COAS, who told him, ‘You were given a chance but you
~ 
bungled it.’ With great reluctance, he handed over command on
10 April, one week after my arrival in Dhaka.

COMMANDER EASTERN COMMAND 
49
On 11) April there was a complete reorganization. General
Tikka Khan became Governor. He was also the Martial Law
Administrator and so was responsible for both civil administration
and Martial Law duties in East Pakistan. All arrests, punishments,
and executions were carried out on his orders. Mr Shafiq-ur-
Rehman was the Chief Secretary, Major-General Rao Farman Ali
was Military Adviser to the Governor, and Brigadier Fagqir
Muhammad was Brigadier Martial Law. Brigadier Jilani (Later
Lt.-Gen. and Governor) was my COS (Chief of Staff), replacing
Brigadier El-Edroos. Major-General Shaukat Riza was
Commanding 9 Division. Major-General Rahim had replaced
Major-General Khadim Raja as GOC 14 Division. Major-General
Nazar Hussain Shah was GOC 16 Division, and Major-General
Jamshad was head of CAF (Civil Armed Forces), replacing
Brigadier Nisar. Rear Admiral Sharif and Air Commodore Inam
were commanding the naval and air force contigents.
When Tikka became COAS, during Bhutto’s rule, he tried to
give the impression that I was operating under his command,
which was not correct. Our duties and responsibtlities were
widely different. I was the military commander, responsible for
military operations only, and functioned directly under the
COAS, who was the acting C.-in-C. also. On the other hand,
Tikka was the Governor and MLA and functioned under the
President. We worked independently, functioning in our own
spheres, with no overlapping duties.
Major-General Mitha, who had been sent to assist Tikka, sent
the following message to GHQ, asking for reinforcements:
This operation has now developed into a civil war. No long distance
moves, no rail moves possible. No ferries or boats available. In fact
movement has become the chief obstacle for conducting operations
or restoring economy and will remain so for some time. It is therefore
essential that Armed Forces develop own independent capabilities in
all fields. I suggest that following units should be raised immediately
and sent. Alpha—Port Operating Battalion for Chittagong Port by
Navy. Bravo—River Transport Battalion and River Marine Battalion
by Army or Navy or Engineers and Rail Operating Battalion by Army
Engineers. Charlie—Cargo and Tanker flotilla by Navy for which
ships available but may require crew or certain specialists. More
choppers for logistic and movement essential.

