Recce
Sec.
SIC
Tk
VCGS
ABBREVIATIONS
Recoilless Rifle
Reconnaisance
Secretary: 
|
Second in Command
Tank
Vice Chief of General Staff
www.balochlibrary.com
X1X

DEDICATION
This book is dedicated to the valiant members of
the armed forces, civil armed forces, civilian
officers, West Pakistani Police, Razakars, and
Mujahids of East Pakistan who strove hard, made
supreme sacrifices, and suffered humiliation to
keep Pakistan united,

PREFACE
It is an inherent trait of human nature to discard unpleasant
memories. But certain events leave a deep imprint on our lives
and their memories can never be obliterated. To preserve such
memories is essential, especially for posterity. The memories of
the separation of East Pakistan still haunt us, as it left the nation
divided and its pride shattered.
On my return from India in 1974, where I was a prisoner of
war, I found the political atmosphere in Pakistan far from
amicable. Power rested in the hands of those whose
confrontationist policies had led to the breakup of Pakistan. My
worst fears were confirmed. Eastern Garrison had been singled
out as a scapegoat. A campaign had been launched to smear the
image of Eastern Garrison. This was being done to divert the
attention of the masses from the devious role of Zulfikar Ali
Bhutto in the breakup of Pakistan.
The Government in power tried to mutilate the truth. It was
exasperating to read the fabricated accounts and concocted
stories. The authors were hired by General Headquarters at 
—
Bhutto’s behest. Also, GHQ had its own axe to grind. The
performance of the High Command at GHQ and their com-
manders in the western theatre was miserable. They had put up a
dismal performance by losing 5,500 square miles in little over a
week’s time under most favourable battle conditions. This was
the stigma they wanted to erase.
My book has been inordinately delayed, but better late than.
never. The book could not have been published earlier because
the circumstances were not conducive to its publication. I was
arrested by Bhutto and detained 
by General Ziaul Haq on 
on
political grounds. Mr Bhutto, mightier than Caeser, with powers
that he inherited as Chief Martial Law Administrator, which title

XXIV 
PREFACE
he managed to retain even as Prime Minister, would never have
allowed the book to be published as it would have damaged his
political image. The attitude of General Zia’s government was far
from sympathetic. The people at the helm of affairs in both the
regimes were scared about the whole affair and they did not
want the truth to come out.
This story is the personal narrative of a fighting soldier, who
has been lucky to have had a chance of fighting in nearly all
types of terrain and climatic conditions during World War II and
during the wars of Pakistan with India. I have also been most
fortunate to have had the chance of commanding troops from a
platoon to a large force, Eastern Garrison, which included Air
Force and Naval contingents, in a far-flung area of operations,
away from the home base, West Pakistan.
As a military commander I was placed in a difficult position,
for our own people, the Bengalis, were not only hostile but were
actively at war against us and were providing all sorts of support
and assistance to the Indian Army. My High Command was
located one thousand miles away, so I could not get timely advice.
At the same time the High Command did not appear interested
in this theatre of operations. My formations were weak and ill
equipped, and we had no air or naval assistance or support worth
the name.
Immediately after the 1970 dleetons Mr Bhutto had asked
| M. M. Ahmad, Adviser Economic Affairs Division, and Mr Qamar-
j ul-Islam, Deputy Chairman Planning Commission, to prepare a
paper for him to prove that West Pakistan could flourish without
East Pakistan. In February 1971 Major-General Omer was telling
the politicians not to go to Dhaka to attend the National Assembly
session because, he said, Dhaka had become the hub of intrigue,
and it would be better to quit East Pakistan. Mr Bhutto was
admonishing the elected members of the Assembly that those
who went to Dhaka for the session would be punished severely.
He said conclusively that the East and West Wings should leave
aaah other alone in his famous utterance ‘Idhar hum, udhar tum’
(me here, you there). Basically Bhutto was not prepared to accept
ithe role of opposition leader of a united Pakistan; his endeavours
;were therefore directed at compromising Mujib’s right to form
the government, which would only be possible if East Pakistan
gained independence.

PREFACE 
XXV
The final plan for the dismemberment of Pakistan was hatched
between General Yahya and Bhutto at Larkana, Bhutto's home
town. The plan, which came to be known 
as the M. M. Ahmed
“plan, aimed at abandoning East Pakistan without a successor
government, which meant: by losing the war. So all the efforts of
: Yahya’s junta and Bhutto’s coterie were directed towards losing
the war. They neither desired a political settlement, nor did they
want a cease-fire. Instead of working on the plan, ‘Battle of East
Pakistan will be fought in West Pakistan’, which was evolved at
the very inception of Pakistan to keep Pakistan united, they were
working on the plan, ‘Lose East Pakistan without a successor
government.
India could not establish a Government of Bangladesh on the
soil of East Pakistan despite the eight month long insurgency. In
desperation, India invaded East Pakistan on 21 November 1971.
The strength of their invading force, including para-military
forces, was half a million, plus half a million available from the
forces deployed on China’s border. When President Yahya was
told about the Indian invasion he said, ‘What can I do for East
| Pakistan? I can only pray’. With one sentence Yahya absolved
‘himself of all his responsibilities and duties as the Head of State
and Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. But over and
above his ‘prayers’, Yahya Khan could have started a vigorous
offensive according to our national plan, i.e., ‘Battle of the East
will be fought in the West’, for which our reserves were already
concentrated in the West. The allotted codeword would have put
our reserve force into motion. We had five strike forces in the
west while the Indians had only three. There was every chance of 
—
success, given the superiority of our strike forces and the fact
that the initiative was with us.
The government in power did not take the case of the Indian
invasion to the UN Security Council straight away. The motive
was to give India enough time to win the encounter by defeating
the small, ill-equipped, and tired Pakistan Eastern Garrison. By
not starting the offensive in the West immediately, the Army in
the West emerged as a broken and discredited institution and it
made the position of Eastern Garrison critical. However, in spite
of our shortages, and the step-motherly treatment meted out by
the High Command, in spite of hunger,-thirst, and battle
exhaustion, we fought on and completed our allotted tasks most
palocnilorary.«
J

XXVI 
PREFACE
successfully, The Western Garrison, on the contrary, blessed with
all the facilities and favourable circumstances, bungled and
flunked, They lost 5,500 square miles of territory and enabled
the Indian Army to get into a position to destroy West Pakistan
due to their soulless offensive under the guidance of the Supreme
Commander and his three C.-in-C.s (Army, Navy, and Air Force).
I must emphasize here that what my commanders and |
achieved with our limited resources and forces—in spite of the
enemy having a great advantage in numbers and fighting under
more conducive circumstances—was all due to the self-sacrifice,
courage, and devotion to duty of my commanders at all levels
combined with their ability, willingness, and preparedness to
assume multiple responsibilities without any hesitation.
These were the qualities which gave us success and which
brought the Indian army to a standstill in front of our strong
points and fortresses when they attacked us openly. We nullified
all the efforts of a superior enemy to achieve his tasks and we
were still in a position to carry on the fight.
We had decided to fight till the end. But this did not suit the
junta’s designs and we were told to lay down arms. When I
hesitated, they told me that the situation in West Pakistan was
critical. Hence to save West Pakistan and the West Pakistanis, we
were ordered to surrender. We accepted humiliation to save our
homeland, We could have saved our honour and that of the
country by accepting the Polish or Russian Resolution of 15
December. We could have also escaped the humiliation of
surrender if they had allowed us to keep 
on fighting.
The tasks allotted to me, and our achievements under the
most difficult conditions, i.e., the meagre resources at my
disposal, deficiency in heavy weapons, and the absence of air
cover and naval support, must be kept in view and compared
with the dismal performance of the Western Garrison which had
all the advantages. Unless these things are understood, it is
difficult to comprehend the true picture of the 1971 war in East
Pakistan which was a deliberate débacle, pre-planned and pre-
arranged by President Yahya and Mr Bhutto.
Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi,
Lahore, 1995

INTRODUCTION
The delay in publication of this book has been a blessing in
disguise. It is true that time is a great healer, but it is also a great
exposer of lies. Had I written the book earlier, many questions
would have remained unanswered. With the passage of time quite
a few facts have come to light. It has been proved beyond any
shadow of doubt that the disintegration of Pakistan was an
arranged capitulation and not a military defeat. People at the
helm of affairs at that time had decided to quit East Pakistan
much earlier than December 1971.
According to the Larkana Plan, finalized between General
Yahya and Mr Bhutto, East Pakistan was to be left without a
successor Government. Mrs Farida Ahmad, author of Pakisian’s
National Security Problems, told me in writing that Mr Agha Shahi
had told her during an interview that orders were sent by
President Yahya Khan to the Pakistan Representative at the
United Nations on 9 December 1971 to proceed with the
preparations for the surrender of troops in East Pakistan. At that
time we were still holding the enemy on or near the borders, and
having repulsed continous attacks the troops were physically and
mentally ready to continue the fight.
The tragedy of 1971 still resounds with bitter memories of
strife, bloodshed, and destruction. It is a story of political
ambition backed by military might, aided and encouraged by our
enemies from outside which tore the country asunder,
culminating in the birth of Bangladesh.
The breakup of Pakistan and creation of Bangladesh is the
' 
most important event in the recent history of South Asia. The
secession of East Pakistan has altered the political balance in the
area. The magnitude of the event attracted the attention of
innumerable writers, but only a few have been able to view the
crisis in its true perspective, whilst the majority have presented a
version far removed from the factual happenings, based on
hearsay, conjectures, and unsubstantiated records. Most of the

eee
XXVIil 
INTRODUCTION
accounts are written from a safe angle for various reasons, mostly
for personal gain. The writers have conveniently avoided
mentioning the names and misdeeds of the people who mattered
most.
Some books were written by military men as well. Crisis in
Leadership was written by Major-General (Retired) Fazal Mugeem,
who was commissioned by Mr Bhutto and General Tikka to write
the book (they had initially approached Major-General Sarfraz
but he refused). In this book facts have been deliberately
distorted. Fazal Muqeem described the battles fought in East
Pakistan while sitting in General Headquarters, Rawalpindi,
without seeing the area of conflict where the battles took place
and without talking to the people who fought those battles. He
based his conclusions on books written by Indian authors and on
statements made largely by people who had been sent back from
East Pakistan on disciplinary grounds. Major-General (Retired)
Fazal Muqeem was given a staff officer and an office in GHQ,
and it is alleged that he was provided some funds as well. He was
given access to secret and top secret material to which he had no
entitlement, whereas I was denied the material when I was writing
my report on my return. His book was given wide publicity
through the official media, and Army units were told to buy it. In
the absence of any official contradiction, the book was taken as
GHQ's version of the war. The book was approved by General
Tikka Khan to please his mentor Mr Bhutto, and in return
/ Mugeem was given the prized job of Defence Secretary.
, 
Witness to Surrender was written by the late Brigadier Siddique
Salik. He was my Public Relations Officer (PRO), as a Major. He
‘used to 
accompany me on my visits to formations and units, He
was a reporter by profession, and had neither basic training in
military matters nor any experience in warfare, and had no
understanding of military operations. Military matters of that
magnitude were entirely beyond his comprehension. 
|
Salik had written a book in Urdu, Haman Yaran Dozakh,
immediately after his return from India as a POW. The contrast
between the two books sheds light on his propensity to change
and invent events to please 
5se masters. Salik wrote against 
me,
lynch him. His “book Witness to Surrender is a pack of lies. Like
Fazal Muqeem, he too wrote the book on the instructions of

INTRODUCTION 
XXX
’ General Tikka and Mr Bhutto to discredit me, but Bhutto met
his fate while the book was in the press.
As my PRO, Major Salik used to issue Press Notes on situations
given to him by one of my staff officers. Those who are aware of
military functioning know that only senior officers, and only those
who are concerned with operations, are allowed to attend the
operations room presentations. Salik admits in Haman Yaran
Dozakh that he was not allowed to enter the operations room
during briefings and discussions on operations and security
matters. The title of his book seems out of place. He was part of
the surrender and not a witness to surrender. He too was
rewarded well. He became a Brigadier.
Major-General (Retired) Shaukat Riza was commissioned by
GHQ to write the official version of the 1971 war. Nothing can
be more ironic. He was removed from the command of a division
by me for inefficiency, cowardliness, and inability to cope with
the stresses of war conditions. The Pakistan Army 1956-7] is full of
inaccuracies even about the locations of units and various actions
fought in East Pakistan.
General Headquarters is reported to have commissioned
Lieutenant-General (Retired) Kamal Mateen to write yet another
book on East Pakistan. It is interesting that so many books are
being commissioned by GHQ on East Pakistan, though none on
West Pakistan, where we had enough forces, resources, and
favourable circumstance, to win, yet operations were bungled
and caused the amputation of East Pakistan. Muqeem and Salik
were commissioned by General Tikka and Mr Bhutto to cover up
their failures and misdeeds, but Mateen was commissioned by
General Beg, who had been Shaukat Riza’s Staff Officer but had
left East Pakistan before completing his tenure. Mateen too is
sitting in GHQ getting all the facilities and writing his book.
Another book, which has been recently published by Major-
General (Retired) Rao Farman Ahi, How Pakistan Got Divided, is
also a pack of lies. Farman was Incharge Civil Affairs. Through
intrigue and manipulation he survived five Governors. He was a
dubious character. It was he who undermined Governor Malik’s
confidence by painting a false military situation. He sent some
signals to the President without my knowledge, and he released a
top secret signal clearly meant to dismember Pakistan before it
was approved by the President. It was countermanded by the

XXX 
INTRODUCTION
President, but by then the damage had been done. Farman has
misrepresented facts in his book. He was in fact secretly in touch
with General Sam Manekshaw, C.-in-C. Indian Army. I came to
know of his communications with India through General
Manekshaw’s signal of 15 December saying that he was already
negotiating surrender with him.
Granted, the commanding general and his troops play the
leading role in a battle, but there are many factors beyond their
control which have far-reaching consequences on its outcome,
and eventually on the war. Anyone writing about a military
débacle should consider many factors: climatic conditions,
geographical location, the political and military mission assigned
to the commander, quantum of troops available for the task,
extent and type of area of responsibility, local conditions, attitude
of population, resources available, distance from base, availability
of the right type of equipment and armament, replenishment
and reinforcing capability, availability of reserves, naval and air
support, intelligence set-up, medical facilities, and the strength,
resources, and facilities available to the enemy. These factors
must be taken into account before any verdict is passed on the
efficiency of the commanding general.
Nearly all the writers on the 1971 War have divorced the East
Pakistan War from the West Pakistan War. This omission is unjust
and misleading. The plans for both the theatres of operations,
East and West, were concomitant and interlinked. The battles
with the Indian Army were not to be fought in isolation. As a
matter of fact the main and decisive battle was to be fought and
won on the western front.
Similarly, most of the writers have not taken into account the
elements of operational environment and their effects. National
strategy, political thinking, economic situation, conduct of
diplomacy—all have crucial bearings on the military operation.
Viewing military operations. in isolation is an escape from reality.
The military action is 
a means to an end and not an end in
itself; it is 
a wheel within a wheel. Therefore, it is important for a
writer to understand the national strategy and its implications
during a war.
The most annoying thing is that none of the writers of the
books on the 1971 War kept in view the tasks allotted to me, or
the achievements of my small, tired, ill-equipped force under the

