264 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Whatever has been published is apparently the brainchild of
vested interests. In fact the original copies were all destroyed.
Only one copy of the amended version survived but nobody was
willing to authenticate it. So in reality, there is no Hamood
Report. Its name might be there but the contents are largely
fabricated. There is a possibility that the new version of the so-
called Report, if published, would have exposed many in power
because of distortions in their statements. Mr Wali Khan, in an
interview published in an Urdu newspaper, said: ‘There are many
deficiencies in HRC’s report. The most important is that all
parties have been exonerated, all accusations have been deleted
from the account whereas I maintained that the Army was
compelled to take action when politicians failed to find the
solution. I clearly told this to Justice Hamood, that Pakistan was
dismembered by Bhutto and Yahya Khan. However, when I saw
the typed version of my statement it had been tampered with. I
corrected the draft and sent it back after retyping. A photocopy
of the corrected draft is still with me.
New Commission
The HRC Report was a top secret document. So-called extracts
from it have been published in Pakistan and abroad. Whatever
has been published is to suit vested interests. From what has
appeared in print so far, the attempt seems to be to conceal and
confuse rather than reveal and explain. The disclosures made so
far appear to have been inadequate, deliberately loaded, and
purposely slanted. I am fully convinced that the leaked extracts
were not from the original report, which has been rewritten,
re-hashed, or altered to such an extent that it has lost its
authenticity. Mr M. B. Naqvi, a senior journalist, wrote in Dawn
in August 1986:
It is essential that an all embracing high level enquiry, with senior
army officers, politicians and superior judiciary as members of the
Commission be constituted to arrive at the truth and punish the
guilty.

HAMOOD-UR-REHMAN COMMISSION 
265
The terms of reference of such an inquiry should also include
a computer model of the conduct of operations by the armed
forces in the whole of Pakistan, as well as separately for East and
West Pakistan, keeping in view the political and military
environment at that time. This is the modern method of assessing
performance. Although I suggested it to the HRC they did not
pay any heed.
If this were done, I and my generals would be shown to be
among the most successful generals of this century.
www.balochlibrary.com

Cuapter 
17
CIVILIAN LIFE
During my stay in Rawalpindi I realized that I was not going to
get justice from any Commission, so I opted for a court martial,
because that was the only way left to get some justice. Charges
were framed but the DJAG told General Tikka that they were
flimsy and that I would be honourably acquitted, so I was removed
from service. He admitted this himself in a recent interview. Tikka
Khan sent instructions to Station HQ Lahore that I should be
told to vacate the house I was living in within a fortnight. I had
no house of my own and no money to buy or rent one, so I had
to sell almost everything which I had acquired during my forty
years of service. With some I had sentimental attachment. What
cannot be cured must be endured, so I moved to the house of a
relative on Lawrence Road in Lahore’ and sent my wife and
daughter to the house of my son, who was a major in the army. I
had to sell my land to build my house. That was my reward for
forty years of meritorious service. In addition, an attempt was
made on my life, presumably at the instigation of Bhutto.
At one point I was contacted by Mian Mahmood Ali Qasuri, an
eminent politician and a lawyer. He listened to my side of the story,
saw the papers I was carrying, and said, “You have a strong case and
you have been penalized wrongly’. I told him that I would prefer an
open trial so that the real culprits could be exposed. The Hamood
Commission had not yet been activated, but due to its limited terms
of reference, and with the Government, the army, and the
establishment being led by Bhutto and Tikka, I did not expect any
Justice from them. At least an open trial would bring out the truth
and pinpoint the real culprits. ‘I will fight your case so that you are
honourably acquitted and I will not charge for anything because I
can see you have already suffered a lot due to no fault of yours,’ he
said. At his death I lost a good and sympathetic friend.
Vv 
Vv 
sz
o> ¢ 
wy L. 
T 
—~ 
at 
fe ad 
@, i f\tyr>
www.balochlibrary.com
v 
Vv 
VV 
@ 
&Y vel 
wy 
. 
AAA A 
W 
/

CIVILIAN LIFE 
267
One day I got a call from Khan Qayyum Khan saying that he
would like to come to my house to discuss some political matter.
He invited me to join his Qayyum League. I said, ‘It is a great
honour, but I am sorry, I cannot accept it.’ He asked why. [ said,
‘Khan Lala, you are a minister in Bhutto’s Government so
naturally you have sympathies with him, while I am against him.
So there ts likely to be a difference of opinion on many matters
and that is not good.’ Then he said, “The offer to enter politics is
a deception. I have been sent by Bhutto to offer you the job of
Commander of Civil Armed Forces of Pakistan.’ I said ‘Khan
Lala, a very tempting job, but again, no. Bhutto hates my guts. I
wanted a court martial but he could not frame the proper
charges. If 1 put on uniform now, he can cook up many charges
and get me convicted, even executed. So I decline this very good
and tempting offer of Mr Bhutto's.’ 
'
Later on I was called by Bhutto and was offered a diplomatic
job if I were to say publicly that East Pakistan was a military defeat
and not a political defeat. I refused point blank, telling him that it
was a political defeat, and that the military defeat was engineered
by him to malign the army. He told me to think it over, otherwise
he would ‘fix me up’. Telling him to try his luck 
I left for home.
Bhutto carried out his threat and my Chief of Staff, Brigadier
Baqir Siddiqi, and I were made scapegoats. We were the only two
in the whole army who were removed from the services and
deprived of pensions. The real culprits were rewarded with either
promotions or diplomatic assignments. Generals Yahya, Peerzada,
Hamid, Mitha, Umar, etc., were retired with full pensions;
General Yahya was given two pensions; sent abroad for treatment,
and honoured with a military burial after his death; Gul Hassan
became COAS; Yaqub was given an ambassadorship; Tikka later
became COAS.
Joining Politics
I have been a soldier all my life and initially I had no inclination
to join politics, but Bhutto had carried out so much venomous
and false propaganda against me that I decided to vindicate my
honour, and since the political platform was the best place to do
this, I joined politics.
yy 
@
www halochlit
VV 
VY 
VY 
e |, Ci LT & I I A A QUYwarv com
J} = Us 5 
e 
AG
/
_ 
wy XL

268 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
I delivered my first speech at Delhi Gate, Lahore, and it was
acclaimed by the public. The next day Maulana Noorani and
Maulana Abdul Sattar Khan Niazi came to my house and invited
me to join Jamiat Ulema-e-Pakistan (JUP). | felt it to be a great
honour to be in the company of two leading ulema and learned
leaders of Pakistan. 
I had known Maulana Abdul Sattar Khan
Niazi before and respected him very much as an honest person
who I thought would guide me on the right lines. I also found
Maulana Noorani a very dignified person and a scholar of deep
religious thought, so I joined JUP.
I went to Mianwali and then to Bhakkar. On my way back
Maulana Fazal-ur-Rehman, son of Maulana Mufti Mehmood, met
me. He asked me to accompany him to Dera Ismail Khan. There
was a meeting to be addressed by Mufti Sahib. I knew Mufti Sahib
and had great respect for him, so I went to Dera Ismail Khan.
When the PNA was formed in 1977 and the heads of the political
parties were arrested, I carried on with my political activities, at
times addressing as many as eight meetings a day in far-flung
areas. The PNA movement remained very much alive and a pain
in the neck for Bhutto. The slogan for me during the 1977
elections was Mard-i-Mujahid, Mard-i-Ghazi—General Niazi, General
Niaz. I was particularly popular in the recruiting areas, and in big
cities where ex-soldiers were collected. After touring Punjab and
the Frontier, I was told to go to Karachi. During my first meeting,
an unprecedented crowd of about one and a half million gathered,
the largest in the history of political meetings. People asked me
lots of questions which I answered, and they appeared to be
satisfied. I said that the best way to get to the truth would be by
means of a public trial. I myself, Yahya, Bhutto, and Tikka should
be made to appear. People should ask questions. A panel of judges
from among the people should be present to give a verdict and
award punishment to the persons found guilty in their opinion.
Bhutto refused to attend such a meeting.
One day there was a meeting in Malir, Karachi. The PPP also
arranged a meeting nearby which Hafiz Pirzada was to address.
When Pirzada started speaking I also started my speech. After
hearing my voice, all the people attending Pirzada’s meeting
came to my area and Pirzada was left almost alone. Only the
management and the hard core PPP stayed, so Pirzada left in
disgust and the PPP meeting failed dismally.
, 
— 
wo) 
| 
c 
~ > 
| 
. 
> 
LL. 
A irdaew y 
lf. f~ tran
VK 7XUK7UXK7 
-Z~ o) 
lTM (rh 
| 
: Arn Tr X7 
lL’ DIr\TY)
Www 
.palocniiprarv.com
VV 
VV 
VV 
eCUUAWwe PsA Y 
OWA
~~

CIVILLAN LIFE 
269
From Karachi I went to Hyderabad. Before the meeting a
procession was taken out which I led. The people from the city
and its suburbs thronged the area. All the routes, and the roofs
of the houses were packed with people. There was a sea of
humanity in Hyderabad. This shook Bhutto. The same night I
was arrested from Major Saqib’s house in Latifabad and taken to
Sukkur Jail along with Major Saqib.
In Karachi I was helped by Mr Mahmood Azam Farooqi and
Professor Ghafoor Ahmad. Professor Sahib proved a great source
of inspiration to me. He stayed with me throughout my stay in
Karachi and we became good friends. Prof. Ghafoor and Azam
Farooqi later made a point of always calling on me whenever
they came to Lahore, even when they were Federal Ministers.
Before I was arrested I went to see the leaders of the PNA
lodged in Karachi Jail. The Jail Department gave me full respect,
and opened the gate which is only opened for VVIPs. Similarly,
when I reached Sukkur Jail, the Jailer and Deputy Jailer were
both present at the gate and the whole gate was opened, which
during Bhutto's rule was a great risk for the jail authorities. They
offered me a cup of tea in the office and then both of them
escorted me to the place where I had to live.
Sukkur Jail
I was put in category ‘A’. All other politicians were in class ‘B’
except Mir Ali Ahmed Talpur, who was also in class ‘A’. He was
my next door neighbour. There were people from all the parties.
Mr Faridul Haq, Haqqani Sahib, and Dost Mohammad Faizi from
JUP, Maulana Amroti from JUI, Professor Ghafoor and Mahmood
Azam Farooqi from Jamaat-i-Islami, Mr Saleh Muhammad
Mandhokhel from Tehrik-i-Istaqlal, Mr Palijo and Abu Bakar
Zardari from Jeay Sindh, and Mr Bostan Ali Hoti from the Muslim
League. We used to eat together and offer our prayers together.
Maulana Haqqani from JUP led the prayers.
Lt.-Gen. Jahanzeb Arbab was Martial Law Administrator, Sindh.
One day, when he was coming to see Sukkur Jail and the jail
authorities were preparing for his visit, I asked the Jailer what he
thought of this visit. He said, “To tell you the truth, Sir, such
visits are a nuisance. As a matter of fact such people have no

970 
THE BETRAYAL OF FAST PAKISTAN
interest in the welfare of the prisoners or the jail staff. They
come here to give orders for different items which we
manufacture in the jail.’ I said, ‘You tell him that I am here in
jail and looking forward to meeting him.’ He asked, ‘What will
happen?’ I said, “He will not come, because I sent him out of
East Pakistan for corruption and looting.’ The message was passed
and Arbab cancelled his visit.
Zia Takes Over
When Martial Law was declared, all the political prisoners were
released except me. After a couple of days an army officer came
to see me. He said, ‘CMLA General Ziaul Haq has ordered that
before releasing you he wants an undertaking from you that you
will not take part in politics in future.’ I said, ‘Son, I have no
political aims and I know nothing about politics. 
I have found
out in jail that I do not know even the ABC of politics. 
| had
joined politics to help the nation against Bhutto, the tyrant. He
has gone and I am no more interested in politics, but as far as an
undertaking to the Government is concerned, my answer is “No”.
It is against my principles. I do what I like and do not want to be
dictated to by anyone.’ So I stayed in jail. From Sukkur Jail I was
transferred to Lahore under house arrest. Ziaul Haq said, ‘If the
case against Bhutto is started for treason will you volunteer to
appear as a witness against him?’ I said, ‘YES if he is set free and
NO if he is in jail, because it is not my principle to stab anybody
in the back, even my worst enemy’. So I stayed in confinement
for three months during Bhutto’s rule and six during Zia’s time.
Of these, three months were spent in jail and the remainder
under house arrest.
Bhutto comes to Sukkur Jail
The most important event while I was in Sukkur Jail was the
arrival there of Mr Bhutto after the imposition of Martial Law.
When he saw me he came forward and embraced me, and said,
‘Niazi, 
I am really sorry for being hard on you. I was badly
advised.’ I took him to my room and gave him a cup of hot
1 
1 
114° 
- 
—
. 
a> a @ 
¢ 
wwiy 
- 2 \ 
’ a fr y >» 
| vv 
Lm - lad 
@ Yeo ad ¢ 7 f ofr rwYs
WWW Na | OCNILDT al vV.COll
oe

CIVILIAN LIFE 
271
coffee and we started talking. He did not look worried. He said,
‘Niazi, when we go back, we will work together.’ I said, ‘Mr
Bhutto, how can we work together? We have got quite different
views, we are more or less enemies.’ He said, “Niazi, I realized my
mistake and tried to compensate you but you refused my offers,
The first was when you came to my place. I asked you to say that
it was a military defeat and the army was responsible for it. I said
I would carry you on my shoulders and send you on a diplomatic
assignment but you insisted that it was a political defeat. The
second time, I sent Khan Qayyum Khan with the offer of
command of the Civil Armed Forces of Pakistan and that too you
turned down.’ He added, ‘I looked at your record of service and
I studied the war fought by you in East Pakistan. With meagre
resources you did a good job. I read your signals sent to GHQ.
They gave the impression that the author is a brave, experienced,
patient, and extremely devoted man. I had decided to make you
COAS after Tikka but you did not come close to me.’ I said, ‘I
did not trust you. That is all.’ He asked me, ‘Why are you still in
jail?’ I said, ‘Zia wanted an undertaking from me that I would
quit politics, which I refused, so Iam here.’ I said, ‘Now you tell
me why you sent me to jail’. He said, “You were becoming
dangerous to us. The crowds at your meetings and your speeches
gave new life to PNA’s dying movement. We arrested you so that
the PNA movement would peter out.’
In the evening Bhutto was taken away from Sukkur Jail . He
sent a message to me through the jail doctor (who was a retired
army officer) saying: ‘I am grateful to you for the coffee and heart-
to-heart talk which has provided me a lot of food for thought.
When we get out we will be together, I will patch up with you.’
I had my differences with him. He had been very unfair to me
but I was sorry when he was hanged. He did not deserve that sort
of death, least of all at the hands of a man like Zia who had
usurped power. Zia was neither a good general nor a good
administrator, nor did he do anything good for the country. He
kept promising democracy but never delivered it, and he made a
mockery of Islam. He left behind death and mortgages, hunger
and unemployment, exploitation and discrimination, smuggling
and nepotism. He introduced Kalashnikovs and heroin to the
country, made his relatives rich, and gave Siachin to the Indians.

CuHapter 18
EPILOGUE
The war in East Pakistan was a saga of gallantry smothered by the
presidential decision to surrender when the acceptance of the
Polish and Russian Resolutions in the UN Security Council could
have saved the army from humiliation. Those at the helm of affairs
preferred to sacrifice the national honour to their vested interests.
Instead of working on the plan ‘Battle of the East will be fought in
the West’, they worked on the M. M. Ahmad plan to get rid of East
Pakistan without leaving a successor government, thus eliminating
the two other centres of power, i-e., the Awami League, by giving
them independent Bangladesh, and the army, by humiliating it so
much that it would not be able to raise its head again. This would
leave Bhutto holding the reins of power in a truncated Pakistan.
The fortitude, endurance, and perseverance shown by the East
Pakistan garrison is a tribute to their patriotism and fighting
skill, They fought one thousand miles from home, established
government authority, and restored the boundaries of East
Pakistan, which had vanished during the time of Tikka, amidst a
hostile population in the most difficult terrain and unhealthy
climate. It was a battle between an ill-equipped and poorly armed,
under-strength army and an enemy with a ring of twelve divisions,
39 BSF battalions, hundreds of aircraft, and a large naval
contingent around them. Yet Eastern Command fought with
diligence against internal disorder created by the local
population, guerrilla warfare, and Indian aggression. It was
continuous war spread over a period of about nine months, over
a frontage of three thousand miles.
The troops in East Pakistan were ordered on 25 March 1971 to
convert a political debacle into a military victory. They achieved
this objective within a short span of time, and by May 1971 they
had evicted the Mukti Bahini guerrillas from the soil of East
|
S 
-y
¥) 
~> 
oC)
/ 
A 
| 
| 
) P
y 
» iY’ 
weeBiele til } yradal VCC) 
I
ALRJVIIILULILAL 
Y 
VUUILII

EPILOGUE 
273
Pakistan and had brought the situation sufficiently under control
to enable the government to launch a political campaign for
reconciliation between the two wings of the country. There was no
overall national strategy to deal with the insurgency in East
Pakistan. The high command failed to reap the fruits of our early
military successes in East Pakistan. On the contrary, the enemy
made full use of this period by preparing himself to undo the
order restored by the military action, organizing a war of rebellion,
and following it up with a coup de grace to create Bangladesh.
Indian propaganda had done terrible damage to the image of
the country and the armed forces. False and exaggerated reports
were not countered by the junta for selfish motives, and were
accepted by the world at large. This suited some discredited.
commanders, and those army personnel who had been sent back
for inefficiency or were involved in heinous crimes. They blamed,
their failings and blunders on Eastern Command with the full
co-operation and advice of the political and military clique. These
people had a free hand while we were away, because of the
absence of any faithful account emanating from any responsible
person involved in the crisis. The conspirators cheated Eastern
Command and engineered orders for surrender, with a view to
leaving no successor government in East Pakistan, and keeping
the POWs and civilians in the Indian camps so that their early
return would not expose Bhutto. Feeding the public with lies
and the armed forces with false and doctored information kept
the real events shrouded in mystery.
The battle of East Pakistan was to be fought in the West,
where there was parity in infantry and superiority in strike
formations, and where there were three C.-in-C.s (Army, Navy,
and Air Force) to conduct and control the battles under a
Supreme Commander (General Yahya). The conspirators were
so paralysed that they neither used the Air Force in full, nor
launched the planned offensive properly. As attackers, instead of
gaining territory, they lost 5,500 square miles of area, whereas in
the East we succeeded in all our missions, including the
additional mission of not allowing the enemy to transfer troops
from East to West Pakistan. Our Navy disappeared from the scene
of battle altogether. It did not even fire one shot at an enemy
who was attacking its bastion of strength, Karachi.

