INTRODUCTION 
XXXI
worst possible circumstances against a far superior enemy.
The time has now ‘come to bring to light the interplay of
power between General Yahya, Mr Bhutto, and Mujibur Rahman,
and their henchmen.
@ 
My story is based on my personal knowledge and record of
what I actually saw, experienced, and felt.
I stand duty-bound to defend my gallant heroes of Eastern
Command, who fought against overwhelming odds with
unflinching courage for nine long months in a hostile land,
under the most adverse conditions, the like of which no other
army ever faced—without rest, without relief, without the
necessary 
replacements, 
and 
reinforcements, 
without
entertainment, cut off from West Pakistan—and who had to
undergo the humiliation of laying down their arms on the orders
of the President of Pakistan. 
. 
:
WWwW.Ddalf ychlibr al y. COM

Cuaprer |
EARLY YEARS
My name is Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi, but I have come to be
known as “Tiger Niazi’. This nickname was given to me by
Brigadier Warren, Commander, 161 Indian Infantry Brigade, for
my exploits in Burma during World War H. The nickname of
‘Tariq-Bin-Ziad’ was given to me in West Pakistan. I was decorated
with the Military Cross in Kohima in World War I and with two
Hilat-e-Jurat, one for the 1965 War and the other for the 1971
War with India. Other awards include Sitara-e-Khidmat and Silara-
e-Pakistan. 1 also have twenty-four medals. I am also the recipient
of mentions in despatches and Commendation Card. All my
promotions from Major and above were accelerated. When I was
selected to command the Eastern Garrison , the third senior post
in the army, I was twelfth on the Army List. The war cry of my
troops in certain sectors was ‘Pakistan Zindabad, Niazi Tadbir, Allah-
o-Akbar’. 
| was allowed to give commissions to members of EPCAF
(East Pakistan Civil Armed Forces) and gallantry awards up to 5]
(Sitara-e-Jurat) to members of the East Pakistan Garrison. The
Indians have called me a soldiers’ general. By mentioning my
gallantry awards it is not my aim to glorify my achievements, but
to explain my sense of commitment to duty, which has always
forced me to place the nation above myself.
I was born in 1915 in the small village of Balo-Khel, perched
on the eastern bank of the River Indus two miles from Mianwali
city. Fhe present Mianwali and Isa-Khel tehsils of Mianwali District
used to be a part of Bannu District. The British, for some
unknown reason, took this area from Bannu District and created
anew Mianwali District. In Lundianwala, Faisalabad District, there
|are fourteen chaks (villages) of Niazis who were settled there by
| the British. This area is still called Bannu Tukri (chunk) by the
locals.

4 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
selected Indians. These officers had to go to Sandhurst for
training and were called KCOs (King’s Commissioned Officers).
Later the Indian Military Academy (IMA) was opened at Dehra
Dun for this purpose. Entry to IMA was through open com-
petition, though some candidates were taken from the armed
forces as well. They had to pass the Indian Army special class,
after which they could appear before the selection board. Cadets
passing out of Dehra Dun were called [COs (Indian
Commissioned Officers). To accommodate these 1COs, certain
battalions and regiments were Indianized.
World War II
In the meantime World War II had started. Officer Training
Schools were opened to train officers to meet the requirements.
The officers passing out of OTS were called ECOs (Emergency
Commissioned Officers). I passed out from OTS Bangalore on
8 March 1942 and was posted to the Rajput Regiment whose
raining centre was in Fatehgarh. In Bangalore, during training,
[ was appointed Cadet Company Commander of 11 Company,
commanded by Major Blair. When the War came to an end in
1945, all ECOs had to appear before the selection board and, if
approved, became Regular Officers of the Indian Army. They
were henceforth called [COs (Indian Commissioned Officers). I
went before the board in Singapore. I was approved and became
ICO 906.
From the training centre Lt. Padack and I were posted to the
4/7 Rajputs fighting in the Western Desert. On 30 October 1942
we embarked from Bombay for Egypt. After disembarking at Port
Ismailia we were taken to Meena Camp, a suburb of Cairo near
the Pyramids, Before being despatched to our respective units,
the officers and men were given extensive weapons training, and
familiarized with the enemy’s weapons, and the salient features
of desert warfare. The training culminated with battle
inoculation, simulated attack by troops using live ammunition,
supported by artillery, mortar, and machine-gun fire. 
[|
commanded the attacking company during battle inoculation as
a Second Lieutenant. My performance and keen interest were
appreciated by the senior officers to the extent that I was offered
1 
- 
L 1° LL
| 
‘ 
> 
>» 
XK J 
I fr" a
WWW DOdlOciil lL B [ CG 1 T Y VULLI
VV 
Vv 
V 
vy 
Vv 
e 
i/7 wes Xr” 
A. 
A 
”,

EARLY YEARS 
*
Admiral Karamat Rahman Niazi, as Commander of the
submarine Ghazi during the 1965 War, proved his mettle against
the Indians. For his superb performance, he was awarded S]
( Sitara-eJurat). Captain Mehboob Khan Niazi won the first ever
SJ] awarded to any Pakistani Officer during the Kashmir operation.
Captain Hidayat Ullah Khan Niazi (later Major-General) and
Major Abdul Rab Niazi (later Lieutenant-Colonel) were awarded
SJs for their feats of bravery in the 1965 War. NK Abdul Sattar
Khan Niazi of the Rangers was given a military burial by the
Indians for his courage and bravery in East Pakistan. Deputy
Superintendent of Police [kram Ullah Khan Niazi was awarded
the Police Medal for showing extraordinary courage against
dacoits. As a mark of his heroic deeds a chowk near Ravi Bridge
(Lahore) has been named after him.
In sports also, Niazis have had their share of fame. Tariq and
Qayyum Niazi excelled in hockey, representing Pakistan in many
international matches. The legendary Imran Khan Niazi has no
peer in cricket. My son, Major Aman Ullah Khan Niazi, was the
top sprinter in Pakistan, and my younger son, Habib Ullah Niazi,
won a trophy in a car rally from Tehran to Dhaka.
During my days, village life was simple. The eldest male was
the head of the family, in whom was vested the power to take
decisions. At night the elders gathered in hujras gossiping over
hookahs or a pinch of naswar. Kabbadi was a popular sport.
Matches were held between villages and witnessed by young and
old alike. Hunting of quail, partridge, and rabbit was popular.
Pig-hunting with spears was 
a common sport. A catapult was the
personal weapon of the very young, either carried in the hand or
hung around the neck.
There was only one primary school in the village. The middle
and high schools were in Mianwali, about two miles from my
panes Neither the children nor the parents took an interest in
‘schooling, but every child went to the village mosque for prayers
and recital of the Holy Koran. In the village, matriculation was
considered the top rung of the ladder, as there was no college in
Mianwali District. After matric, I joined the Army as a ‘Y’ Cadet.
In the beginning the Indian Army was officered by the British.
Indians could only rise to the rank of Subedar-Major, Subedar or
Jamadar, called VCOs (Viceroy’s Commissioned Officers). After
World War I, the British Raj decided to give commissions to
W W W. b; aloc Tt Alibi 
1 ra Vv CO] mM )
eo

4 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
selected Indians. These officers had to go to Sandhurst for
training and were called KCOs (King’s Commissioned Officers).
Later the Indian Military Academy (IMA) was opened at Dehra
Dun for this purpose. Entry to IMA. was through open com-
petition, though some candidates were taken from the armed
forces as well. They had to pass the Indian Army special class,
after which they could appear before the selection board. Cadets
passing out of Dehra Dun were called ICOs (Indian
Commissioned Officers). To accommodate these ICOs, certain
battalions and regiments were Indianized.
World War II
In the meantime World War II had started. Officer Training
Schools were opened to train officers to meet the requirements.
The officers passing out of OTS were called ECOs (Emergency
Commissioned Officers). I passed out from OTS Bangalore on
% March 1942 and was posted to the Rajput Regiment whose
raining centre was in Fatehgarh. In Bangalore, during training,
[ was appointed Cadet Company Commander of 11 Company,
commanded by Major Blair. When the War came to an end in
1945, all ECOs had to appear before the selection board and, if
approved, became Regular Officers of the Indian Army. They
were henceforth called [COs (Indian Commissioned Officers). I
went before the board in Singapore. I was approved and became
ICO 906.
From the training centre Lt. Padack and I were posted to the
4/7 Rajputs fighting in the Western Desert. On 30 October 1942
we embarked from Bombay for Egypt. After disembarking at Port
Ismailia we were taken to Meena Camp, a suburb of Cairo near
the Pyramids. Before being despatched to our respective units,
the officers and men were given extensive weapons training, and
familiarized with the enemy's weapons, and the salient features
of desert warfare. The training culminated with battle
inoculation, simulated attack by troops using live ammunition,
supported by artillery, mortar, and machine-gun fire. I
commanded the attacking company during battle inoculation as
a Second Lieutenant. My performance and keen interest were
appreciated by the senior officers to the extent that I was offered
WWW na
VV 
VV 
VV -v'4 A

EARLY YEARS 
i
the job of Training Officer for Meena Camp, but I opted to join
the battalion rather than accept the offer of staying in the Camp
as Incharge Training as a Captain,
I was appointed the Intelligence Officer of the 4/7 Rajput
Regiment. Our battalion was part of 161 Brigade commanded by
Brigadier Hughes. Major-General Briggs was the General Officer
Commanding the 5th Indian Division. I gained much experience
under actual battlefield environments which later proved very
useful in confrontations with the enemy in India, Burma, Malaya,
Singapore, and Indonesia. The 5th Indian Division was soon
moved to Iraq and became part of the Persia Iraq Force. In Iraq
troops were being collected and trained to stem the German
onslaught into Iran and Iraq through the Caucasus.
On our return from the Middle East we went to Fatehgarh;:
our training centre. From Fatehgarh we left for Chas, a sntall
town near Ranchi in Bihar, where our division was concentrated
for jungle training prior to its move to Burma. From the training
area, 161 Brigade moved to the Teknaf Peninsula in Bengal, very
near to the Burma border. At Nihla, where our battalion was
located, we started intensive jungle warfare training. Our Brigade
was first given the task of capturing Razalil fortress in Arakan,
Burma, which it accomplished. Though we suffered heavy
casualties, we found out the difference between desert and jungle
warfare.
Bauthi-Daung Tunnels
Our next assignment was in Bauthi-Daung, a small town in
Arakan. The town was surrounded by low hills and thick jungle.
During the monsoons, railway communications assumed greater
Significance, as landslides normally blocked the roads. To
negotiate the hilly terrain, there were two railway tunnels, about
‘a hundred yards from each other and approximately one
thousand yards from the town. The tunnels, if destroyed or held
by the enemy, could contain our advance towards Bauthi-Daung
or onwards. To ensure logistical support to the advancing troops,
it was vital to control the tunnels. 161 Brigade was entrusted the
task of capturing the tunnels. Brigadier Warren formed a guerilla
company by pooling the guerilla platoons of 4/7 Rajputs, 1/1
yt 
a 
| 
- 
@ 1
rwy 
i. o) 
I~ 
fr°ne 
, i a te ay @ 
ee ed 
Os 
I°Xfryrwn
A/ 
| 
Fraeutelaan 
B) 
ai 
\
eLVMVUOAArVrJYJARYY BBR RCLVJTA OAR 
YY
>. 
Ve” 
LF AA A

6 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Punjabis, and the Royal West Kents. I was selected to command
the guerilla company. Keeping the deployment of the enemy in
view, it was decided to capture the tunnels in two phases. In the
first phase we attacked and captured the right tunnel. The enemy
suffered five dead and four wounded. Next, the left tunnel was
assaulted and captured. The enemy left behind seven dead; the
rest managed to get away. From our side, two men were killed
and eight suffered severe injuries.
Lt.-Col. Cargill, my Commanding Officer, and Brigadier
Warren were delighted with the successful conduct of the
operations. I was recommended for the Distinguished Service
Order (DSO) although DSO was meant for senior officers, while
I was only a Lieutenant (acting Captain). Instead my action was
mentioned in despatches. A letter of appreciation for distinguish-
ed service, signed by the Secretary of State, is reproduced below:
By the KING's Order the name
Captain (actg) Amir Abdullah Khan, M.C.,
7th Rajput Regiment, Indian Army was
published in the London Gazette on
5 April, 1945,
as mentioned in a Despatch for distinguished service.
I am charged to record
His Majesty’s high appreciation.
S. I. Grigs
Secretary of State for War
In the meantime, the Japanese, after having overrun Burma,
invaded India, and entered Assam. 161 Indian Infantry Brigade
was ordered to move from Burma to Kohima in Assam. The
object was to stem the flow of the rapid Japanese advance. The
rest of the 5th Indian Division was ordered to move to Imphal in
Assam. Hardly had we reached Kohima town than a head-on
clash with the Japanese took place.
The Japanese had plenty of heavy mortars and much heavy
artillery, which was drawn by elephants. Considered experts in
¥
www.baloc
v 
Vv 
y 
Vv 
vy 
Vv 
@ 
Si A 
f 
LF 
Ow
& 
> 
4. 
—
yer
hlibrary.com
oe

EARLY YEARS 
7
jungle warfare, they fought with skill and tenacity and
maintained constant pressure through by-passing positions and
hooking attacks. The only road on which the Japanese could
advance was under our control. Mortars and artillery fire
inflicted substantial damage on us before we could dig in.
Survival lay in digging proper trenches and linking them
together with communication trenches to facilitate movement
and avoid casualties. The Japanese had managed to occupy the
surrounding hills, some higher than ours, and they dominated
our posiuon by observation and fire. Our moves were mostly
confined to the hours of darkness.
Our Brigade Commander, Brigadier Warren, was a brave man
who taught us that stagnation results in strangulation. Patrolling,
ambushing, and sneaking raids enhanced the morale of our
troops. After about a week, although the fury of the attacks had
dissipated, the siege continued. | was given the task of ambushing
a Japanese ration party. We were successful, and the complete
party of ten lay dead on the track.
Finally the 2nd British Division came to our rescue and the
siege was broken after thirteen days. Brigadier Warren had
deployed the brigade very intelligently and conducted the
defensive battle brilliantly. With meagre resources he had
managed to stem the Japanese advance at Kohima for thirteen
days and shattered the Japanese hopes of capturing the territory.
He was awarded the DSO. The Japanese, realizing that further
advance into India was fraught with extreme difficulties, decided
to abandon their plans to advance further and started a systematic
withdrawal! from Assam.
The Trap at Slopey Hill
After two weeks of rest, during which we were given convalescent
rations, 161 Brigade was ordered to impede the Japanese
withdrawal, harass them, and destroy their troops and vehicles.
Within the framework of the brigade plan, 4/7 Rajputs were
ordered to cover the roads, lay ambushes, and disturb the enemy
balance when their troops were withdrawing. As a Lieutenant, J
was given the overall command of Bravo and Charlie Companies,
being senior to Lieutenant Richardson, who commanded Charlie
ye
WW X 7 bal. ochlihr baa
Vv \ e 
LJ Ali TF & 6 I Ai Ui Ai y e VW Ul et

8 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Company. As a rule, the second-in-command (21/C) of the
battalion should have commanded the ambush operation being
carried out by two companies, but I was enstrusted with this
arduous mission. I deployed the companies on the dominating
ground, which had good fields of fire. 
The trenches were properly
camouflaged.
We waited for the Japanese to walk into the trap. Next day the
enemy, about one company strong, came along the road. I sent a
platoon under Subedar Bharat Singh to a previously prepared
position in the rear to isolate and cut off the leading elements
from the main body. As soon as the Japanese leading platoon
crossed Bharat Singh’s platoon, they opened up with devastating
fire and successfully isolated the leading platoon from the main
body. We held our fire. The Japanese company commander,
thinking our position was unoccupied, rushed for the heights
but his troops were ruthlessly cut down with fire. The company
commander managed to extricate about a section strength and
took up a defensive position. As the Japanese officers carried
swords, it was easy to identify them. Leaving Lt. Richardson in
charge of the troops, I, with one platoon, encircled the area
occupied by the enemy. We closed in on them by crawling and
using cover. In one hour, most of the Japanese were eliminated.
They either killed themselves or had to be killed. They never
surrendered. The Company Commander was still alive. He was
proud and audacious. He flashed his sword defiantly, calling me
to fight him. I told my people not to shoot him. I sent two jawans
to check whether there were any Japanese around. I got up from
my position and the Japanese officer took up a ferocious stance.
He was older than me. Like an enraged bull he charged. I
deflected his charge. On his second charge, I speared him in the
neck with a spear I had bought from a Naga in Kohima.
The troops had displayed discipline and courage. The action
was appreciated, and I was given accelerated promotion. The
name ‘Tiger’, which Brigadier Warren gave me then, has stuck
with me ever since.

EARLY YEARS 
g
The Tekris of Kikrima
The Rajput Regiment was next deployed in Kikrima, a village in
Assam. The area was hilly and covered with thick forests. An all-
weather road passed through Kikrima towards the Tekris, and
then turned sharply towards the area where 1/1 Punjab, the other
battalion of 161 Brigade, was deployed. The Tekris were held by
the Japanese and they controlled the road. | was ordered by Lt-
Col. Cargill to take my company from the right flank to find about
the strength of the enemy on the Tekris. I will not go into the
details of the operation, The citation written by my Commanding
Officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Cargill, and approved by Brigadier
Warren, is reproduced below. It gives a fair account of the battle.
This officer, on 11th June 1944 in the Kikrima area on the Jessami
Road on the Assam-Burma front, was ordered to take his company on
a wide outflanking movement with a view to ascertaining the enemy
strength on a feature covering the road which was holding up the
advance of the unit eastward.
Having got round the feature without being observed he reported
to the battalion headquarters that position was strongly held and he
could see many bunkers and in his opinion he could achieve surprise
and inflict heavy casualties on enemy if he attacked. With 35 men
(strength of Coy that day was 35 including company commander) he
was allowed to carry on with his attack. He organised the attack with
such skill that his leading platoon succeeded in achieving complete
surprise over the enemy holding the first three bunkers, destroying
the occupants inside with grenades. Casualties began to occur in his
leading platoon and Capt. Abdullah personally lead the second
platoon and captured three more bunkers which were pinning down
the first platoon. Leading platoon reported enemy assembling for
counter attack on their Right.
Capt. Abdullah with his orderly crawled forward under heavy fire
and fired in all five grenades with EY rifle causing at least 30 casualties
and finally dispersed the attack. He then reorganised the coy position
and held on to it under heavy and accurate enemy fire. 
When he was
ordered to withdraw from the position he then with great skill and
coolness, withdrew his last remaining platoons section by section, he
himself remaining with the rearmost section in each case. The Japs lost
a minimum of 60 casualties at a time when they could il-afford them
and it was undoubtedly due to a very large extent on this very spirited
action of Capt. Abdullah that the Japs withdrew from that feature the
following night and enabled the speed of the advance to continue.
www.balochlibrary.com

