20 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
anti-tank gun-fire. The guns were dismantled and carried on
charpoys and reassembled on the position.
After a detailed recce of the area, I decided to capture Uri. I
got two mountain guns from Ordnance Depot, Rawalpindi, and
selected an ideal place to locate the guns from where Uri could
be effectively engaged, but before Uri could be attacked I was
ordered to move to Sialkot, where the enemy armour had
attacked to force a decision. Major-General Abrar had requested
that my 14 Para Brigade be placed under his command. I left
Azad Kashmir, reached Sialkot sector, and reported to GOC 6
Armoured Division. Thus from 12 Division, I moved to 6
Armoured Division, and fought the war under General Abrar in
area Badiana, Chawinda, and Zafarwal. I had been sent to 12
Division at the request of Major-General Akhtar Malik and had
now. been sent to Sialkot sector at the request of Major-General
Abrar Hussain.
Sialkot Sector
Precisely at 2100 hours on 9 September, I reported for duty to
Major-General Abrar Hussain, MBE, Commander, 6 Armoured
Division. After the usual niceties and a cup of hot tea, he briefed
‘me on the map about the latest situation. He laid great stress on
Rakh Baba Bhoore Shah, which he said was to be captured
immediately.
Rakh Baba Bhoore Shah was dense with trees; it provided
ideal cover, concealment, and adequate area for dispersal for the
enemy tanks. The tanks concentrated nightly in a laager to refuel
and replenish. To deny this space to the enemy was vital. It was
too close to our positions. It had to be captured at all costs to
ensure that it could not be used by the enemy armour to carry
out offensive operations.
I was informed that Badiana village, located on the road
connecting Sialkot, Pasrur, and Narowal, was under our control.
The area beyond the village.was held by the Indians. Their main
position was in the rakh, I went to Bhopalwala where my brigade
was concentrated and gave the orders for the move. The
battalions reached their allocated positions by 1400 hours the
next day. After visiting the battalions and placing 1/1 Punjab at

THE 1965 WAR 
2)
one hour's move notice, I left with an escort of one section
strength to carry out a detailed recce of village Badiana and the
surrounding area.
When I entered the village, my driver Alam Jan Mahsud and I
spotted about half a dozen Indian soldiers clustered around a
wireless set. They were deeply engrossed in listening to
something. We stopped, reversed the jeep, and moved to a mandir
(temple) about three hundred yards from Badiana..'The escort
section was instructed to leave their truck in the mandir and
occupy positions on the right edge of the village and wait for 1/1
Punjab. In case the escort section was attacked by the enemy with
the strength of a platoon or more, the section was to withdraw
through the nudlah and join me in the mandir.
After one hour, Alpha company of 1/1 Punjab reached the
mandir. Their platoon was ordered to join the escort section
already deployed on the right periphery of the village. After a
few minutes there was firing and then complete silence. The
company commander, Major Zaman Kiani, was sent ahead to
ascertain the latest position. He came back after about thirty
minutes. He explained that the Indians had attacked with a
platoon strength, The attack had been repulsed. The enemy in
the village had managed to get away in a hurry. The company
commander deployed his company in and around village
Badiana. The defensive measures and digging started. My escort
had not yet arrived. In the meantime, Lt.-Col. Amir Gulistan
Janjua (later Brigadier and Governor, NWFP), CO Guides
Cavalry, and his Second-in-Command, Major Fazle Haq (later
Lt-Gen. and Governor, NWFP) drove up in a jeep. Janjua told
me that 19 Lancers were going to sweep the area on the other
side of the village and his regiment, the Guides Cavalary, would
support them in case of attack by Indian armour. In the
meantime there was tank fire, and the 19 Lancers destroyed some
of the Guides Cavalary’s tanks. I informed General Abrar that
village Badiana was in our control and the Indians had been
ejected from the village by 14 Para Brigade troops, therefore the
attack by 19 Lancers should be discontinued. As the area was in
the control of 1/1 Punjab, the attack was called off.

22 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Attack on Rakh Baba Bhoore Shah
The rest of 1/1 Punjab arrived. The battalion was deployed in
Badiana and the mandir, Lt-Col. Nasrullah, the CO, was told to
patrol the area. The H hour for attack on Rakh was not to be
before 0900 the next day. The time was fixed to allow the enemy
tanks to move to their battle position. Lt-Col. Ata Muhammad
(later Brigadier) of the Artillery stayed on with Nasrullah to fix
artillery targets and make a functional artillery fire support plan.
Next morning, I reached the area by 0630 hours. Accompanied
by Lt.-Col. Nasrullah and Lt.-Col. Ata Muhammad, I went to the
observation post at Badiana. As previously decided, the attack
had to be carried out by two companies from the left. I instructed
Nasrullah to infiltrate the third company through the nullah from
the right. There were bushes and bends in the nullah. lt was a
covered approach that would also divide the enemy's attention
and give an impression of envelopment from two sides. The H
hour was fixed at 0900.
The two companies of 1/1 Punjab under their Second-in-
Command, Major Lal Khan, moved before sunrise towards their
forming-up places (FUP) and were in position by 0830 hours
undetected. The mortar platoons of the three battalions of the
brigade were concentrated centrally under Col. Ata, along with
the affiliated Field Regiment. Also, an anti-tank screen was
formed on the right, comprising sixteen anti-tank guns of the
two Battalions not going for the attack. The anti-tank screen was
placed under Major Mehtab, who was another very efficient
officer from Artillery. The enemy tanks which had started moving
on our right were effectively neutralized and kept at bay by Major
Mehtab’s guns. The application of mortar and artillery fire was
superb and set the grass in the r@kh on fire. It also effectively
softened the targets before 1/1 Punjab put in their attack.
As the two companies of 1/1 Punjab started moving from the
FUP in battle formation, Col. Ata and I saw three enemy tanks
about 800 yards away forming up on the left. The tanks’ enfilade
fire from the flank would have had a devastating effect on the
attacking troops. The four anti-tank guns of 1/1 Punjab placed
on the left did not prove effective as the tanks had adopted hull
down position in a ditch.

THE 1965 WAR 
23
Lt.-Col. Ata contacted Commander Artillery, 15 Division, on
the wireless and asked for artillery fire support, including their
Medium Regiment. Within five minutes 15 Division Arullery
started engaging the specified targets as these targets had also
been registered by them. When the dust cleared one tank was in
flames and the other two had vanished.
Our infantry, which had been told to go to ground, resumed
the attack. The attack was successful. The losses were minor
despite the enemy’s liberal use of artillery fire on the attacking
troops. The enemy vacated the position, which was occupied by
two companies of 1/1 Punjab. The company advancing from the
nullah, after clearing opposition in their front, also joined the
two companies and formed firm base inside the rakh. The
Battalion Commander brought his fourth company and Battalion
HQ forward. The anti-tank screen was also brought ahead to
defend the newly-captured area. Nasrullah was told to mop up
the position and firm in. By evening the entire area of Rakh
Baba Bhoore Shah was captured and under control of 1/1
Punjab.
Attack on Alhar
After resting for a day, I asked GOC’s permission to attack Alhar
village. 1/1 Punjab was holding Rakh Baba Bhoore Shah. Their
defensive position extended one hundred yards beyond the
railway line. It was a good defensive layout, but their front and
right flank were exposed. With a few mines and a few anti-tank
guns they would not be able to hold a concentrated armour and
infantry onslaught. Up till now, enemy armour was being used in.
a ramming battle to destroy our armour. The Indians, having
failed in their tactics to destroy our armour, now suddenly
switched over to infantry attacks supported by armour. Such
attacks could be launched by the enemy on 1/1 Punjab’s position.
Yo maintain continuity of the brigade defences and ensure its
integrity, it was essential to capture Alhar village, which was
located about twelve hundred yards on the right of Rakh Baba
Bhoore Shah.
To capture a built-up area, especially devoid of armour
support, is an arduous affair which can result in heavy casualties.

24 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
A built-up area has to be subjected to intense mortar and artillery
fire to create a shock effect, destroy buildings, and soften up
positions. This treatment is essential before the infantry puts in
the attack. Fire support was discussed with Col. Ata. Two mortar
platoons of the brigade and two regiments of Artillery were
available for the attack. The emphasis was on subjecting the
railway station and its pucca buildings to severe punishment in
order to inflict a psychological shock on the Indian Army who
were holding the village and railway station area.
I gave my plan outline to Lt.-Col. Ham Dost, CO Baluth
Battalion, at 1400 hours. The H hour was fixed at 0100. The
attacking companies had artillery officers with them. The attack
went through, and the artillery fire started at H minus 5 to H
plus 4. The field artillery fired on the railway station and the
mortar platoons concentrated on Alhar. From H to H+2, the
mortars were also shifted to the railway station, and from H+2 to
H+4 all the fire power, artillery and mortar inclusive,
concentrated directly on Alhar. Both positions were captured.
The enemy left fifteen dead and the rest managed to get away.
We suffered about twelve casualties. With the capture of Alhar,
the brigade defence became sufficiently strong. There was mutual
support, depth, and continuity in the brigade’s defence posture.
After congratulating the 
Commanding. Officer on the excellent
performance of the troops, I informed the Division HQ about
the capture of the village. Lt.-Col. Ilam Dost was awarded Imtiaz-i
Sanad.
Move to Zafarwal
The tempo of war gained momentum. The day after the capture
of Alhar, I was called by General Abrar to the Divisional HQ. He
told me to leave 1/1 Punjab in Rakh Baba Bhoore Shah and
move the remaining two battalions of the brigade to Zafarwal,
located about forty miles by road to the right of our present
location. The distance as the crow flies was much less. According
to the intelligence reports, the Indians were assembling their
troops to move on the Zafarwal axis. With this move, not only
would our division’s right flank be exposed, but also the Indian
Army could threaten the Gujranwala-Lahore Road. It was essential

THE 1965 WAR 
25
‘a counter the enemy move, Holding Zafarwal was vital for
blocking attacks from the Indian Army.
After issuing the instructions and the timetable for the move
of the two battalions, I left at about 1500 hours with my recce
group for Zafarwal. Major (later Brigadier) Mahmood, commonly
known as Tony Mahmood, accompanied me as escort with a
section of 4FF under his command. We reached Zafarwal at night.
There were still some civilians in the town. I located my Brigade
Headquarters in the High School building and made a local
recce. 4FF, which had followed me, was deployed in and around
Zafarwal. Early next morning, after a cup of tea, I went out to
recce the area and selected the deployment area for the Second
Battalion, which had stayed in a temporary position during the
night. My Brigade Major Imtiaz accompanied me.
Zafarwal was on the bank of a dry stream about one thousand
yards wide. The other side of the stream had clusters of trees and
tall elephant grass, and appeared to be a good defensive position.
It was decided to have two strong points. One strong point was to
be located in Zafarwal and the other across the stream. This
would force the enemy to split his oops. Without capturing
these strong points the enemy would not be in a position to
advance further. The Second Battalion Commander was given
the area of responsibility. He was told to deploy his battalion on
the other side of the stream.
Before the battalion could move, Major Tony Mahmood
informed me that enemy tank movement had been observed
across the stream. The strength was about a squadron. Their
close proximity suggested their unawareness of the presence of
our troops in Zafarwal.
1 informed General Abrar about the armour movement in our
area. He told me that the enemy had launched a strong attack in
Chawinda area and a fierce tank battle was raging there. The
infantry was closely following them..He said that the tanks in
Zafarwal area could be the uncommitted troops. It was vital to tie
down the tanks to ensure that they could not be shifted to join
the battle in that sector.
I told Major Tony to take over the anti-tank guns deployed to
cover our left flank, move close and engage the enemy tanks. He
moved out. After fifteen minutes the booming of the anti-tank
guns started. More anti-tank guns were moved to engage the
| 
eK y
y
TX XT7 
@ <9 | 
I~ 
| 
) 
> 
L. ‘Se at SD We 7 
r 
7 
°° T\trr
WV 
DALOCN IOTarVv.COrMM
\ 
) 
JUAN Y BARA 
A 
ALY A CAA 
y 
e VW XJ 
A 
ee

26 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
enemy tanks. One infantry rifle company and two MGs were also
sent to Tony to augment his defences and fire-power. Tony’s
effective anti-tank gunfire forced the enemy tanks to retreat. After
an hour, [ again talked with General Abrar. He told me that they
had monitored the enemy saying that their regiment was under
fire from Zafarwal side. He was happy with the troops’
performance and asked me to consolidate the Zafarwal defences.
The two battalions stayed on alert, expecting an enemy attack.
None materialized, so troops were told to ‘Stand Down’. Screens
and patrols were sent ahead to procure information, and deny
space and information to the enemy.
Move Back to Badiana
At about 1630 hours, I was ordered to move my Brigade
Headquarters and the two battalions back to the original location
at Badiana area. It was anticipated that the enemy was likely to
carry out a night attack in this area. With no reserves with the
Divisional Commander, especially no troops in depth, it was
considered extremely difficult to sustain the momentum of an
enemy attack if the first line of defence were penetrated. To
forestall this precarious situation, 14 Para Brigade was ordered
to move to Badiana. The Zafarwal position was to be handed
over to the elements of Recce and Support Battalion which were
on their way to relieve the infantry battalions.
With the transport available to us, we moved swiftly and
reached the original positions, I reported to General Abrar. He
wanted 14 Para Brigade to relieve 24 Brigade, but as 24 Brigade
was engaged in the defensive battle, the change-over could not
take place. I suggested 14 Para Brigade be allowed to deploy
behind 24 Brigade to provide it depth. The Divisional
Commander agreed. The battalions were deployed accordingly.
The enemy attack could not make any headway and petered out.
The enemy suffered heavy casualties in both tanks and infantry.
After the failure of the attack, the enemy went on the defensive.

THE 1965 WAR 
97
The Zafarwal Battle
After spending a fairly quiet night, I was again summoned in the
evening by General Abrar. He told me: ‘I am afraid you will have
to reoccupy Zafarwal. [ am still worried about the axis. It cannot
be weakly held, Leave the two battalions deployed in Rakh and
Alhar and move your third battalion to Zafarwal.’ He asked me
whether I would be able to hold Zafarwal with one battalion.
‘Yes, it is possible, it being a built-up area, with a good field of
fire’, I told him, and requested armour support and readily
available artillery support.
With his blessings and promise of armour support, I left for
Zafarwal. 4FF was ordered to move immediately. It was a race
against time to get there before the enemy. I located myself in
the same school where my Brigade HQ was located when we had
come here a couple of days earlier. 4FF arrived and were
deployed in village Zafarwal. They were already familiar with the
position as they had occupied the defences in Zafarwal previously
also. 
A squadron of tanks from 22 Cavalry and a battery of Field
Regiment under Major Hasham Khan were placed at my disposal.
Positions for the tanks were selected. Targets for artillery fire
were also selected. I came back to Brigade HQ at 0400 hours in
the morning. I went to sleep and told my batman not to wake me
up except in case of dire necessity.
At about 0600 hours, Major Imtiaz, my Brigade Major, woke
me up and informed me that 4FF was under artillery fire and was
about to be attacked. The Commanding Officer was in a panic. I
talked with Lt.-Col. Latif, CO 4FF, who was under tremendous
stress. He painted a despondent picture of being completely
encircled by the Indian Army. I told him Zafarwal had pucea
houses and was located on high ground which had a good
defensive position and good fields of fire. It would take the
Indians a lot of time and troops to surround it.
Again after fifteen minutes, he rang up and said that they
would all be massacred. As he was panicky, his actions were
creating an adverse impact on his officers and troops. I asked
him to call his Second-in-Command. His 21/C was a Pathan. His
name was Major Muhammad Hayat and he had newly joined the
battalion. I told Major Hayat, ‘Your CO has broken down. Can
vou accept the responsibility and fight the battler” He was

28 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
confident. He said, ‘Inshallah, (by the grace of God), we will push
the enemy back.’ I relieved Lt.-Col. Latif of his command. He
wanted to come back but I did not give him permission to do so,
{ told him to sit in the trench and not to show himself to the
troops.
After about an hour and a half, Major Hayat rang me up. He
told me that the attack had been repulsed. The enemy had
attacked with two battalions supported by a squadron of tanks,
two of which had been knocked out. The enemy had extracted
his troops behind a smoke screen. Major Hayat asked permission
to follow them. I gave him permission to follow the enemy but
told him to be careful not to walk into a trap.
One man had made the difference. The courage and
determination of Major Hayat infused confidence 
in his officers
and men. It is true that in battle you need a man and not men. It
was a day of heroism. 4FF had excelled. Major Hayat was awarded
Sitara-e-Jurat for this action. Major Dilawar Butt, commanding the
heavy guns, had terrorized the enemy tanks. He was also awarded
Sitara-e-Jurai. Major Hasham, the field battery commander, also
gave excellent support. Although his guns were under constant
bombardment, still he remained steadfast and continued to give
artillery support. I believe he got the Imtiaz-e-Sanad. The Squadron
Commander of the tanks was the only disappointment. He and
two of his troops disappeared, although one troop stayed behind
and participated in the battle. The Squadron Commander was
court-martialled after the war.
One company of 3/14 Punjab was with me and was told to
move up and join 4FF at Zafarwal. I accompanied them. The
officers and the jawans were in high spirits. After having a cup of
tea with them, I left for my Brigade Headquarters. Lt.-Col. Latif
was told to report to Divisional Headquarters, from where he was
despatched to his Regimental Centre.
The battle became static. The front stabilized. The Indian
Army was beaten to a standstill. Brigadier Effendi, the Number
Two to General Abrar, was replaced by Brigadier Riaz-ul-Karim,
MC. The division was now a well-knit, cohesive team. This was all
due to General Abrar’s efficiency, personal touch, and
charismatic personality.
I suggested to General Abrar that we attack the Indians to
recover the area lost; the Indians had suffered heavy casualties,

THE 1965 WAR 
29
‘they were pinned down and not in a position to continue their
offensive. The next day. we went out. I explained the attack plan
in detail. It was to be a dawn attack on village Wadianwala from
the left flank, with two battalions under my personal command.
In phase II a regiment of tanks was to join me on the objective.
The third battalion was to put in a frontal attack. This was a
diversion, a part of the deception plan. The actual attack was
with two infantry battalions supported by a regiment of tanks.
General Abrar also promised that he would order the armour to
attack with a regiment of tanks on our right after we reached a
village two miles from Wadianwala.
The plan approved by General Abrar was sent by Corps HQ to
GHQ, where it was studied and approved. After GHQ’s approval
the green light was given by General Abrar. I infiltrated with two.
battalions, including my Tactical Headquarters, to the selected
area. Within a few hours the attack had to go in. Suddenly the
orders came, “Cease operations, sit tight.’ India and Pakistan had
agreed to stop hostilities. Orders for a cease-fire came. The 1965
war had ground to a halt.
General Abrar’s troops had moved fast and fought hard. My
14 Para Brigade moved 134 miles during the war and fought
some tough battles successfully. But unfortunately, when the din
of the battle had settled down, the credit for the successful Sialkot
battles was given to General Tikka. The pervading misconception’
exists even today. General Abrar’s 6 Armoured Division and
infantry troops under his command defended the area from
Badiana to River Ravi. The battle of Sialkot was won by General
Abrar and his Brigade, Battalion, and Company Commanders.
The gallantry awards bear testimony to the success of an
operation, After the 1965 war, General Abrar was awarded Ailal-
efurat for planning and bravery. Similarly, Brigadier Abdul Ali
and I were awarded Hilal-e-Jurat for exceptional performance
during the operations. Neither General Tikka Khan nor his
Brigade Commanders were given any gallantry awards. In fact,
Tikka narrowly escaped disciplinary action for giving wrong news
about the activities of Indian guerrillas behind his positions. He
kept chasing shadows throughout the war because guerrillas had
not infiltrated. Tikka’s report about guerrillas created
unnecessary panic.

