144 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
The Company of 23 Punjab commanded by Major Shahid attached
to 32 Baluch during these operations was practically wiped out. A
small number of the survivors were taken prisoners. The heroic fight
of Havildar Hukam Dad had taken place during this battle...Major
Sajid, Company Commander of 23 Punjab, was on the eastern side of
the main road. He was captured by the enemy advancing from the
south. Havildar Hukam Dad of Sajid’s Company had successfully
foiled three enemy attacks to link up from the south and north. The
Indian Major ordered Major Sajid, his captive, to stop this fanatic
fellow, or they would assault his position. As Sajid showed his
reluctance, an Indian detachment charged on Hukam Dad’s position.
Alone in his position he sprayed bullets into the charging troops. He
killed three of them. The others crawled back. Further infuriated,
the Indian Major, with a revolver at Sajid’s chest, ordered him to stop
that fanatic fellow. Sajid obeyed. He shouted to Hukam Dad to stop
it. He replied, “Sahib! you seem to have exhausted your ammunition
but I still have two magazines with me. Don’t worry, I have enough.”*
It was in this sector that Major Akram, one of the company
commanders of 4FF, was awarded a posthumous Nishan-e-Haider
for his gallantry in Mapara area. The e complete 205 Brigade
Group fought extremely well. Lt.-Col. Abbasi of 4FF was wounded
and evacuated. As 4FF was holding Hilli, a very important
position, I could not afford to leave it without a good CO, so I
took my General Staff Officer, Lt.-Col. Mumtaz, GSO-I
(Intelligence), to Hilli when I visited the area on 26 November
1971. He put up a magnificent show. He also officiated as Brigade
Commander during Tajammal’s absence when the latter was
ambushed. For his extraordinary bravery he was awarded Sitara-e-
Jurat. It was a model battle against the enemy’s four brigades,
one Mukti Bahini brigade, and one armoured brigade with
incessant air bombardment, and he held out for nineteen
continuous days until ordered to withdraw to Bogra.
General Lachhman Singh had more than enough troops, fire
power, and conducive circumstances to have done much better,
but he let the battle run itself and became a hopeless spectator.
He went on hurling troops into successive battles without feeling
the pulse of the battle. This is typical of generals who conduct
operations by sitting in the HQ, basing their decisions on the.
‘reports coming from the front, without bothering to go forward
to see, smell, and feel the pulse of the battle themselves. Our

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
145
successful withdrawal from Hilli to Bogra, forty miles away, and
breaking through the Indian encirclement without any air cover
or long range artillery support, was a worse stigma on the
generalship of Lachhman Singh, than his unsuccessful offensive
operations earlier on.
Brigadier Tajammal Hussain Malik had volunteered to fight in
East Pakistan. I wanted to keep him for the defence of Dhaka but
he insisted on going to a front-line brigade. He was sent to 205
Brigade under General Nazar. I had full faith in him as a good
commander and a brave leader. He had proved his mettle in the
1965 war. He displayed the qualities of a true soldier of Islam
and gave the toughest battle to the Indians. I recommended him
for the award of Nishan-e-Haider, but GHQ ignored him and his
heroic deeds as many chairbound soldiers and sycophants had to
be catered for. I insisted on his promotion to Major-General as
some people were afraid of him because of his unflinching faith
in Islam. He was promoted and became the only Brigadier from
East Pakistan to attain this rank.
Our troops also successfully transfixed the Indian army in
Dinajpur, Rangpur, Saidpur, Bogra, and Rajshahi, so that the
enemy could not transfer troops to West Pakistan, In fact, with
the arrival of Brigadier Manzoor’s brigade from 9 Division into
16 Division’s area, the enemy was sandwiched in the north and
.south. Had the ceasefire not taken place, the enemy would have
been placed in a precarious situation.
The performance of the Indian Corps Commander in this
sector was below average. Not only did he not capture Dhaka, he
failed completely even to capture the preliminary objectives. He
was sacked after the war for his failure to defeat the tired, ill-
equipped garrison despite the vast resources placed at his
disposal. The battle result tn this sector exposes the error of two
COASs, Gul Hassan and Tikka, in accusing us of dispersing the
troops in penny packets. It should be remembered that Gul
Hassan never took part in any battle, and that Tikka never won
any battle in Pakistan. The troops were deployed within the ambit
of the tactical doctrine of the Pakistan Army as approved by
GHQ, otherwise 16 Division, indeed my whole force, could have
been defeated in detail.

146 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Kushtia-Jessore-Khulna Sector
Major-General M. H. Ansari was my Logistics Area Commander
Dhaka. I got him promoted because of his brave action against
the rebels. He took over the command of 9 Division from Major-
General Shaukat Raza. Ansari had two brigades in his division,
and he established 9 Division Headquarters at Jessore. On the
commencement of hostilities, he moved to Faridpur. He fought
his battle according to the formulated plan. At times he was out
of communication with his subordinate formations. I provided
guidance to them during the intervening period.
9 Division was to hold Kushtia-Jhenida-Jessore and Khulna line.
Troops had also to fall back to Faridpur to prevent the enemy
from reaching Dhaka. 57 Brigade, under Brigadier Manzoor
Ahmad, was responsible for Jhenida-Kushtia. 107 Brigade under
Brigadier Hayat, SJ, was to defend Byra-Jessore. After delaying
and causing attrition to the enemy, the brigade was to fall back
to Magura-Faridpur. One battalion was to look after Satkhira-
Khulna area. I had an ad hoc brigade of CAF in Khulna which I
moved to Dhaka later.
Opposing 9 Division was the Indians’ II Corps, newly-raised
for the capture of Dhaka. Lt.-Gen. Raina’s force comprised 4
Mountain Division, 9 Infantry Division, 50(1) Para Brigade group,
two regiments of tanks, and five battalions of BSF. The Corps was
provided special equipment to facilitate its move to Dhaka. 4
Mountain Division was expected to launch a two-pronged attack
on the Karimpur-Harding Bridge axis, and a second attack on
the Mahrpur-Kushtia axis to capture Jhenida.
When the war started on 21 November 1971, the Indians
attacked Byra, but they had to pay heavily to capture it. According
to the scheduled plan, Byra was abandoned. The troops fell back
on the next delaying position, the line Afra-Chaugcha. Darsana
was lost on 2 December. A frontal attack by 350 Indian Brigade
was halted. The Indians suffered heavily, also losing several tanks.
The first air battle was fought here, in the area of Ghoripur village.
107 Pakistani Brigade was deployed in Jessore area. Brigadier
Hayat, SJ, sought my permission to withdraw, his communications
with his Divisional Commander being disrupted. I asked him to
assess the prevailing situation, and told him that if withdrawal
was the best available option, he should conduct a withdrawal, as
a 
-a 
4 
ye = | 
- 
- 
—~ = 
aa
| 
| 
mn 
Pw 
vat 
> 
oi 
Ay 
Aa 
@ 
@ 
|
—rNneCHhNWnHrATrV COTY?)
r/ 
mC 
TEL ELIL 
ah 
V ew
WAY, 
VAY 
VAY 
D 
T&S 
LBRa&VYaA OWOEsA 
| 
os 
_
VV 
VV 
VV¥ 
ewyuousavew-ss*” 
f
v 
Vv 
v

7. 
KUSHTIA-JESSORE-KHULNA SECTOR
i 
7
S 
, HARDING BRIDGE 
a
¢ 
© PABNA 
Gy
,)
nf 
57
’ 
~s KUSHTR
Vy
WS
HENIDA
HUADANGA
wa
XXFNs
OBHATIAPARA
= S$ORE
www.balochlibrary.com

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
147
he was holding a delaying position which at some stage would
have to be abandoned. He suggested withdrawal towards Khulna.
After some consideration I gave him permission to withdraw.
The reverse move would lure the bulk of Raina’s force, thus
engage and involve maximum Indian troops, and so restrain the
enemy from shifting his troops to the western theatre. This
change of plan was followed in consonance with GHQ’s
5 December signal. Also, Hayat could pose a serious threat to the
Indians’ rear areas and L of C. The enticing move would
disintegrate the Indian Corps’ cohesion, its divisions becoming
engaged in isolated battles. Also, Raina’s threat to Faridpur and
Dhaka would be considerably reduced.
Hayat was told not to make a clean break, but to withdraw in
stages, engaging the enemy, causing attrition, and luring the
maximum enemy troops. He performed this task in an admirable
fashion. As expected, the bulk of Raina’s II Corps followed Hayat
towards Khulna. Like Brigadier Tajammut’s withdrawal from Hilli.
to Bogra, Qadir’s from Mymensingh to Dhaka, Salimullah’s to
Sylhet, Saadullah’s from Brahmanbaria to Bhairab Bazar, Hayat’s
withdrawal to Khulna (Daulatpur) without air cover, armour, or
long-range artillery support, especially against heavy odds in the
Mukti Bahini infested areas, is a lesson in military history. He
conducted the withdrawal of 107 Brigade with extreme efficiency.
This he did despite enemy air attacks, armour interference, and
especially the Mukti Bahini, who tried to impede his move at
every step. The withdrawal was executed with near perfection.
He made good use of the successive delaying positions. He did
not allow the enemy to use his armour in out-flanking moves. By
his tactical sense and bold moves, he enticed Raina’s corps, and
they went after him like children following the Pied Piper.
Hayat was finally ready to face the enemy at Daulatpur, a town
a few kilometres short of Khulna. This position had extensive
marsh on one flank, and the Bhairab River flanking the other
side. He converted this area into a strong defensive position,
deriving maximum strength from the terrain. The existing
obstacles were used to best advantage. At this stage, Mayjor-
General Dalbir Singh moved the rest of his Division forward in a
bid to capture Daulatpur, with corps artillery and many aircraft
in support. A divisional attack was launched on 15 December but
failed, and the entire division was pinned down. The armour
,' VW 
Ac
WW .D. al
A) 
| 
» 7 L 420) 4°U 7
OCNIILDTary.Coly
/
i}
ra

148 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
failed to move forward or manoeuvre against the co-ordinated,
accurate fire of Hayat’s brigade.
Hayat’s performance was extraordinary. With a small force, he
played around with a superior enemy force. He blunted the
enemy armour, consisting of T-55 and PT-76 tanks, outwitted the
Opposition with his quick decisions and bold actions, and
eliminated the enemy by his courage, fortitude, and initiative.
Hayat was a brave commander. He had served under me in
Sialkot sector in the 1965 war and had done very well in
command of a FF Battalion, for which he was awarded SJ.
Two Indian Naval boats tried to enter Chalna seaport but
were destroyed. After this incident, the Indian Navy kept a
respectful distance from East Pakistan seaports.
The enemy advanced to Chauhadanga on 6 December.
Although not a tactically important town, the advance had an
adverse impact on the Governor because it was his home town.
The rebels played havoc with the locals and many were massacred,
The enemy's occupation, on 7 December, of Jessore, which we
had vacated on 6 December, added fuel to the fire. Desperate,
Governor Malik started asking for a ceasefire. I invited the
Governor for a briefing at Eastern Command. I informed him
that certain other areas would be vacated. We would be falling
back to Kushtia, Faridpur, and Khulna in the west. Major-General
Rao Farman, his military adviser, instead of pacifying him, created
confusion in his mind. The Governor was worried about the
safety of the civilians. He was deeply concerned about casualties
and the killing of innocent persons.
After Magura, 62 Indian Brigade advanced to Madhomati. The
purpose of the move was to capture Faridpur after clearing
Madhomati. Our intention was to divert the enemy forces in
another direction. Our troops at Kushtia succeeded in luring the
Indian division to the north. Jhenida-Khushtia offered a lucrative
target. Our troops in Kushtia could now cut the Indians’ lines of
communication in area Jhenida. Brigadier Manzoor at Kushtia was
told to cut the road but before he moved, the enemy started
moving towards him. General Barar, fearful of the flank threat
from the north to his over-stretched line of advance to Jhenida
and Madhomati, ordered 7 Mountain Brigade to attack Kushtia.
By getting drawn towards Kushtia, the Indian troops went off on a
tangent, thus giving us sufficient time to organize and re-adjust
e@ 
+4
och
YW7UKIUKT 
Na
V/ / 
y IV/ 
\ VA / 
iWé ]
VV 
VV 
VV 
e FE
| > te alt @ me ah 
Gi 
rr as rYNs
brary.com

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
149
our defences at Faridpur and Golando. The diversion of the Indian
forces to Kushtia proved fatal for the Indians—they got bogged
down there, and fhe threat to Faridpur and Dhaka was reduced.
Our 57 Brigade troops in Kushtia let the Indians, whose attack
was led by one squadron of tanks, come forward into the built-up
area, where they could not manoeuvre. Artillery, automatic and
recoilless guns opened up simultaneously creating a devastating
effect. Only one Indian tank managed to get away. The rest were
either knocked out or captured. The leading battalion suffered
heavy casualties. The unexpectedly strong reaction by our troops,
their violent and fierce action, created panic among the Indian
troops. The first wave of the enemy bore the brunt, and those who
could were forced to withdraw. The Indians literally ran from the
battlefield. The troops in the depth and the reserve likewise ran
for safety. The Indian Corps Commander pulled back another:
brigade from Jhenida to Kushtia, followed up by 41 Brigade also,
leaving only one battalion on Madhumati. Thus, the entire division
had been drawn in front of Kushtia by 10 December.
Brigadier Manzoor, Commander 57 Brigade, was allowed to
move to 16 Division area with most of his equipment, crossing
the Ganges over the Harding Bridge which had been roughly
decked. The brigade thereafter came under the command of 16
Infantry Division. When Manzoor initially withdrew from the
forward delaying positions, his brigade HO with one Rifle
Company got detached and reached Jhenida, while Manzoor with
the rest of his Brigade and Tactical HQ firmed in Kushtta. When
he crossed over to 16 Division area with his troops, Major-General
Ansari, using the leftover troops of Manzoor’s brigade (Main
Brigade HQ and one Rifle Company) and two newly-arrived
battalions from Dhaka, raised an ad hoc Brigade. He gave the
command of this Brigade to Col. K. K. Afridi, his Col. Staff.
Afridi was responsible for looking after the approaches to
Faridpur and Golando. Ansari himself took over the command
of the troops defending the Faridpur Fortress and Golando strong
point. Col. Afridi fought magnificently, The enemy never
succeeded in reaching Faridpur, thus their advance to Dhaka,
which was their main objective, was successfully blocked.
With both Jessore and Jhenida in the bag by 7 December, General
Raina was well placed for a quick advance to Dhaka, He was in a
z 
| 
1 
1 
4°) 
|
, 
aa 
~~ 
ro” 
—} 
> 
4 
/ 
dearry 
dew 
y 
“ey 
f~ 
tran
x 
K 
) 
rm~> 6 7 
| 
y 
\ ff 
. 
Y 
6) 
‘Y ) 
f 
f \ 
]
Pannell 
( 
RCA 
J

150 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
position to contain the remnants of Ansari’s two Brigades in Kushtia
and Khulna areas with two of his own Brigades and push on to
Faridpur and Golando Ghat with the rest of his Corps. However, as
we have seen he allowed his one Division to get involved at Kushtia.
In the event his second Division also got stuck on the road to Khulna.
The opportunity to reach Dhaka was lost.
The views expressed by the author, an Indian, clearly indicate
the failure of the Indian Army despite overwhelming superiority
in all spheres. The greatest help was provided by the locals, who
carried out disruptive activities, guided them, and provided them
detailed information. Leave alone reaching Dhaka, all the Indian
Corps failed even to capture their preliminary objectives. Every
move by the Indian commanders was checkmated. The
determined Pakistani commanders outmatched the Indian
Generals at every step.
From across the river obstacle, I was defending Dhaka. We were
successful in keeping the enemy at bay. The Indian Army
formations were kept away from Dhaka, and away from each other.
They were involved in their respective sectors. We tied them down
completely, not letting them transfer troops to the western theatre,
nor allowing one sector force to be switched over to the other
sector. If not ordered to surrender to save West Pakistan, we could
have fought for a considerable period. We had lured the enemy to
our fortresses. Battles were being fought at places of our own
choosing. We were dug in; the enemy was in the open. The Indians
had to maintain a stretched L of C; we had no, or only limited,
lines of communication to guard, and our guns, ammunition, and
food were safely tucked away in our fortresses.
The advice of the author of Indian Army after Independence to
General Raina, Commander II Indian Corps, is indeed very
interesting. He says that Raina should have contained our two
brigades at Daulatpur (Khulna) and Kushtia with two of his
brigades, and he himself should have gone for Dhaka with the
rest of his troops. It appears a bit far-fetched when judged in the
context of the battles which took place. He overlooks the
performance of the Indian troops against our troops defending
the fortresses and strong points in various areas. Two Indian
brigades could not contain two Pakistani brigades. Raina’s long
L of C would have been blocked, forcing him to send back troops
to protect it, which would have reduced his offensive power.
www.baloch ior: uv.com
WW,
\/
_ 
J
A

THE BATTLES SECTORWISE 
15]
Faridpur and Golando were held fairly strongly under the
personal command of General Ansari. The approaches to these
fortresses were being guarded by the ad hoc Brigade of Col. K. K.
Afridi, a brave and experienced officer. The Indians had yet to
cross the Madhumati River, which was being guarded by Afridi’s
troops. His troops were to fall back to Faridpur and Golando,
increasing the strength and defensive capability of the fortresses
considerably. Under the circumstances, General Raina would not
have been in a position to muster enough strength to invest
Faridpur.
Chittagong
The Indians had moved their aircraft carrier to East Pakistan.
Our submarine Ghazi had under complete stealth reached the
Vikrant’s anchorage. According to the reports, however, it went
too deep to attack Vikrant, failed to surface, and remained
undetected until some papers and equipment floated up.
Submarine Ghazi had done extremely well in the 1965 war, when
‘it was commanded by Karamat Niazi, who was awarded Sitara-e-
| furat and later became C.-in-C. Navy.
Chittagong was defended by our naval troops and an ad hoc
Brigade under Brigadier Ata Muhammad Malik, a tough
Brigadier with a flair for meticulous planning and personal
leadership. He foiled the enemy’s attempts to capture Chittagong
and held up their troops. He did not give up till the end. Another
ad hoc Brigade was commanded by Brigadier Taskeen. The
Commandos, local Chakma tribesmen, and Mezos from Indian
Assam were part of this brigade. They kept the Indians away
from the sensitive objectives and towns in Chittagong Hill Tract
area and inflicted considerable losses on the Indian Kilo Force.
An attempt by the Indians to launch an amphibian operation
against Cox’s Bazaar, an area held by our regular troops, did not
succeed, Out of the battalion launched by the Indians, only twelve
men could disembark. Two of them drowned, and the adventure
ended in a fiasco. Indian Kilo Force, operating in the Chittagong
Hill Tracts, did not show any offensive spirit.
1; th
WW -b: aloc ch N1Orar y com

152 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
39 ad hoc Division
On 4 December I was told to reoccupy Feni, which I had vacated
earlier because under the prevailing circumstances it held no
tactical importance. GHQ insisted on its reoccupation. In fact
the interference by GHQ was considerable. They at times gave
orders without knowing the situation or having any information
about the terrain, etc,
The raising of 39 ad hoc Division for the defence of Laxam/
Feni was not a part of the original plan. I had wanted to hold
Dhaka and Chittagong as fortresses, with Chandpur as a covering
position, not Laxam or Feni, but Gul Hassan, our armchair
strategist. at GHQ, was adamant in ordering me to hold Laxam/
Feni on the border.
CGS Gul Hassan, who had never commanded troops in battle,
and who made several excuses for not coming to East Pakistan,
barely understood the complex East Pakistani situation. He failed
to grasp the tactical requirements and basic tactics of infantry in
East Pakistan. GHQ ordered the move of the troops, overruling
my opinion. In forcing me to occupy Feni BOP, GHQ was making
me stretch my neck in the area, not realizing that when war starts
international boundaries vanish and FDLs become the boundary.
The area between the FDLs of the opposing forces is called No
Man's Land.
The ad hoc 39 Division was raised under General Rahim Khan,
HJ, on 21 November 1971. General Rahim had done extremely
well as General Officer Commanding 14 Division in the
insurgency operations. He was a bold and dashing general who,
on account of his bravery, sharp intellect, and practical
generalship, was given command of the Chandpur sector. It had
two brigades, 53 and 117. 117 was holding the borders from
north of Comilla to Chaudogram, while 53 was responsible for
area further south, up to Fen.
53 Brigade was commanded by Brigadier Aslam Niazi. He was
Command Reserve for Dhaka. The brigade was to defend
Chandpur and then fall back to Dhaka on orders. This brigade
was placed under the command of 39 (A) Division and was
deployed 
in Laxam.
Indian 301 Mountain Brigade advanced between the Lalmai
Hills and Laxam on the night of 3 December. They secured
WWW.DALOC

