10 
THE BETRAYAI. OF EAST PAKISTAN
We paid a heavy price for the victory: eight men were killed,
the rest wounded, some slightly and others seriously. I received
three bursts. One went through my haversack, grazing my thigh,
the second tore my right shoulder epaulette, and the third tore
the heel of my boot. My wounds were not serious.
As the Battalion Headquarters was located on higher ground,
overlooking the objective area, Lt.-Col. Cargill and Brigadier
‘Daddy’ Warren witnessed the entire progress of the battle
through binoculars. After the capture of Left Tekri, Lt.-Col.
Cargill broke wireless silence to congratulate me on the fine
performance of my troops. Brigadier Warren was highly
impressed by the results. I was awarded the Military Cross (MC)
on the spot, immediately after the action. Verbal approval was
taken from the Corps Commander on the telephone. The
cititation was sent later on.
Awards Ceremony
The war in Burma was coming to an end. General Slim,
Commander 14th Army, was to be knighted and his three Corps
Commanders and some other senior officers were to be
decorated. One Indian Officer and one Indian Viceroy’s
Commissioned Officer (VCO) were also to be decorated the
same day. 
.
| 
It was a great honour for an Indian officer to be decorated on
the battlefield by the Viceroy of India. 
From the 14th Army, I was
the Indian officer selected for this honour, and Subedar Man
Bahadur Thapa, if I remember his name correctly, was the 
VCO.
Squadron Leader Mehr Singh was the seniormost Indian officer
present on the occasion. The medals were handed by Admiral
Mountbatten to Lord Wavell, the Viceroy, who pinned the medals
on the chests of the recipients.
Later, when Lord Mountbatten went to Java, a guard of honour
was organized in his honour by 5th Indian Division. I commanded
the guard of honour company. Fauji Akhbar published the
following news item on 25 May 1946.
UK7UKITXY) | AN ] ft’ ch ] 1 h LrATrV 
CC QO] Y)
WWW .OUdaLOUCILIDI aL Y UU

EARLY YEARS 
1]
When Admiral Mountbatten, Supreme Commander East Asia visited
Batavia during his tour of Netherlands East Indies recently, he was
met on the airport by Maj. Niazi, MC, of village Ballo Khel, PO
Mianwali, Punjab. Maj. Niazi was commander of the guard of honour
supplied by the 4th Battalion, the Rajput Regiment.
Admiral Mountbatten complimented the Major on the smart turn-
out of his men and enquired into his distinguished war record. Major
Niazi joined the Army 11 years ago and served in the famous 5th
Division in the Western Desert, until they were transferred to Burma
Front, In 1943 he was mentioned in despatches and in the jungle of
Kohima he was awarded Military Cross for outstanding bravery and
leadership. He now commands *D’ Company which is one of the two
Muslim companies in the Battalion.
Maj. Niazi arrived in Surabaya last vear and took part in the sweep
which cleared the town of armed bandits. Later his brigade was
transferred to Batavia from where they have escorted convoys loaded
with food for refugees in Bandung.
Back to India
From Burma we were sent to invade Singapore, but the Japanese
surrendered before the invasion started. From there we were
sent to Indonesia. We stayed there for about three months and
then we returned to India.
We left Java on 30 May 1946, embarked at Jakarta and landed
in Madras. The 5th Indian Division was concentrated in Ranchi.
Most of the set-up had changed. Our new commanding officer
was an old Englishman, Burton by name. The Brigade
Commander was Brigadier Thorat from South India. The
Divisional Commander was General Russell, known as Russel]
Pasha. Lieutenant-General Ranken was the Eastern Command
Commander.
Soon I went to Clement Town, near Dehra Dun, for the tactical
course. The course was attended by senior British and Indian
officers. Our two King’s Commissioned Officers were Lt.-Col.
Mohammad Afzal Janjua and Major Afzal Sheikh, who later
became Quartermaster-General in the Pakistan Army. The course
was also attended by many Indian Commissioned Officers. I got
above average grading and was posted to Tactical School,
Clement Town, as instructor. 
|
www.balochlibrary.com

1? 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
I was an instructor at Clement Town when partition took place.
The course in progress had quite a number of Muslim students.
Also, many of the clerks working there were Muslims. All of us
packed our belongings, happy and joyous to move to our beloved
country, newly created by the efforts of Quaid-i-Azam.
Move to Pakistan
I was detailed to go as advance party to Pakistan. I embarked at
Palampur airfield and landed at Lahore. From Lahore I went to
GHQ, Rawalpindi, where I reported to Col. Lauder (later Major-
General) who had been appointed as Commandant, Staff College.
He told me to leave for Quetta where other instructors would
also be arriving. I was told that Lieutenant-Colonel Yahya Khan
(later General and C.-in-C.) was already there. I was to tell
Colonel Yahya Khan that Staff College was to be renamed
Command and Staff College, and that it was to have two wings—
the Staff and the Tactical wings. I was told to take half the
classrooms for the Tactical wing.
The Library of Staff College was the best Army Library in
United India. Many people have wrongly claimed that they took
it over after partition; this is the true story of how I did so,
When I reached Quetta, the Hindu, Sikh, and British students,
the staff and instructors were still there. Major Latif (later
Brigadier Latif, who was convicted in the Rawalpindi Conspiracy
Case) was a student in the College. He was ordered to take over
the Library. The Librarian was an Indian Christian who had
started hiding important library books. A battle was raging
between the Librarian and Latif. When things got bad, I was
ordered by Lt.-Col. Yahya Khan to take over the Library. I tried
to negotiate with the Librarian, but his attitude was obnoxious. I
soon realized that other tactics would have to be used to take
over the Library. So I told Captain Ishaq to go to Baluch
Regimental Centre, which was located at Quetta, and get a section
of infantry from there. When the Librarian was closing the
Library, 
I pounced upon him and relieved him of the keys. I
ordered Captain Ishaq to mount a guard of the armed infantry
section and ensure that no one broke the lock of the Library. |
arranged for a room to be kept open where books returned by
oa 
4 
= 
2 
| 
® 
7
| 
| 
| 
]
eo 
Oh 
@ 
@A 
@ 
@/ 
m~> Co) 
| C \ / Y
\ 
W, 
\ 
. 
Wi 
} 
Da
WWW UAaALVUL
| 
42 ff) ye 
J 
°f~tr?
|
a 
1 
> 5 2 6 7 
12X 
} 
> 
;
oo L 1 Ul al Y Wi il
[4

EARLY YEARS 
13
the officers could be kept tll the new Librarian took over. When
I reported the matter to Lt.-Col. Yahya Khan, he said, “Well done.
Now vanish fora few days till the dust settles.’ This I did.
[ remained with Command and Staff College till the end of
1948. I did my Staff College in 1949 and was awarded PSC (Passed
Staff College).
From Quetta, | was posted as General Staff Officer Grade II to
the Officers Training School, Kohat. Col. Halsay, who was OC
Tactical Wing of Staff College, was posted as OC Officer Training
School.
In 1951 the Rawalpindi Conspiracy took place with the
involvement of General Muhammad Akbar Khan, DSO. 2/1 Punjab
was located at Tal, commanded by Lt.-Col. N. M. Arbab. The
Adjutant of the battalion was Captain Khizer. It was alleged that
2/1 Punjab under Arbab was to march to Pindi, take control of
GHOQ, and arrest the senior officers. Instead, Arbab and Khizer
were arrested. Due to the arrest of the CO, 2/1 Punjab was without
a commanding officer. General Muhammad Ayub Khan, the C.-in-
C., ordered that a good, seasoned officer should be given the
command of 2/] Punjab. His first task would be to investigate and
report the involvement or otherwise of 2/1 Punjab in the
conspiracy, before any decision was taken regarding possible
disbanding. I was selected and posted as CO of 2/1 Punjab, even
though I did not belong to 1 Punjab Regiment but to 8 Punjab
Regiment, and was still junior to many for promotion to the rank
of Lieutenant-Colonel. I took over the command in April 1951.
After thorough investigation, I found nothing wrong with the
battalion and submitted a report to that effect. The battalion
moved to Lahore, and at the end of the training season it was
declared the best battalion of 10 Division. Field Marshal
Auchinleck visited us as Colonel Commandant of 1 Punjab
Regiment. After the visit he said 66 (the old name of 2/1 Punjab)
was in good shape and deserved to be the best battalion of any
formation. I really worked hard with the battalion. I remained in
command ull 24 October 1953.
From 2/1 Punjab, I was posted to the School of Infantry and
Tactics in Quetta. Col. Jones was the Commandant. I took over
the command of the junior leaders wing, as instructor class ‘A’. I
remained with the schoo] till 26 August 1956, when I was posted
as General Staff Officer Grade I to 8 Division, which was also

14 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
located in Quetta. I remained with 8 Division till 20 June 1957
and again reverted to regimental duties. 
I was posted to 1/14
Punjab (5 Punjab Sherdils), located in Dhaka in East Pakistan. |
asked General Bakhtiar Rana, MC, General Officer Commanding,
8 Division, the reason for my posting before the completion of
two years tenure of duty. He replied, ‘I had asked the Military
Secretary for your posting to my division. I am very happy with
your good work and self discipline. You have been posted on the
orders of the Commander-in-Chief, General Ayub Khan. As 1/14
(Sherdils) is the Chief's battalion, he always selects the com-
manding officer of 14 Punjab himself.’ So again I had to change
my regimental badges. From 8 Punjab, I changed to 1 Punjab,
and now to 14 Punjab Regiment.
1/14 Punjab (Sherdils) was Headquarters Battalion of 14
Division, commanded by Major-General Umrao Khan, a capable
General. During our stay in Dhaka, the Sherdils had a good
reputation as the officers conducted themselves with poise,
dignity, and soldierly bearing. A road in Dhaka Cantonment was
named ‘Tiger Road’ after me. The name has not been changed.
Capt. Gohar Ayub, later Speaker of the National Assembly, Lt. Asif
Nawaz, later COAS, and Lt. Alam Jan Mahsud, later Lieutenant-
General, all served in 1/14 Punjab during my command.
After completion of a successful tour of duty in East Pakistan,
we embarked at Chittagong on 10 November 1957 bound for
West Pakistan. From Karachi 1/14 Punjab moved by train to
Lahore where we became part of 106 Brigade, commanded by
Brigadier Wahid Haider of 10 Division, with Major-General Azam
Khan as the General Officer Commanding.
From the time of our arrival in Lahore, we got involved in a
new tactical defensive concept being introduced in the Army,
known as the ‘New Concept’. It was the idea of C.-in-C. General
Ayub Khan. To ensure that the officers understood the concept
in its vital perspective, papers were written and discussions were
held, but the desired impact was not created on the young
officers, the unit commanders and the sub-unit commanders. It
was therefore decided to give a demonstration of the defensive
layout to the officers to convince them that this was better than
the old concept of defence being practiced in our army.
Brigadier Gul Mawaz, MC, Commander 103 Brigade, was given
the task of the demonstration. 103 Brigade was also located in

ot
EARLY YEARS 
1
Lahore Cantonment. Major-General (later General) Hamid and
Colonel Umar, his staff officer (later Major-General), were carrying
out the paperwork. Someone suggested that as Lt.-Col. Niazi had
vast experience in war and also as an instructor, the onus of
conducting the demonstration should rest on him. So my battalion
was changed from 106 Brigade to be made a part of 103 Brigade.
Units change formations, but not usually in the same station, unless
it is grouping for war. I was given the task of laying the
demonstration of “Defence on a Broad Front’—our new concept.
I deployed and rehearsed the battalion in various layers as per
the tactical concept in Tilla Field firing area. The Commander-
in-Chief, General M. Ayub Khan, invited foreign Military Attaches
to witness the demonstration, which was perfect. General Ayub
Khan was delighted by the superb performance of the Sherdils.
I commanded 5 Punjab (Sherdils) till 10 June 1961. I was then
posted to 51 Brigade as its Commander. The brigade was
earmarked to go to Laos under SEATO. I was a Lieutenant-
Colonel and not senior enough to be promoted to the rank of
Brigadier, but as I had been selected to command 51 Brigade, I
was given accelerated promotion. I underwent intensive training
to meet the challenge in Laos, but eventually we did not go. We
were not told the reason.
In Karachi, beside commanding 51 Brigade, I was also the
Martial Law Administrator of Sindh and Karachi. It was a difficult
job with lots of temptations and pressures from all quarters. By
the grace of Allah, I did control Karachi and Sindh quite well
and left with a clean slate. I was awarded Sitara-e-Khidmat.
CONFIDENTIAL
Anx “GC
Citation of S. K. in respect of PA-477
Brig Amir Abdullah Khan, HJ, SK, MC
If any one person is to be singled out for saving the standing crops
and orchards of the civil divisions of Karachi, Hyderabad, Mirpur
Khas and Bahawalpur from what at one stage appeared complete
destruction by the locust swarms, that officer is Brigadier Amir
Abdullah Khan Niazi, MC, Commander 51 Brigade. He was ordered
to assume full control of anti-locust operations at a very short notice.
Uhe resources placed at his disposal were meagre and what is more

16 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
he had to exercise control over a variety of civil agencies. And it
speaks volumes for his great ability, tact, patience and cheerfulness
that Brigadier Niazi managed to successfully coordinate the efforts of
the diverse agencies in wiping out the locusts.
Initially the operations were to be limited to the civil divisions of
Karachi and Hyderabad. Later the scope was extended to Khairpur
and Bahawalpur divisions as well thus placing a very heavy drain on
the resources available to him. But for the mental robustness
combined with a great clarity of mind, which enabled him to
judiciously redeploy his forces and resources, it would have been very
difficult to carry out the task successfully without giving him
substantial reinforcements.
Throughout this period his behaviour and example were a source
of inspiration to all—in particular to the civilian authorities and this
brought a great credit to the Army. He managed to put up a cheerful
and brave face in spite of an almost 20 hours working day for well
over a month.
CONFIDENTIAL
From 51 Brigade, I was posted to the School of Infantry and
Tactics as its Commandant. I remained there from 16 November
1963 to 12 May 1965, Here it was concentrated hard work with
hardly any time to relax. The old tactical exercises without troops
were re-written and new exercises were introduced. The main
thing I introduced was a model exercise on the conduct of battle,
which was much appreciated, and some formations introduced
the exercise in their formations. I also gave to the Army the
Rotating Rifle Range System. This system reduced time and
manpower. I devised new trenches, particularly for anti-tank guns
and medium machine-guns. They are still operative in the Army,
particularly in 8 and 10 Divisions defensive areas, even today.
www.balochlibrary.com

CHAPTER 2
THE 1965 WAR
The partition of the Indian subcontinent had carried in its womb
the seeds of hatred and animosity. The failure to remove mutual
distrust was the genesis of the 1965 War. Emergency was declared
and the armies were poised to resolve their differences on the
battlefield.
The School of Infanuy and Tactics, where I was the Com-
mandant, came to a grinding halt. The student officers and
instructors were posted back to their units and formations. Only a
skeleton staff remained to look after the weapons, equipment,
stores, and accommodation. I was given the command of 14 Para
Brigade located at Bhai Phairu, about thirty miles from Lahore. I
took over the command from Brigadier Suleman, an officer from
Signal Corps. Major-General Yahya Khan took over the command
of 7 Infantry Division from Lt.-Gen. Altaf Qadir. The officers were
posted to various formations and units based on experience and
past war performance. The officers not considered capable of
commanding troops during war were removed from the command
of units and formations before the start of military operations. 
|
After taking over 14 Para Brigade, I started training my brigade
in real earnest. My brigade was under 7 Division commanded by
Major-General Yahya.
During this period, Operation Gibraltar, the operation to be
launched in Kashmir, became the epicentre of interest.
Operation Gibraltar was to be conducted by Major-General
Akhtar Malik, Commander, 12 Division. At General Akhtar’s
request, 
I was summoned to GHQ Rawalpindi, where I was
ordered to report to HQ 12 Division, located at Murree. I had
known General Akhtar fairly well when I was instructor in Tactical!
Wing, Command and Staff College as a Major. Yahya Khan and
Akhtar Malik, both Lieutenant-Colonels, had been instructors in

18 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
the Staff Wing, and for three months we had stayed together in
the same house, 10 Braithwaite Road, as our families had not
joined us, and we had become very close. From 7 Division I was
moved to 12 Division with my Brigade HQ and one battalion.
This was on special request of GOC 12 Division.
Accompanied by my Brigade-Major Imtiaz (later Major-
General), I left for HQ 12 Division, Murree. General Akhtar was
cordial in his welcome. He asked me to take over No. 1 Sector
in Muzaffarabad. As General Akhtar was expected to be deeply
involved in the planning and conduct of the Chamb-Jurian
operation, he required an officer in whom he could repose
confidence in his absence to hold Muzaffarabad, the capital of
Azad Kashmir. As the situation was expected to be fluid, any
decisions taken on behalf of the Commander 12 Division had to
be taken promptly and without delay.
On the map he explained the dominating area captured by
the Indian Army which had placed the enemy in an
advantageous position. The area could be used as a jumping-off
place to develop further operations for the capture of
Muzaffarabad. He told me to leave for the operational area the
next day. He also instructed me that, under the circumstances,
the enemy should not be allowed to gain way, especially towards
Muzaffarabad. General Akhtar left for Chamb the same day.
Col. Ejaz, the Colonel Staff (later Major-General) was left behind
to control 12 Division operations room.
I was still in the HQ 12 Division operations room when Field
Marshal Ayub Khan, General Musa and their staff officers
arrived. Discussions were held. Plans for the capture of Akhnoor
were slightly modified. It was a brilliantly conceived plan, but it
transpired during the discussion that operations in that sector
were being considered in isolation from other sectors. The
concomitance, interaction, linked implications, and the overall
plan, especially the action and enemy’s reaction, were not given
due weightage. | put in: “as capture of Akhnoor would cut the
artery to Jammu Kashmir, would it not impel India to resort to
diversionary action, say against Lahore, to divide our attention,
divide our efforts, and create a psychological threat to Punjab?’
However, the euphoria and enthusiasm of Operation Gibraltar
were so frenzied that it prevailed. All other considerations were
simply overruled.

THE 1965 WAR 
19
Next day, | reached Muzaffarabad and took over 1 Azad
Kashmir Brigade; Brigadier Khilji, the Commander, was not there
but his BM and DQ were present. 14 Para Brigade HQ and one
of its Battalions, 1/1 Punjab, commanded by Lt.-Col. Nasrullah,
joined me in Muzaffarabad.
Counter-attack by 5 Punjab (Sherdils)
| reached 5 Punjab (Sherdils) in the morning. As the gun position
was en route, 
| took Major Zaidi, the Battery Commander, along,
who explained the deployment of artillery and the selected
artillery targets. Lt.-Col. Hassan showed me the deployment of
the troops and the important tactical features. The Indians were
occupying a higher position and 5 Punjab was deployed on
comparatively lower ground, but it formed a sort of reverse slope
position and could effectively cover with small-arms fire the
enemy descending from the heights. The enemy could also be
effectively covered by the machine-guns of the Azad Kashmir
Battalion on the next ridge. The two battalions were mutually
supporting. A hill dominated the area and anyone occupying it
could observe the movement on Pakistan’s side. When asked, Lt.-
Col. Hassan told me that initially the hill was with us but it was
now occupied by the Indians. “We lost the position a day before
you arrived. It is now occupied by two Indian companies.’
I! ordered Col. Hassan to capture the hill by a dawn attack the
next day. As the Battery Commander was present, certain features
were shown to him to be registered as targets. In a surprise attack, 
|
the Sherdils captured the hill the next morning. The Indians
were Carrying out relief operations—old troops being replaced
by new troops. 5 Punjab suffered five wounded. Major N. M.
Niazi was killed. I congratulated 5 Punjab for the successfully-
conducted attack and gave them a new area of responsibility.
I contacted General Akhtar and informed him about the
successful counter-attack, in which the lost area had been
recaptured. He was pleased. He asked me to take quick decisions
where required and gave me a carte blanche to take decisions
keeping in view the changing panoramic situation. I visited the
Battalions of the Brigade and made certain changes. At one place,
a skirmish took place. We cleared the enemy position by direct

