254 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
was at stake. It had cost half the country to achieve the sceptre
and crown. It would have been foolhardy of Bhutto to have let
the prize slip away. Subverting the truth was a very small sin in
the game of power politics.
Referring to the major players in the grisly drama, one of Bhutto’s
biographers significantly observes that Yahya, Mujib and Bhutto have
to share the responsibility of the catastrophe of 1971...Many indeed
are inclined to the view that Bhutto, as the most sure footed politician
of the three and thus the best equipped to assess the consequence of
his actions must accept the lion’s share of the blame.
(Salman Taseer, A Political Biography, quoted by A. T. Chaudhri,
Dawn, 23 and 26 July 1986)
If, however, the objective of the Commission was to extract
military lessons for future application, or if its aim was to evaluate
the performance of military officers, then the matter was
different. Even then it was vital to entrust the task to military
experts of known professional competency and impeccable
integrity. The restricted terms of reference led us to doubt
whether their intentions were bona fide. They clearly indicated
that some officers were to be made scapegoats.
As the Terms of Reference were designed by those who played a key
role in the events, therefore, the Terms had two major defects: firstly
they restricted the inquiry to the professional military aspects and
they further restricted it to the events in East Pakistan. The first
omission was meant to protect the political leadership and the second
omission was intended to cover up the Military High Command, The
reasons for these omissions are as obvious as daylight because the
political and military leadership which designed these Terms of
Reference were controlling between them the Government of
Pakistan and the military apparatus and their acts of omission were
highly detrimental to the result of the war. It, therefore, suited both
of them to give a bad name to the East Pakistan Commander and his
troops and not to bring any thing else under discussion.
(The Muslim, Islamabad, January 1991)
The HRC, as expected, turned out to be a farce. It was a mock
enquiry at the national level. The two most important actors in
the débacle, Bhutto and Tikka, were firmly ensconced in the
saddle of power. Between them they shared two most powerful
on 
| [~~ lA IqrAnRrarnrtyd 
COVTY)
VATOYVC 
TILTIPDDT di Vi 
COVU | a
\ J XY / i 
5 | i \ U 4 i € J S »/ 
eo 
VWsbd

HAMOOD-UR-REHMAN COMMISSION 
255
posts. One occupied the top political post of Prime Minister, the
other the coveted seat of COAS. From the corridors of power,
they pulled the strings.
People testified under duress or for self-motivated gain. Tikka’s
complete exoneration is an enigma. He is not mentioned in the
report. Bhutto had to ensure he was not condemned, for a man
condemned is a political outcast. Failure can be forgiven, but the
mark of treachery is indelible.
The late Mr A. T, Chaudhri, a journalist of repute, wrote as a
result of his investigative efforts:
Rejecting those sensible options open to them, the PPP stalwarts not
only made the Hamood Report the personal property of the Prime
Minister, but also denounced it parrot like as lopsided, laconic and
biased. Supposing the report was inadequate, Bhutto’s men had none
but their leader to blame for it. Indeed, he saw to it while setting up
the Commission with a flourish of trumpet, that it should be
hamstrung by its limited terms of reference and scope of inquiry.
One can say, on the authority of unimpeachable sources, that the
probe body was specifically told to confine its investigation to the
military debacle and not to delve into the ‘cause of surrender’, notably
its political background. Justice Hamood-ur-Rehman is believed to
have pleaded for the enlargement of the terms of reference to enable
him to look into the ‘totality of the situation’ before the traumatic
fall of Dhaka. But he was firmly directed not to burn his fingers with the
political nettle. The implication was clear.
(Dawn, Karachi, 23 and 26 July 1986)
Since ‘war is an extension of politics by other means’, could
the political actions required by our Government be excluded
from the terms of reference? Should events which were political
in nature, leading on to military action and ending up in war
and dismemberment of the country, not be taken into
consideration? Could the extension of the main edifice, Le.,
politics, be inquired into without going through the main
building? Even if this was not included in the terms of reference,
the inquiry could not be complete without in-depth consideration
of all these requirements. But whenever I raised this question
and tried to convince the Commission, by giving examples of
political failures, that it was a political defeat and nothing else,
they would say that this was outside the scope of the inquiry. One
cannot delink military actions from political actions. They start
Ln ¢ >)
Dal
@
LNOATATAIKAROATX], COYVTY)
UCLTUIIDIALY 
CULL
VWJ7eibi 
lt 
UJ 
CQi 
¥Y 
wrwJviil
« J
sw 
/ 
. 
J 
N 
|
Y / Y / 
Y / V/ 
XY / V/

256 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
with political parleys and on their failure, the political order is
restored by military shock action, and finally ends with a political
solution. Mr A, T. Chaudhri further writes,
If the terms of reference of the Hamood Commission were restricted
and it was told by its sponsor, a super politician, to eschew politics,
the object clearly was to make the report babble in conformist tone
vindicating those at the helm of power.
The scope of the Commission was restricted to the military
operations, and that too mainly to operations in the eastern
theatre, divorced from the conduct of war in the western theatre.
This was unjustified and aimed merely at crucifying the
Commander Eastern Command and his troops. As the national
war plan embraced both the theatres, keeping in view the
geographical configuration, the battles had to be fought in close
rapport, with intimately interlinked actions based on concomitant
and premeditated plans. If this was not the case we would not
have had ‘the battle of the East will be fought in the West’ plan,
and the High Command would not have given me the task of not
allowing the Indians to move troops from east to west. To carry
out this order I had to stop my planned offensive against 20
Indian Division from the north and go on the defensive in area
Dinajpur-Saidpur to contain 6 Indian Division, which was to be
moved to the western sector. Later I would not have been forced
to surrender when I was still in a position to keep fighting. The
defeat was in the west because of their inability to stem the
advance of the Indian forces in spite of the fact that we struck
first, at places of our own choosing, and had more tanks and
most conducive circumstances. The surrender was not our fault.
As it 1s, when I refused to lay down arms, the COS Army
ordered me to act on their signal of 14 December 1971 as the
security of West Pakistan was endangered. Since the Commission
was not familiar in depth with national and military strategy, it
could not be expected to reach an accurate conclusion. Even
Lt.-Gen. Aftab, who was heading his own inquiry committee, when
confronted by me about the performance of the Army in West
Pakistan and Tikka’s failure to launch the pre-planned offensive 
|
to relieve pressure against East Pakistan, told me, ‘Never mind
about West Pakistan, let us concentrate on East Pakistan.’ I was

HAMOOD-UR-REHMAN COMMISSION 
257
not a subaltern whose actions were confined to a tactical level. As
a Lt-~Gen. and commander of a theatre, I had to think on a
strategic level and could not afford to ignore the operations in
the west. That is why I had instructed my staff to plot West
Pakistan's battles on a map. But Aftab, who had a meek
personality, could not resist the bait of a diplomatic assignment,
which he eventually managed when he went to Libya as
Ambassador. Col. Sabir Qureshi, who was acting as liaison officer
between the HRC and the Aftab Committee, was sent to Saudi
Arabia as Military Attache,
The HRC was headed by Justice Hamood-ur-Rehman, Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court. The other members were Justice
Shaikh Anwar-ul-Hagq, Chief Justice of the Punjab High Court,
who was due for elevation to the coveted post of Judge of the
Supreme Court, and Justice Tufail Ali Abdul Rehman, Chief
Justice of the Sindh High Court. Col. Hassan was the legal adviser.
Lt.-Gen. (Retd.) Altaf Qadir was the Military Adviser (MA)
appointed to assist the court in matters dealing with purely
operational strategy and the conduct of war. This composition
raised many an eyebrow.
To quote the late Mr A. T. Chaudhri again:
|The] object was also reflected in the composition of the Commission.
It was no doubt headed by a Chairman of unquestionable integrity
though hailing as he did from former East Pakistan, which lay
shattered and tattered, he must have been emotionally upset. It had
no neutral political figure or outstanding military expert on its panel.
The Government had decided that all Bengalis were to be
repatriated to Bangladesh. Justice Hamood should have been
sent back but he did not want to go, and this leverage was applied
to obtain a favourable report. Normally judges keep away from
the parties involved, but Bhutto used to invite Commission
members and had psychological influence over them. Justice
Hamood once told me that the Prime Minister had toid him that
he had received a complaint from Mr Muyjib-ur-Rehman with
tons of evidence against the Pakistan Army. This shows his clever
manoeuvres to influence the judges. Hamood also told me that,
although he was Chief Justice of Pakistan, his son, a major, was
not being cleared to leave for Bangladesh—the only instance of
a Bengali being retained in the Pakistan Army.

258 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
The second member, Justice Anwar-ul-Haq had a penchant
for politics. The third member, Justice Tufail Ali Abdul Rehman,
was every inch a judge. His attitude was unbiased and his conduct
dignified. The fourth member, Lt.-Gen. (Retd.) Altaf Qadir, was
an unfortunate choice for an assignment of such national
significance. He had never commanded any formation in East
Pakistan. He knew neither the terrain nor its effects on mobility
and military operations. He had never commanded troops in
war. In 1965 he was commanding 7 Division, but when war
became imminent he was removed from command. His thirst for
the bottle exceeded the purpose for which he was nominated.
He functioned with a fogged mind and lacked tactical knowledge
and practical experience of fighting conditions in East Pakistan.
At times, Justice Hamood-ur-Rehman in exasperation had to
correct his erratic knowledge, and at times the Commission
became hilarious due to his desultory questions and inarticulate
speech.
The civilian judges lacked expertise in military matters,
especially the knowledge of military and staff systems, operational
Strategy, tactics, standing orders, drills and procedures, and rules
and regulations, which greatly impeded their ability to grasp the
essence of military strategy and the impact of political aims on a
military mission. I was repeatedly asked by the HRC why I did
not move my troops to Burma. That shows their naivety: they had
not the slightest idea of what was involved in disengaging and
moving thousands of men several hundred miles under adverse
conditions, nor did they realize what would happen to the loyal
local population, West Pakistani civilians, and Biharis if we left. I
believe they wrote in their report that I should have moved all
my troops to Burma. If that was to be the case then the resolutions
in the Security Council offered a much better solution.
Apparently they were influenced by Fazal Mugeem’s chapter, ‘On
Preservation of Command’. Neither he nor the Commission knew
what that meant. Geopolitics, military strategy, and national aims
and objectives were not their field, hence this proposal. They
could not hope to understand the implications and problems
involved in moving to a foreign country. They gave no reason for
my going to Burma. I was fighting well, I had nullified all the
efforts of a far superior enemy to attain their objectives, and |
was tactically much better placed than the Indians.

HAMOOD-UR-REHMAN COMMISSION 
259
The Military Adviser’s questions were bookish, naive, and
theoretical, divorced from the reality of the events, thus they
failed to extract the facts bunied under the debris of intrigue and
deliberate concoction. Although the Commission consisted of
three judges, a legal and a military Adviser, the perennial
presence of 
a GHQ team, comprising Major-General Qureshi,
Colonel Sabir Qureshi, and others, was indeed baffling. Their
pompous manner and constant interference were not only
irritating, but they also reduced the HRC to an illegal Court of
Inquiry. They cross-examined witnesses at will, while we were
denied this fundamental right. Their constant interruptions were
demeaning and an affront to the Commission, who nevertheless
put up with this behaviour without a whimper of protest. They
were neither law officers nor members of the Commission, and it
is unclear what legal authority they had for cross-examining us. «
This imposition and infringement was not the only irregularity
carried out by GHQ. A parallel army committee, under Lt.-Gen.
Aftab, was appointed to carry out an inquiry into the military
operation, an act tantamount to contempt of court as the HRC
was already functioning. Its real aim was to sift the officers’
statements, adjudge their frame of mind and inclinations, and
then sort them into groups according to their mode of thinking.
Generally, only those found complying with GHQ’s policy were
allowed to appear before the HRC, and those found deviating
from official policy were browbeaten, intimidated, and offered
lucrative gains to change their statement. Those still reluctant
and adamant were phased out of the army unsung. What Tikka
was doing at GHQ to remould the opinion of the officers was
being done by Lt-Gen. Hameed Qazi, Commander 4 Corps, in
Lahore, who was urging people to speak against me—this was
told to me by Brigadier Asghar Hassan and Qadir.
My protests to Tikka against the invidious activities at GHQ and
Lahore proved futile—understandably, since Tikka could hardly
castigate or punish those indulging in nefarious activities initiated
at his own behest and patronage. Initiallv I refused to appear
before the Aftab Committee, but I was threatened with a court
martial so I gave my statement under protest. In my letter to Lt-
Gen. Aftab Ahmed, I made it clear that, since the matter was sub
judice, responsibility for any violation of law would be that of GHQ.

260 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
I asked for a legal ruling but it was never given. I understand
that a special cell was created under General Tikka Khan in
GHQ whose job was to evaluate evidence and frame the strategy
to be followed before the Commission. Colonel Sabir Qureshi
used to be given a list of questions to be asked of the witnesses
and was briefed personally by Tikka. 
'
Fazal Mugeem’s book amounted to contempt of court. When
a protest was lodged with Chief Justice Hamood, he remarked
nonchalantly, ‘Don’t waste my time’. When judges are apparently
hostile, it is reasonable to expect a miscarriage of justice. My
contempt of court application was not even considered because
Fazal Muqeem’s book was indirectly and psychologically
indoctrinating the witnesses and bending their thinking to the
official line.
The HRC started functioning while Eastern Garrison was still
stranded in POW camps, and the inquiry was confined to the war
in the East. The purpose was easily discernible, and became more
obvious as the statements of officers sacked from East Pakistan
on charges of corruption, inefficiency, poor battle performance,
looting, and arson were recorded, building the foundation on
which the future report was to be built. This was being done to
the detriment of those who fought and then became POWs, by
those who had proved themselves failures or corrupt and had
been sent back in disgrace. The HRC based its findings on the
statement of such discredited people.
The HRC invited Maj.-Gen. Qureshi to attend the proceedings
as an observer after my contempt of court application. Under
what law of the land did they allow him to sit in when none of us
were even allowed to listen to the witnesses or to cross-examine
them, particularly where our character and reputation was
involved? In addition, ADCs and stenographers were being asked
questions about their generals in their absence. This convinced
me that I should not expect any fair or just report from the
Commission.
The late Mr A. T. Chaudhri’s investigative reporting in Dawn
on 235 and 26 July 1986 is an eye-opener. I would therefore, like
to quote him rather than give my own observations here. Because
of their immense value, the articles are more fully reproduced at
Appendix 5 by kind courtesy of Dawn. They should set at rest the
occasional noises being made by vested interests.

HAMOOD-UR-REHMAN COMMISSION 
?61
...ronical as it is, the Commission is said to be discreetly silent—
apparently in deference to the wishes and in compliance with the
directives of the then Prime Minister on the political background of
the military debacle and the dismemberment of the largest Muslim
state on the map of the world.
Nor was Yahya put in the dock by the patriots who tried to build
‘New Pakistan’ on the ashes of the old. The question is why was the
chief villain spared. It is because his trial would have unmasked the
faceless actors (who shoved him from behind) and opened a
Pandora’s box.
His detractors preferred to suggest that Bhutto never dared issue
the report because he was so heavily implicated in the political
chicanery and blundering that preceded the country’s break-up. That
may be so considering the circumstances in which the Commission
worked, its final report may even have erred in Bhutto’s favour...It is
common knowledge that even the PPP cabinet was not allowed to
pore over the “Top Secret’ stuff. Only a cabinet sub-committee was
permitted to have a glimpse of what may be called a skeleton in the
PPP cupboard. A little detective hunt would reveal that a committee
of seven top notchers, i.e., J. A. Rahim, Khan Qayvum Khan (a
coalition partner), Hafeez Pirzada, General Tikka Khan, Aziz Ahmed,
Rafi Raza and Ghiasuddin is reported to have recommended that the
report should not be made public and that the political section does
not reflect the correct picture. /ts bias is definite. The report
conclusions are not borne out by the statements recorded before the
Commission nor was it qualified to use political vocabulary. Half of
the report is repetitious, the other half superfluous...the Commission
has indulged in character assassination. \t has not observed the norms of
court of inguiry either in whole or parts. (Emphases added.)
With no knowledge of technically sophisticated military
doctrines and their application in planning and conduct of war,
what value can one attach to this document? Our superior
judiciary is known for the best legal decisions, but something
goes wrong with it when political decisions are involved, as in the
case of Chief Justice Muneer’s decision on Ghulam Muhammad
and Maulvi Tamizuddin Khan’s case, or General Ziaul Haq’s Law
of Necessity, or the declaration of Yahya as usurper after his
resignation. The Chief Justice Hamood-ur-Rehman’s Report has
been called biased and inadequate, and it did not observe the
norms of a commission of inquiry. It should have been set aside
in accordance with Pakistan Army Act Rule 157 (6), (8), note 4,
www.balochlibrary COM
e

262 
JHE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
in which it is mandatory to allow the respondents to cross-
examine the witnesses where their character and reputation is
involved, Failure to do so should have resulted in the inquiry
being set aside. We were denied our legal right in that we were
not allowed to cross-examine.
As per its terms of reference, the Commission was to inquire
into the surrender and laying down of arms. Two days were spent
in scrutinizing various documents, including their timings, The
Commission announced in court that:
(1) The President issued orders for laying down arms on 14
December.
(2) I sent a signal back at 0910 hours 14 December 1991,
saying, ‘My decision to fight it out still stands’.
(3) In the evening General Hamid, COAS, insisted on laying
down arms. He would not listen to my pleas to continue
fighting and save us from the ignominy of surrender. He
was followed by Chief of Air Staff Air Marshal Rahim Khan
who issued orders to Air Cdre. Anamul Haq to obey Niazi.
(4) I, accompanied by Farman, went to the American
Consulate and sent a signal to COAS India requesting a
cease-fire.
(5) I received a signal from India accepting cease-fire but
demanding surrender also.
(6) [ repeated this signal verbatim to the President.
(7) During the night I received a signal from the President to
surrender.
Giving the above sequence themselves, the Commission said
that they accepted that the orders for surrender were given to
me by the President. That being the case, which was the main
plank of their inquiry, I was absolved of all blame. Also, they
could have recorded that acceptance of the Polish Resolution
would have saved the country from humiliation, and that Bhutto
was responsible for this catastrophe. Apparently either the
Commission wrote something unpalatable to Bhutto, or their
findings have been changed, or I was not blamed. However, the
findings are not known. My COS, Brigadier Bagir Siddiqui, later
met Chief Justice Hamood-ur-Rehman at a wedding party. Chief
Justice Hamood inquired what he was doing. He said that he was
IXX) 
L~ SD | 
Ir frr 
| 
) . » at 
SD ie ad 
@, 
°° 
Tr°xrTrnr}
/ 
A 
f 
Df 
\ 
A 
j 
| 
{ 
}
/ 
IN/ 
| 
Pa i 
i 
a 
7 
BB 
a 
BAY, 
| 
a
\ 
et(tVMVUuUAAvVJIoeYY 
BSS] 
SJ 
WM 
) 
a TAUS 
©
ed

HAMOOD-UR-REHMAN COMMISSION 
263
out of the army because of his report. Justice Hamood told him
that the Commission had not recommended any action against
him but had actually commended his role in the impossible war
in East Pakistan, That leaves no doubt that the original report
had been tampered with.
As far as 
| am concerned the HRC was set up by Bhutto to
appease the public and cover up the misdeeds of those in power.
That is why the Deputy Judge Advocate-General, GHQ,
considered the evidence ‘weak’. To me it was an illegal inquiry.
We were subject to the Pakistan Army Act and entitled to the
protection granted us therein. We had not committed any
offence, and all procedures laid down in the Pakistan Army Act
should have been complied with. The HRC ought to have
followed the procedure of a civil court, where the evidence is
produced, examined, and cross-examined by the other party.
That we were denied this right proves Mr A. T. Chaudhri’s
assertion that the norms of a court of inquiry were not observed
by the HRC, If they did not follow the norms, then their
conclusions are invalid and illegal.
It has been said that the HRC report was rehashed and
modified by forces stronger than the HRC. In the report, there
were eighteen pages about Bhutto’s activities. Bhutto was furious.
He is reported to have ordered all copies confiscated and the
pages containing unfavourable and unwelcome remarks replaced,
and to have summoned the Registrar to authenticate the replaced
pages. The Registrar, however, refused to endorse them, and an
angry Bhutto had him locked up in a room with no food and
water. It was only due to the direct intervention of Mr Hamood-
ur-Rehman, the Chief Justice, that he was released. This story was
told to Mr Habib-ur-Rehman by Justice Hamood.
It is interesting to note that after presentation of the report,
Bhutto is said to have asked the judges to hand over their personal
notes to him. The judges consulted each other and Justice Tufail
is said to have suggested that all notes and records should be
handed over otherwise they would get tangled up in the Official
Secrets Act. They handed over the records and their notes. The
FSF carried out a search of the Commission’s office and the
residences of HRC staff and others, and took away relevant papers.
That shows that even the judges were afraid of his tyranny.

