88 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
events at a strategical level and thus control the situation to
achieve the required results. Any action contrary to the overall
plan could unhinge the links, letting loose a chain of actions and
reactions and jeopardizing the plan. A theatre commander has
the independence to use his initiative to implement his part of
the plan in fulfilment of the government mission, but lacks the
authority to violate the requirements and restrictions laid down
by the High Command or the Government.
Deception
Deception means doing something that the enemy does not
expect and is not prepared for, something that will surprise him
and disarm him morally. Deception leads to surprise. Surprise is
the salt that flavours the battle. Surprise is the principle of war.
To mislead the enemy about one’s intentions is the constant
endeavour of every commander, especially one who suffers from
a paucity of troops, and acute imbalances in equipment,
weaponry, and resources, and thus has to resort to planting
decoys, playing bluffs, feigning moves, and simulating activity to
compensate for the shortages of his resources and the inadequacy
of his troops. By inducing activity we hope to mislead the
opposing commander, influence his opinion by planted
information, and force him to make erratic decisions to deal
with the ruses, unaware -of the implications and consequences
which will later unfold in the course of the battle.
Our intelligence machinery had come to a standstill. Being a
small army we had to depend more on good training, good
leadership, strict discipline, courage, and various unconventional!
and unorthodox concepts to make up for our deficiencies in
numbers and weapons. We had to resort to improvisation on a
large scale to offset the lack of funds and equipment, and at the
same time to fox the enemy about our strength. Here we had to
practise deception, for which the co-operation of the local
Bengalis was a must. Luckily I had some old colleagues and some
honourable civilians who wanted to see that Pakistan remained
united, and who agreed to help me in this difficult job. For
. instance, Major-General Jamshed, Commander, East Pakistan
Civil Armed Forces (EPCAF), was located in Dhaka, so when I
i 
|
ia, y oO) 4eX 
7
Bw 
"4
Ji 
UW
| 
-¢
a 
" 
|
BE |
|
<
\
I

DEPLOYMENT OF ENEMY AND OWN FORCES
SILIGURI 
XK a
a f 
nS
f 
an 
Xx
; 
| 
23 
101. 
COMN ZONE
>< I20 
\ 
:
TT 
RANGPUR 
TURA 
312
> 
XX
=
BALURGHAT 
HiL LONG
HILLI 
:
i 
5 
[202 (A) 
8
eS 
| 
3(A) 
oy
fv 
@,,BOGRA \) a: a4 
SYLHET res
S<] 
MY MEN SINGH 
'
J Bd }
16
RAJSHAHI b NATOR 
MAULVI BAZAR =
x
* 
x
7
{ 
PABNA 
A he
ah 
571 
4 
r
PLASSE 
@/AGARTA
KUSHTIA 
-AKHORA 
IV
EASTER 
> 
ls 
Dk 
XX ceTM
\
$ 
FARIDPUR 
(A)
Ex 7 
$< | *23 
°
> 
a 
@,comiLLa 
? 
\
RRISHNAG A , 
RENE
n7 5%} 
{ 
:
CHANDPUR 
us 
(
KJ
@ 
KHULNA 
. 
a
= <= paren 
= . 91(A) =
. 
ne
@ut*
CHITTAG 
ONG
J 
|
\
www.balochlibrary.com

OPERATIONAL PLAN 
89
went out to visit troops I took him along with me. All mistook
him for the Divisional Commander of the Fourth Division.
In my office I had four miniature flags on a table covered with
a thin cloth, but their poles protruded and could be counted.
Similarly the maps in my office were covered with thin cloth but
the boundaries of four army divisions covering four civil divisions
could be seen. This conformed to a logical distribution of
command and troops. The Bengali officers and civilians helping
us were briefed. They gave out that we had four Divisions in East
Pakistan and they did this job efficiently. Therefore, the Indian 
—
Army launched its invasion of East Pakistan on the relative
strength of four divisions of the Pakistan Army. The effectiveness
of our deception plan can be gauged by the admissions of certain
senior Indian commanders, whose conversations with me after
the cessation of hostilities bear testimony to the success of the
plan. Major-General Sukhwant Singh of the Indian Army, in his
book The Liberation of Bangladesh, gives the strength of Pakistan
Eastern Garrison as four divisions. According to him, Indian
Intelligence was confused about our real strength. They thought
Dhaka was held by an entire division. 36 ad hoc Division, which
we had raised under General Jamshed, in fact had only two
regular battalions, but since the Indian Army thought it was a
full-fledged division, the advance of the leading Indian troops
was cautious and there was no rush, no urgency or desire to
move at speed, even along the northern, obstacle-free route
towards Dhaka,
Brigadier Shah Beg (later Major-General), who commanded a
Mukti Bahini Brigade during the war, came to me after the
surrender ceremony, introduced himself, and said that he would
be grateful if I cleared his doubts about the number of troops I
lad in East Pakistan. ‘How many divisions did you have here,
Sir?’ I said, ‘Three.’ He asked, ‘Did you not have four? What was
the job of General Jamshed?’ I told him that he was Commander,
EPCAF and was acting as my Second-in-Command. ‘Was not
EPCAF the command of a Brigadier?’ he asked. ‘You are correct,
it used to be, but when Brigadier Nisar was posted out of EPCAF,
I got General Jamshed posted in his place. General Jamshed was
commanding our fourth Division, which was an ad hoc Division
and had only one ad hoc brigade of only two battalions of regular
troops fighting in area Mymensingh.’ He looked a bit perplexed,

90 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
so I changed the subject and said, ‘I thought vou were a Sikh.’
“You are right, [ am a Sikh, but as I had volunteered to come to
Dhaka to find out about the strength of troops, I trimmed my
beard and hair. I was brought to Dhaka by the Bengalis, dressed
as a Bengali. I stayed for two days and moved about in a rickshaw,
but did not enter the cantonment area.’ I asked, ‘What did you
find out?’ “There was a lot of military activity which gave me the
impression that Dhaka was full of troops. The Bengalis were very
reluctant to move about with me, and were scared to enter the
cantonment or military positions, so I could not make any
assessment about the number of troops in Dhaka.’ I said, ‘When
did you come to Dhaka?’ He said, ‘In early November 1971.’
Brigadier Kler, (later Major-General), who commanded an
Indian brigade in Mymensingh sector, came to me a couple of
days after the surrender and asked more or less the same
questions asked by Brig. Shah Beg Singh. I said, ‘I have a
question. You had plenty of troops and resources, air supremacy,
lots of tanks and tracked vehicles, support of the Mukti Bahini
and the locals, in other words, you had shortage of nothing but
abundance of everything. You had deployed more or less half of
the armed forces of India in East Pakistan, then why did you not
make a dash for Dhaka from any one direction? All the routes
lead to Dhaka, particularly the north which was obstacle-free
from the very outset. You landed troops behind my troops in
Sylhet and Kushtia areas where you supplied them by air. Then
you dropped your para brigade trump card in Tangail and air-
bridged Meghna River at two places by helicopter in Dhaka
sector, but you achieved nothing of any significance. You could
not block the withdrawal of Brigadier Qadir’s brigade to Dhaka
from Mymensingh and Saadullah’s brigade to Bhairab Bazar from
Ashugang. You took no prisoners, nor could you clinch any
decision in any area. Your separated columns could not link up,
which ts not only surprising but astonishing. Your gains on the
whole are not at all commensurate with the losses suffered and
resources employed here in East Pakistan, particularly in Dhaka
sector. In spite of having everything in your favour you got
bogged down on the entire front near the border and stayed
there for three weeks. In Dhaka sector, things got so much mixed
up that your Army Commander was in a state of perpetual
confusion. If the surrender orders had not come, the Indian
1 
e@
O ( i 
am |
www.balochlibrary.con
r 5) r 
las
ATY . CON

OPERATIONAL PLAN 
9g]
Army would have met the same fate as the Americans in Vietnam
and the French in Algeria.”
Kler said, “Yo tell you the truth, our senior officers were very
cautious because we had been confronting your troops since July
1971. The fight put up by the Pakistani soldiers showed that they
were not only brave but tough and well-versed in their profession
and had the will to fight. They put up a stiff resistance all along
and we had to pay a heavy price for our advance into East
Pakistan. Heavy casualties are the main cause of our cautious
move. As for Dhaka, we were sure that the fight for Dhaka would
be tough. It was called the Tiger’s Den. We had experience of
attacking Kamalpur and Jamalpur, sort of outposts, where your
troops fought tooth and nail to retain their positions and stop us
overrunning Dhaka, which was the nerve centre of everything in
East Pakistan, in addition to being the location of your HQ. How
could we think that it would be an easy affair? At the same time
we were under the impression you had a full division in Dhaka
sector and the bulk of the division was deployed for the defence
of Dhaka. All our senior officers had a high opinion of you as a
fighting general, and Dhaka’s defence being under your personal
command, they did not want to contact your defences without
proper preparations.’
All this was confirmed by Lieutenant-General Sagat Singh,
General Officer Commanding 4 Indian Corps, but in a different
way. He asked, ‘In what strength were you holding Dhaka
Fortress?’ I told him I had about 30,000 troops deployed and
more were trickling in. Over and above these I had about 2,000
more men consisting of retired army and police personnel whom
we had armed and mixed with our troops. Many West Pakistani
and Bihari civilians had also joined us. We were quite a large,
well-knit force which had sworn to fight till the end. The brigade
at Bhairab Bazar and the elements of HQ 36 ad hoc Division at
Narayanganj, which added a lot of strength, mobility, and
flexibility to Dhaka Garrison, are not included in this summary.
Every officer had a soldier batman, and there were many officers
in this area.
On the whole, Dhaka was full of troops. There were three
Major-Generals, one Air Commodore, two I.G. Police, eight
Brigadiers, and several Colonels and Lieutenant-Colonels, As a
matter of fact, the Indian Army had to tackle three fortresses
VW/ W/ W/ r) qn Tea
VV 
VV 
VV 
UA
j_a~
ww
~~{ J
X 
6
=

92 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
simultaneously, i.e., Dhaka, Narayanganj, and Bhairab Bazar,
which needed almost the whole of 4 Corps only to contain them.
Similarly, due to the location of Narayanganj and the obstacles
on our flanks, Dhaka could not be outflanked, bypassed, or
surrounded. The only side the Indians could attack Dhaka from
was the north. Even there Bhairab Brigade was right behind them.
The Indian Army was in a sort of snare here. They were caught
between the devil and the deep blue sea. I still had enough
weapons to arm thousands of people.
General Sagat Singh said, ‘I knew that Dhaka was well
defended, and the falling back of Mymensingh Brigade to Dhaka,
Ashuganj Brigade to Bhairab Bazar, and HQ 39 Division and
some of its troops to Narayanganj, added a 
lot of strength to
Dhaka Fortress. It also added to your mobility, but our
movements were restricted mainly to the northern side due to
the nature of the ground, in spite of air-bridging of Meghna. |
told General Arora, who was very keen to capture Dhaka, that it
needed a proper recce for which we required aerial photos of
the defensive lay-out. Proper planning and a big force would be
needed to attack Dhaka, and before we could approach the
enemy, their defence would have to be softened up through
intense shelling, for which we would need medium and heavy
artillery regiments and aerial bombardment. Any advance in a
hurry, without medium and heavy guns and tanks, would have
been suicidal. So I asked for seven days for preparation and
assembly of my troops. I had my helicopters located at Agartala.
But now due to the location of Bhairab Bazar we had to shift our
landing area away from there. We could not bring tanks and
artillery, as the Bhairab Brigade was with you. I doubted if even
in seven days we could gather enough resources to tackle the
Dhaka defence. Bhairab Bazar and Narayanganj positions had
made our task most difficult.’
The discussions and questions of all senior Indian officers
proved that our deception about our strength and our ploys to
fix and fox the Indian Army had worked. They took it for granted
that | had four full-fledged Divisions and not three truncated
Divisions in East Pakistan; they were convinced that one army
Division was deployed in every civil division of East Pakistan, so
their invasion plan was based on my four divisions and they did
not make a beeline for Dhaka at the very outset, which they

OPERATIONAL PLAN 
93
would have done had they known my real strength and
deployment. For the same reason, after getting a bloody nose in
Kushtia, the Indian Army did not rush to Faridpur either,
These measures proved fatal for quite a few Indian generals,
particularly for General Arora, the Commander of Indian Forces
in East Pakistan, because in spite of all the facilities, conducive
circumstances, and tilting advantages, he could not achieve any
of his given tasks in nine long months on the frontage of three
thousands miles.
General Arora’s overall superiority of at least ten to one in
everything created the most conducive circumstances ever
available to any commanding General in the history of warfare.
He had air supremacy, giving him the options of aerial
envelopment, air bridging, air transport, and unobstructed air
supply, thanks to our lack of aircraft, anti-aircraft resources, long-
range artillery and tanks; he had command of the seas, free run
of the rivers, capability of landing and maintaining troops by
naval vessels along seashores and river banks on our flanks and
rear unopposed; and he had a carrying capability of about
brigade-strength groups in their APCs and on tanks in all the
sectors. Indian tanks had night vision devices and were
amphibious, whereas the shell of our light tanks was not effective
against Indian tanks. They also had enough long-range artillery
to keep my short-range guns under constant fire, thus reducing
fire support to the infantry considerably. Last but not least, they
had Russian experts to train and organize guerrillas, Russians to
handle their sophisticated weapons on the battlefield, and
hundreds of thousands of Bengalis (Mukti Bahini and the Bengali
dissidents) to help the Indian Army. Still General Arora could
not succeed militarily. We were manoeuvred into a political defeat
by Bhutto. Genera] Arora was retired immediately after the war
and not given any other job.
Visits
I had finalized the operational plan and it was kept constantly
under review. In the meantime, I had the honour of many visits
by prominent politicians of Pakistan whose advice was useful to
me. Although as Martial Law Administrator I had come into
halnachti
ae 
@ 
-TM® 
6 > ' 
I» fr 
» 
| 
| r~ 
FT? 
Oo) 
1 ~*~ 
> 
4
A, 
rH 
TC) 
PITT).

94 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
contact with the politicians in Lahore, their visits to East Pakistan
were really inspiring. 
| was most impressed by Maulana Mufti
Mahmood’s deep insight into the whole affair. He maintained
that force would be counter-productive, and that the popular
movement could not be suppressed for long. He felt that, since
normalcy had been achieved to a great extent, the time was ripe
for a general amnesty and for a serious effort to find a political
solution—the problem was basically political and Mujib had not
declared unilateral independence or waged a war. The
Government of Bangladesh in exile in India was a political ploy
to force a political solution. He was of the view that the majority
party should be allowed to form the government because they
were Pakistanis, and according to the Legal Framework Order
they must be given their due rights. Any deprivation of their
political rights for a longer period would result in the complete
loss of East Pakistan, as the people felt that they were being
subjugated and therefore must obtain independence, According
to him me was running out, and he felt that Yahya and Bhutto
were not interested in keeping Pakistan intact. How right he was.
Other regular visitors included Mr Fazlul Qader Chaudhry,
former Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr Abdul Saboor
Khan, Mr Siraj-ul-Haq, and Maulvi Farid Ahmed. They were most
loyal Pakistanis who loved the country and wanted to keep it
united, They insisted on handing over power to the elected
representatives and starting a political process immediately.
Unfortunately Maulvi Farid Ahmed was killed by Mukti Bahini.
Mr Siraj-ul-Hag, being 
a member of Dr Malik’s cabinet, was
luckier. Mr Fazlul Qader Chaudhry was taken prisoner by the
Indian Army while trying to escape from Chittagong. Many East
Pakistani leaders were slain. The worst sufferers were the ethnic
Biharis, who remained loyal till the end.
On his return from Rawalpindi in September 1971 after the
aforementioned briefing, my Chief of Staff, Brigadier Bagir, told
me that he had heard from a reliable source that a decision had
been taken at the highest level that the army in East Pakistan was
to be made a scapegoat, and the junta had decided to give up
Kast Pakistan, There were rumours in political circles that Yahya
and Bhutto had taken vital decisions at Larkana. However, the
details were not available. It was said that they had decided to get
, » , @ ee la» 
OP 
(%» Lrrwa
Y 
o 
) 
oY, 
CO)TYT)
) 
@ &

OPERATIONAL PLAN 
Q5
rid of East Pakistan, and had directed M. M. Ahmad to prepare
plans for the implementation of their decision.
When General Hamid, COAS, visited us in October, I told
him what Brigadier Bagir had told me, but he denied it.
Apparently he was not telling the truth, as later events proved
the rumour to be correct.
Change-over of the Governor
When Dr Malik took over as Governor from General Tikka Khan,
I was called by the President and told that I was to obey the
Governor—all instructions emanating from him were to be taken
as if emanating from the President.
I took over as Martial Law Administrator in September 1971
in addition to my duties as Commander Eastern Command. The
relationship between the administration and the public was
gradually changing for the better. The appointment of a civilian
Governor and ministers was well received as a positive step
towards a political setthkement. However, the ministers were not
effective at all because of a lack of public following, and their
induction did not improve the situation. They would not move
without army escort and helicopters. The Urdu-speaking element
was also not happy about the non-inclusion of their
representatives in the cabinet. The population still did not have
confidence in the civil administration. The lower functionaries
were more of a hindrance than a help to the public.
By-Elections
The announcement of the by-election schedule led to some
increase in activity, but only among the rightists and a few loyal
Bengalis. Political activity so far had remained confined to
selected groups. This was due to the fact that the political parties
who were then trying to gain ground with the public had earlier
received a serious setback in the general elections. Furthermore,
on account of the insurgency, channels of political communi-
cation had remained suspended for a long time. With the
announcement of by-elections, the leaders of the PPP, Jamaat-i-
| 
| 
~ 
—_ - 1 - kK TY 
@ 
© 
ad
WWW .DaALOCIUIDI daly COLL

96 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Islami, and Muslim League joined hands and tried to reopen
their credits. Mr Bhutto wanted sixty-five seats for his party to
become an all-Pakistan party, but he was offered twenty-two seats
because of the local problems.
We warned GHQ that a lot of trouble could be expected
during the pre-election period. Disaffected elements tried to
organize public resistance and a boycott of the elections by
intimidating political leaders and workers through threats and
physical attacks. GHQ was told that unless 10,000 troops
earmarked for East Pakistan were sent on time, it would not be
possible to ensure the security of the elections because the Army
was fully deployed for the counter-insurgency operations.
Amnesty
I had been recommending amnesty since May. With the gradual
improvement in the situation, there were reports that some of
the rebels wanted to come back. | felt that a political solution
was the need of the hour and I had briefed COAS Gen. Hamid
on his visit in May. Our recommendation for amnesty took far
too long to implement, and when it was declared, it was partial.
Thus it did not produce the desired results. Refugees were
prevented by India from coming back, and barely 240 rebels
surrendered during September 1971.
Intelligence
Untl March 1971, the intelligence organization was mostly
manned by the Bengalis. With the military action all these
agencies disintegrated because most of the personnel defected
in favour of the Awami League. We never really succeeded in
establishing an intelligence set-up which could be helpful to us.
Some arrangements were made but there were a lot of handicaps
due to language difficulties and the hostility of the population.
The local civil agencies, like DIB and SIB, were of no value to us.
They repeated whatever appeared in the newspapers or whatever
was issued as a part of our propaganda campaign. Even GHQ_
(MI Dte) put us off by showing a threat of three to four divisions

