CHAPTER 6
THE MUKTI BAHINI AND OUR
CIVIL ARMED FORCES
Mukti Bahini
As a reaction to the military action ordered on 25 March 1971,
all East Pakistan Police, East Pakistan Rifles, Ansars and Fast
Bengal Regiment battalions, and East Pakistani members of some
of the regular units of the Army, Navy, and Air Force rose in
revolt against the Government. These elements eventually formed
the nucleus for Mukti Bahini, including its leadership.
The strength of the Bengali armed forces which rebelled after
25 March 1971 was 162,000. The number of civilians trained by
the Russians and the Indians (in stages) was about 125,000. Thus
the total number of Bengalis in Mukti Bahini was 287,500. Add
the 50,000 personnel of the Indian Army who joined them in the
garb of Muktis, and the total swells to a formidable number.
Helping their activities were thousands of armed Bengali
dissidents. Before the Indians invaded East Pakistan on 21
November, we had been fighting, and keeping at bay and out of
East Pakistan, this force for eight months. The Mukti guerrillas
joined the Indian Army when they invaded East Pakistan.
During the period of political crisis the Awami League and
other leftist organizations had secretly organized their
underground militant wings and trained them in the use of small-
arms and terror tactics. Students, intellectuals, and ex-soldiers
joined such organizations in large numbers. They formed the
nucleus for leadership and for advanced technical and special
insurgency operations. On 1] April 1971 all these elements were
put together and a separate force under the name of Mukti
Bahini was formally created. On 14 April 1971 Colonel M. A. G.
Osmany (Retd.) was appointed its so-called C.-in-C.

70 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Training
By May 1971 about fifty per cent of the insurgents had been
disarmed. The rest of them had managed to cross over to their
pre-planned sanctuaries. The Indians had set up some fifty-nine
camps along the border where the rebels were trained and
equipped. Their training programme included indoctrination and
motivation. It was such a vast organization that the Indians had
appointed a Major-General to organize and co-ordinate the
training and indoctrination activities. Basic military training,
including the handling of weapons, was imparted in these camps,
but the main emphasis was on commando training and the use of
explosives, mines, grenades, etc., for sabotage and terror tactics.
Political leaders, mostly MNAs/MPAs, and professors and
teachers, were mobilized to motivate the trainees and for counter-
propaganda measures. They also carried out recruitment drives.
Political guidance was thus available within the country, and all
necessary direction to the rebels in the interior was being
provided locally in a meticulously-organized system.
In order to paralyse river communications, special attention
was paid by the Indians to under-water training. Initial screening
of prospective trainees was carried out by Indian naval officers,
then they were despatched to special under-water training camps.
About 300 rebels were flown from Agartala to Cochin for training
as under-water saboteurs. It was also known that about 300 frogmen
were trained at Plassey, on the Bhairathi River in West Bengal,
under the supervision of instructors from the Indian Navy and
some defected Pakistan Navy submariners and SSG frogmen.
The trainees were divided into three categories, keeping in
view their educational background ana suitabiniy, and training
was imparted to them accordingly:
Science Graduates: Technical training was given to them for two
months.
Undergraduates: They received training in the use of small arms,
mortars, rocket launchers. Instruction in map-reading and
commando tactics was also given.
Non-matriculates: They were trained as saboteurs. They received 
|
training in the use of various types of explosives, mines, and
grenades, and also in blowing up bridges, culverts, and other
vital installations.
4a?
NE oo 
OAT 
AY 
A
ry 
?
/ 
\ 
| 
op
YV 
VWUILIit

THE MUKTI BAHINI AND OUR CIVIL ARMED FORCES 
fie:
Artillery and signals training was imparted at special centres
established at Lucknow and Dehra Dun. It was also reported that
an eight-member team of Russian experts was imparting guernila
training to the rebels in India.
Special officer commission was granted to selected students to
establish a command structure within the rebels. These young
officers were required to undergo three months’ training under
Indian Army arrangements. It was reported that about 600 such
-young officers were trained at the Indian Military Academy,
Dehra Dun.
Organization
The rebels were generally called FF, i.e., Freedom Fighters. They
were organized into regular units, each having a strength of 500.
These units were known as SBR, Le., Swadhin (Independent?
Bengal Regiments. The remnants of the rehe! Fast Bengal
Regiment and East Pakistan Rifles with some rebel students were
re-organized into battalions. The substitutes for their units in
West Pakistan were also raised with rebel East Pakistan personnel
and students. It was reported that the Indian Army had raised
two brigades of rebels at Tura, each having a strength of about
3,000 men. They were, of course, organized, trained, and
equipped by the Indian Army. 
A women’s wing of Mukti Bahini
was also established. Their organization became known but no
special achievement was reported. Their activities mostly served
propaganda purposes for foreign correspondents.
The entire area had been divided into eight sectors. The overall
control and operational co-ordination of these sectors initially
rested with the Indian Border Security Force (BSF) but later it
was taken over by the Indian Army. Each Bengali Brigade was
under the overall command of an Indian Brigadier of the regular
army. Brig. Shah Beg Singh and Brig. Jagjit Singh, with their
headquarters at Agartala and Tura respectively, exercised overall
command over the Brigades and sectors located in their area.
The rebels organized two other forces known as | Poufan Bahini
(Storm Tro ops) and. Beman Bahini (Bangladesh Air Force). The
Indians were reported to be constructing an airfield for the rebels
in Betai area with financial and technical .assistance from the
Russians. Two planes with Bangladesh markings were spotted in

fe 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
close proximity of the borders. They started operating in the
interior when PAF was grounded on Dhaka airfield after it was
rendered out of action.
Strength
By the end of June, approximately 30,000 rebels had been trained
hurriedly and in a slipshod manner. They were mainly trained in
the handling of small-arms, grenades, missiles, and explosives,
and in sabotage activities. By November 1971, we estimated that
about 70,000 had already been trained and about 30,000 were
undergoing training in various camps.
A large 
number of tebels deserted from the training camps in
India and crossed back to East Pakistan. They stayed inactive in
their homes but were regarded as passive miscreants. They also
joined the Mukti Bahini when the Indian Army started advancing
towards East Pakistan.
Weapons and Equipment
The rebels were equipped by the Indian Army with their obsolete
weapons and also with some of those in current use. They were
also busy procuring weapons and ammunition by their own efforts
from foreign sources sympathetic to them such as Israel, USSR,
Belgium, and Czechoslovakia, and from the junk available in the
Far Eastern markets like Hong Kong. Limpet mines of Russian
origin were captured from rebel frogmen by our troops.
Some American arms were also recovered from the rebels. An
American 57 mm RR was captured at Chittagong. Two more
such RRs of American origin had been recovered earlier at
Chuagacha in Jessore sector during infiltration. It was reported
that, on Indian instance, Bangladeshi leaders approached Israel,
and possibly Japan, for procurement of heavy weapons, including
anti-air missiles, worth about 2.5 million dollars, There were
reports that Israel had agreed to supply heavy weapons worth two
million dollars to Bangladesh within a period of two months.
Communications
The Indians provided some wireless sets and other signals
equipment to the rebels out of their obsolete stock. To meet the
LL. 
1.Ahkd1514
UU WW YNALOCIIIIUDULAL Y UULLI
Vv 
v 
v 
v 
v 
v 
@ 
_/7 
GSA 
_ 
y 
ZF a 
&

2. 
DEPLOYMENT OF MUKTI BAHINI
SILIGURI
C N.
OOCH BEHAR
KISHANGANS ? Xo
ay 
Ss. ? o 
Oo
RAYGAN J or 
Xe 
O ”
: 
“
THAKURGAON 
‘J
of
}.. 
RANGPUR 
Z_
\ DINAJPUR 
© 
ywra 
| 
|
‘_— . 
)
i 
(° 
a
Cerise 
Oy wi 
“2.0 6 0 
©
i 
_—— a 6’
oO 
. 
— 
a
MALDA 
oO 
=.
su
SYLHET 
:
MY MENSINGH 
<0
Q 
onTM fo
tn
TANGAIL 
6 
laut Oo 
GC)
‘y 
;
X 
pro)
BERHAMPORE 04 
i 
x i x 
0
oa 
DHAKA 
i
LASSEY Or 
( Ee a. ok
C 
°? 
y 
\ Ce, > -
oY 
JESSORE
( 
in \ a 
:
o+ 
KHULNA
; 
SATKHIRA
CALCUTTA 
( 
9 
D 
\
\ 
oo 9) 
HITTAG ONG 
|
www.balochlibrary.com

THE MUKTI BAHINI AND OUR CIVIL ARMED FORGES 
73
specific needs of guerrilla activities, some new portable
transistorized equipment of Japanese origin was also used by the
rebels. However, they mainly depended upon the Indian Army
for signals equipment, especially for maintenance and repairs.
New Guerrilla Tactics
a. Guerrilla Infiltration: The infiltration of rebels was always
covered by intense Indian shelling. The infiltrators moved in two
groups—the ‘Rifle Group’ and the ‘Explosives Group’. The Rifle
Group advanced ahead of the Explosives Group in order to
provide early warning and protection, and to cover the move-
ment of the follow-up group. Besides this, the Rifle Group was
assigned the task of attracting and luring in the troops while the
Explosives Group completed the mission and pulled back safely.
Experienced guides from local areas of operation were made
available to each group.
b. Guerrilla Activities: The area under each police station was.
marked as an operational sub-sector and was further divided into
four parts. The guerrilla action was launched in one part only
while the remaining three parts were utilized for shelters and
hide-outs.
Trained rebel! students were sent to carry out guerrilla
operations in the interior while regular forces, ex-EBR, and EPR
were mostly employed on the border following conventional
tactics.
Rebels and miscreants were also dissuading government
officials, farmers, and labourers from work by force and
persuasion, in order to cripple the economy.
By the month of October, the rebels had mostly completed
their training under the Indian Army and had been well
equipped by them. With the provision of some command
structure, they were better organized. By then they were in a
position to undertake unconventional and limited conventional
operations. Their main weakness lay in logistics and fire support.
This deficiency was to a great extent made up by Indian Army
support. The rebels were forced to occupy the BOPs which were
fully prepared for defence and had full artillery mortar fire
support from across the border.
| 
7] 
@
Ir flrn 
< 
~> 42) 
42
a) oo 
| 
|| 
,riaro rit)
\ 
IN 
| 
} 
| 
} 
4
FJ 
WwWAAAAULS/ A GU
LL. no 
|
6 
}
D1
( 
I

74 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN 
a
%
xi
The hard core of rebels consisted of highly-educated ang
politically well-motivated individuals. With the passage of time,
and with the active support of the Indians, their morale became
high. Their attitude hardened day by day and they became die.
hards. The Mukti Bahini, drawing inspiration and leadership
from them, was ready for protracted operations with Indian
support. This force proved the greatest asset to the Indian Army
in intelligence work, and rendered extremely valuable assistance
to them in all spheres of fighting and in logistic support.
c. Support to the Indian Army: The greatest advantage to the Indian
Army was the active support of the majority of the Bengali
population in the area of their operation. This, quite naturally,
proved to be our biggest set-back. The local Bengali population
provided valuable intelligence to the Indian Army which they
would otherwise have had to obtain by sending out patrols and
paying a high price in blood. The Muktis readily provided labour
and logistic facilities and guided them on to our positions. They
supplied early information to the enemy about the movements
of our troops and helped them in laying ambushes. With the
active support and guidance of the locals, the Indian commanders,
down to the platoon commander level were reported to have
reconnoitred their areas of operations and fully rehearsed the
tasks assigned to them. The locals provided labour for the
construction of bridges, culverts, and roads. They also made
available country boats, motor launches, bullock carts, cycle
rickshaws, and even porters for the movement of men and
material. This gave speed and mobility to the enemy. 
|
To quote the author of The Liberation War, ‘...with the entire
population on its side, the Indian army did not have to worry
about its capacity to move cross country or intelligence about
Pakistan which will enable quick move.’ Bereft of local support,
the Indian Army would have been fighting on the borders.
If the Indians and Russians had not helped the Bengalis they
would have never dared to revolt against the centre. If the
Bengalis and Russians had not helped the Indians they would
have never dared to cross into Pakistan. Similarly if | had been
allowed to enter India in pursuit of beaten retreating guerillas,
things would have been nipped in the bud. India would have’
been cut to size, the Bengalis taught a lesson, Pakistan remained
united, and the Pakistan Army remained unbeaten.

THE MUKTI BAHINI AND OUR CIVIL ARMED FORCES 
75
In the early stages of operations, the Indian Press published
exaggerated and fabricated stories about rebel successes, but in
actual war, they tried to play down the achievements of Mukti
Bahini and the support this force gave to the Indian Army in all
spheres of the war. This was an attempt to belittle the role of
Mukti Bahini in order to glorify the Indian Army and give all the
credit to Indian troops.
Although the Indian Government denied the induction of its
regular troops in the guise of Mukti Bahini, there were many
incidents, like the explosion at the Hotel Intercontinental and
the destruction of bridges, which proved their active involvement.
This was confirmed by some of the stories we read in the Indian
Press as POWs and in some of the books published there. Some
of the Indian leaders also admitted extensive use of their trained
troops as Mukti Bahini for laying mines, for acts of sabotage, and
for attacks on loyal East Pakistanis before the open war.
The first and most authentic evidence of Mrs Gandhi's
imperial designs and Machiavellian tactics in breaking up
Pakistan came from Morarji Desai, a respected colleague of her
father, Jawaharlal Nehru and a former Deputy Prime Minister
and later Prime Minister. Desai confirmed that the 1971 war with
Pakistan was willed and provoked by Mrs Gandhi. Desai further
disclosed that Mrs Gandhi despatched to East Pakistan thousands
and thousands of Indian soldiers out of uniform, disguised as
Mukti Bahini, and that five thousand of them died in the
enterprise between April and December 1971, According to
Desai, most of the Mukti Bahini were in fact Indian soldiers,
which is why the Chief of Staff went to Mrs Gandhi and said:
‘This can’t go on, it is impermissible to let them die this way. You
must either send them to their barracks or let them engage in a
proper war with Pakistan.’
Civil Armed Forces
The East Pakistan Civil 
Armed Forces (EPCAF) 
rere
The EPCAF was re-raised after the March action. Its strength was
13,000, consisting of personnel drawn mainly.from West Pakistan
and the non-Bengali population in East Pakistan. They were

=
76 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
handicapped by a serious shortage of weapons, equipment, and
training facilities. They did, however, do useful work in manning
BOPs at the border and carrying out operations against the
Muktis in the interior despite heavy odds. They manned certain
positions in depth also. They gave a good account of themselves
where they had the back-up support of the Army, but they could
not stand against the enemy in positions which they occupied
independently. They abandoned their positions on first contact
with the Indian Army in such situations.
Vulnerable Points Force (VPF)
This force, with a strength of 3,000 (twenty-two companies), was
meant to provide protection to the most important VPs such as
road and rail bridges, gas and power installations, communications
centres, etc. Out of twenty-two companies only eight consisted
wholly of ex-servicemen. Hence these were deployed immediately
on arrival. The remaining fourteen companies consisted mostly of
untrained direct-entry recruits. This posed the serious problem of
their training, causing delay in their deployment. They were not
expected to be effective before February 1972.
Industrial Security Force (ISF)
This force had an organization and strength similar to the VPF
and consisted of personnel recruited mostly from West Pakistan.
They were assigned the specific responsibility of giving protection
to the most vital vulnerable points such as factories and industrial
areas. Out of the total strength of twenty-two companies, eight
consisted wholly of ex-servicemen. We could, therefore deploy
them immediately on their arrival in East Pakistan. The remaining
fourteen companies consisted mostly of raw and untrained direct-
entry recruits. Their training likewise posed a serious problem,
and their services could not be utilized straight away. The earliest
they could be usefully deployed was February 1972.
EPCAF Special Force
A EPCAF Special Force with a maximum strength of 10,000 men
was being raised. This force was intended to reinforce EPCAF in
y 
. WS | 
iTM fr» 
| 
> 
| - 
| - ea a 
& ad 4q 7 
( “> a = 
> “a \
} 
ne 
q 
Vf 
x 
| 
\ 
/ 
{ 
@ 
) 
|
VUAaAlLOUCITIILDIdaL 
Y 
COL!
» 
WwW 
y,

THE MUKTI BAHINI AND OUR CIVIL ARMED FORCES 
77
Fast Pakistan, but the outbreak of hostilities prevented it from
being concentrated in East Pakistan.
_ 
Police
The entire police force available in the province was composed
of 16.500 men of the Old East Pakistan Police; 11,500 men of the
New East Pakistan Police, and 5,000 men of the West Pakistan
Police.
Old East Pakistan Police: This force consisted mostly of personnel
of the old East Pakistan Police, and saw action on 25 March 1971.
Due to large-scale desertions and defections at the onset of the
military action, the left-over elements were demoralized and
ineffective. Initially they had to be disarmed, but later they were
augmented by new inductions and transfers from the West Pakisfan
Police. They were mostly employed to man the thanas in mufassal
areas. They usually remained inactive and showed hesitation in
dealing with the rebels. They were, therefore, practically ineffective
and not of much use to the administration or the army. They were
unreliable and changed loyalties according to the situation. Some
of them were reported to be in league with the rebels. They
deserted their posts whenever it suited them.
New East Pakistan Police: To make up the deficiencies caused
by large-scale desertions and defections, about 11,500 newly
recruited personnel were inducted into the East Pakistan Police.
This fresh force did satisfactory work in dealing with the rebels
and combating their attacks on police stations. Incentives were
given to individuals displaying good performance by way of
accelerated promotions. This force being inadequately equipped,
with little combat experience, and without proper officer
leadership, could not stand against the rebels, who had more
experience and were better armed and equipped for operation.
West Pakistan Police: To reinforce the East Pakistan Police,
particularly operating in mufassal areas, a contingent of West
Pakistan Police with a strength of 5,000 men was brought to the
province. This force was distributed throughout East Pakistan
and it displayed a lot of enthusiasm to start with and did some
very useful work in combating the rebels in the thanas.

