224 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
strengthen the defence of East Pakistan by making up the
deficiencies. Bhutto makes a statement at Lahore Airport:
‘Pakistan should not take the case of Indian aggression to the
Security Council.’ This is probably the only instance where a
victim of aggression does not take the case to the Security
Council.
3 December 1971;
Aerial attacks instead of ground attacks—which give away the
element of surprise and alert the Indians—initiated by Pakistan
against India without any prior intimation to Eastern Command.
4 December 1971:
Polish Resolution in the Security Council, asking for cease-fire
and political solution, is rejected by Pakistan.
5 December 1971:
GHQ asks us to tie down enemy forces in East Pakistan so that
they cannot be transferred to West Pakistan. I therefore have to
leave sufficient troops at places like Dinajpur, Rangpur, Khulna,
etc. to contain the enemy till the cease-fire, which affects my
plans for the offensive in Rajshahi sector.
I am informed by GHQ that Chinese help will soon be forth-
coming. This is a farce, just a picture painted to mislead us,
when in truth nothing is happening.
6 December 1971:
The Pakistan Air Force is not used by Air Marshal Rahim against
India, our planned offensive is not launched by General Tikka
Khan, and our Navy does not put up any resistance against the
Indian Navy attacking Karachi, our naval fortress.
7 December 1971:
An alarming signal is sent to the President from Governor’s
House saying that Eastern Front is about to collapse. The truth is
that, after the evacuation of Jessore, Brigadiers Hayat and
Manzoor have drawn two enemy divisions to area Khulna and
Kushtia; enemy II Corps has lost cohesion and its divisions are
drawn at a tangent well away from their objectives. Sylhet, Bhairab
AAJ 
ASA
i’ ee VA Y,

ENGINEERED DEBACLE 
225
Bazar, Mainamati, Faridpur, Chittagong, Chalna, Khulna,
Dinajpur, Rangpur, Bogra, Natore, Rajshahi are all held till the
end of the war. A fierce battle is going on in Hilli and intense
fighting is in progress even in the west. Apparently a pre-planned
series of signals from Governor’s House, drafted by Farman in
most cases, is meant to build up a case that Eastern Command is
collapsing, whereas in fact it is the other way round—we are
holding fast but Western Garrison has collapsed or is collapsing,
and the Indians are having a free run on land, in the air, and at
sea. 
1am not even informed that this scenario is being presented
to GHQ and CMLA.
8 December 1971:
A farcical signal to me from GHQ saying Chinese activities have
begun. It is difficult to imagine a more sinister and cold-blooded
approach to the business of war. After the failure of attacks in
West Pakistan, the President decides to send Bhutto to the UNO
on 8 December, i.e., after eighteen days of war. Bhutto takes
three days to reach New York and then feigns illness. (No doctor
visits him, neither does Benazir, who is staying at the same hotel.)
9 December 1971:
Farman proposes that Dhaka be declared an open city. Another
ploy to save himself, discredit Eastern Command, and leave my
troops in and outside Dhaka in the lurch, an open invitation to
all undesirable elements to come in—I would not have been able
to fire a single bullet. A very well-planned way of demoralizing
the troops and telling the people that East Pakistan is
indefensible.
Another signal from Governor’s House to the President suggests
transfer of power. I do not agree and convey in that signal to the
President through the Governor that I am determined to fight it
out to the end. But the President directs me to accept the
Governor’s orders. Also, he leaves all decisions about East
Pakistan to the Governor, including political actions, which in
any case is beyond him because Mujib is in West Pakistan.
10 December 1971:
The Governor seeks the President’s approval for handing a note

226 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
to the UN representative concerning cease-fire, transfer of power,
and repatriation of West Pakistani troops to West Pakistan,
Without waiting for the President’s approval, Farman hands top
secret message to the UN representative, who flashes it to the
UN. Farman also contacts Consuls-General of France, Britain,
USSR, and USA asking them to take over Dhaka and East Pakistan
and asks the Chinese delegation at UN to join them. Farman is
already in direct communication with the Indian C.-in-C. without
informing either me or the Governor. The above signal to UN is
also released without intimation to me or the Governor.
Discussions with the Russian 
Consul-General are not
communicated to either of us,
II December 1971:
COAS tells me to obey the Governor’s orders. In other words I
am to surrender. The question of the safety of troops and
destruction of equipment arises on surrender.
In response to the previous day’s note to the UN, early in the
morning the Russian Consul-General conveys its acceptance by
the USSR to Farman, who is neither the Governor nor the
commander of troops, and offers him asylum and safety in his
Consulate and safe passage to West Pakistan.
12 December 1971:
Lt.-Gen. Gul Hassan paints another bogus picture, telling me in
Pushto: ‘Yellows from the North and Whites from the South’. I
am told to hold out for thirty-six hours because the Chinese are
coming from the North and Americans from the South, a blatant
lie. 
I never told them that it was not possible to fight on; in fact
every signal conveyed my resolve to fight to the end. Another
clever way to put the blame on me. I later tell Gul Hassan by
telephone, ‘Please no more lies, neither did I ask for help nor do
I need it. I advise you to look after the operation in the West,
where the battle is to be won. I can look after myself.’ After that
he avoids speaking to me.
Maj.-Gen. Qazi' Majid does not fall back on Dhaka in accordance 
~
with the plan.

ENGINEERED DEBACLE 
227
13 December 1971:
| signal GHQ: ‘Dhaka fortress defences well organized and
determined to fight it out’, and issue my press statement about
‘tanks over my dead body’. That night I send another signal:
‘Moving to built-up area for final battle’, and issue orders to
fight to the last man. Farman proposes that the Hotel Inter-
continental be declared an International Safe Zone without
referring to either the Governor or me.
Night 13/14 December 1971:
An unclassified open signal from the President to surrender. I
tell them, ‘My decision to fight it out still stands’. The President's
signal is in reply to the signal sent by Farman on the Governor's
behalf of which I knew nothing. Neither COAS nor Peerzada is
available. Gul Hassan feigns ignorance in spite of the fact that he
is the Chief of General Staff and Head of Military Intelhgence
and Signals Directorates. Governor Malik and his cabinet resign
with a view to leaving me alone and putting pressure on me
because I am reluctant to surrender; at the same time the
Governor wants to avoid signing the surrender document.
15 December 1971:
Poland, supported by Russia, introduces a resolution in the UN
proposing transfer of power to Sheikh Mujib-ur-Rahman and
initial cease-fire for seventy-two hours, Brig. Janjua, Private
Secretary to General Hamid, tells my COS, Brigadier Bagir, that
the afore-mentioned signal is coming. I send a signal to GHQ
that my decision to fight till the end stands. General Hamid and
Air Chief Marshal Rahim ring me up ordering me to act on the
GHOQ signal of 14 December because West Pakistan is in danger.
Farman tries to insist on sending message to C.-in-C. Indis
through the Russians and not the Americans. I ask for cease-fire
and safety of troops and loyal Pakistanis.
16 December 1971:
C.-in-C. India agrees, with the condition that the troops must
surrender. I repeat his reply to the COAS, who orders its
acceptance and surrender.

228 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
I send a signal to the President to release Sheikh Mujib-ur-
Rahman and save Pakistan and the honour of the armed forces.
He writes ‘NFA’ (no further action) on the signal. I want to talk
to the President. He is not available. The COAS is not traceable.
General Peerzada is playing squash at 1430 hours and is unable
to talk to me on the phone.
Instead of acceptance of the Polish Resolution, ignominious
surrender is imposed on Eastern Command, thus ensuring that
East Pakistan is left without a successor government.
After 
16 December:
The nation is furious at this humiliation and there is a bitter
reaction. General Hamid is shouted at by the officers led by
Brigadier Fazal-e-Raziq Khan, close associate of Gul Hassan, when
General Hamid tries to address officers at GHQ. Air Marshal
Rahim personally flies the aircraft that buzzes President’s House
is an attempt to force Yahya to step down. Here is the coup
planned by Bhutto, Air Marshal Rahim, and Gul Hassan. He
dismisses almost all the Generals and many Brigadiers but retains
Lt.-Gen. Tikka Khan. He also retains Maj.-Gen Farman to help
Tikka with his paperwork. Anti-army propaganda is unleashed
through all electronic and print media, with all the blame being
thrown upon Eastern Command and me. I am not there to
defend my Command and expose Bhutto’s conspiracies and
misdeeds. Gul Hassan and Tikka remain mute.
20 December 1971:
The ‘Night of the Generals’. Lt-Gen. Gul Hassan, Maj.-Gen.
Shaukat Riza, who was sent back from East Pakistan on grounds
of inefficiency and loss of nerve, Air Marshal Rahim, who due to
his faulty planning failed to utilize his brilliant air force
effectively, giving the Indians free use of the air in the western
theatre—the same man who later flew over President’s house to
force Yahya to hand over power—Shakir Ullah Durrani, and
Lt.-Col. Nasir Ullah, assemble in Gul Hassan’s house to discuss
who to give power to. Durrani is in favour of Asghar Khan, but
Gul Hassan and Rahim object, and it is decided that power should
be given to Bhutto. At the same time another group, consisting
Wa ' 
A» 
m 
;
wa 
| 
a 
] 
| 
| 
| 
r¢
| 
y ¢ 
} | I XY J ) 
q A J BU/JA CVtA

ENGINEERED DEBACLE 
229
of Yahya, Hamid, Omer, and Mitha, gathers at Yahya’s house to
discuss how to retain power, but Gul Hassan’s group succeed in
making Yahya resign at gunpoint.
_ 
21 December 1971:
A vicious propaganda is unleashed against me, my troops, and
the army to discredit us in the eyes of the people. The
propaganda against me is so venomous and so extensive that |
am considered to be the main culprit, not Yahya or Bhutto. This
is the final act of the conspiracy, ensuring that the real culprit,
Bhutto, is not exposed.
January 1972 till 
1974:
Bhutto's attitude after the fall of East Pakistan betrays his callous
attitude. Mr Mohammad Younis, who was detailed by Mrs Gandhi
to oversee the arrangements for Bhutto’s stay at Simla, writes:
On the second day he (Bhutto) exploded, ‘I have not come here
to seek the release of POWs. They hail from the area that has
served as cannon fodder for the British for over a century, what
difference does it make if a hundred thousand die for Pakistan?!
The question then arises, if he had not gone to Simla to get
the POWs back, then why did he go? And what did he achieve? 
|
Under the so-called Simla Pact, the cease-fire line in Kashmir
was changed to a line of control. The posts occupied by the
Indians in Azad Kashmir during the 1971 war were not vacated.
This sealed the fate of Kashmir and the Kashmiris’ quest for self-
determination. This agreement was not reached between the
delegations of the two countries, but between two individuals. All
discussion between the delegations prior to the meeting 7m camera
of the two Prime Ministers was an eyewash. On return from Simla,
Bhutto's coterie had the cheek to say that Bhutto charmed Mrs
Gandhi during their meeting in seclusion, but from the result
achieved it appears that it was Mrs Gandhi who charmed Bhutto.
Bhutto came back from Simla without getting the release of his
POWs and without getting vacated the 5,500 square miles of
territory captured by the Indians or the posts occupied by Indians
in Azad Kashmir during the war of 1971.
Both Indira Gandhi and Bhutto were keen for the recognition
of Bangladesh, which would drive the final nail into the coffin of

230 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
united Pakistan. They wanted to eliminate any chance of
Bangladesh and Pakistan getting together as one country, because
as long as Pakistan did not recognize it, any future government
or people of Bangladesh could force the issue of reunification.
Bhutto conspired to recognize Bangladesh without even waiting
for the return of the POWs. In the UN Security Council, China
exercised its veto. The people of Pakistan were against recog-
nition. Therefore, Bhutto manoeuvred to convene a meeting of
the Islamic Summit, which Mujib could attend provided Pakistan
recognized Bangladesh. Under pressure from the Muslim heads
of state, Bangladesh was recognized, and Mujib arrived to
participate in the meeting.
Bhutto did not want his POWs to come back. If he had wanted
them they could have come much earlier. Bhutto held four ttump
cards. One was Sheikh Mujib—the POWs could have been
exchanged for him, but he was let go unconditionally. Another
was the two lakh Bengalis in West Pakistan, including Generals,
doctors, engineers, women, and children, who could have been
exchanged but were let go unconditionally. A third trump was
the Indian POWs, and the fourth was the Ferozpur Headworks—
by closing the headworks the whole of Ferozpur and its suburbs
could be inundated and vast areas of irrigated land rendered
barren. Our POWs and vast areas occupied by the Indians could
have been exchanged for these headworks, but Bhutto returned
them unconditionally.
At Simla Bhutto had arranged with Mrs Gandhi for the
Pakistani POWs do be kept in India for a long time. The Chinese,
however, threatened to veto the admission of Bangladesh to the
UN if we were not returned, so the Indians sent us home. We
were not brought back by Bhutto; we were sent back thanks to a
kind gesture on the part of the Chincse.
In this context, it is also instructive to note that Bhutto set Mujib,
who was a prisoner in West Pakistan, at large, without demanding a
quid pro quo from the Indians. Mujib’s presence in Dhaka was
imperative for the configuration of the new State and the Indians
needed him so badly that had Bhutto in return insisted on the
repatriation of the Pakistani soldiers, he could have secure: ‘: and
95,000 of them would not have suffered the humiliation of remaming
- 
prisoners for such an inordinate length of time. papa 
om ‘Bhi ithe
was kern that Mujib should go unconditionally a1. cs expect sty

1.
ENGINEERED DEBACLE 
231
as possible so that he could put his house (Bangladesh) in order.
Over and above was his eagerness to recognize Bangladesh.
’ Shamim Akhiar. Jewn, 27 Decemper 1403.
NOTES
Mohammad Younis, Persons, Patriots and Politics.
www.balochlibrary.com

CHAPTER 14
SURRENDER AND
POW CAMP NO. 100
Surrender
General Manekshaw had informed us that an Indian team would
be coming to Dhaka to finalize surrender arrangements. The
helicopter hovered over Dhaka Airport, the heavy blades
churning in the air like the arms of a giant windmill, and soon
settled down. Major-General Jacob,-Chief of Staff, Indian Eastern
Command, alighted with his team from the helicopter. Brigadier
Baqir Siddiqui, the Pakistani COS, after receiving them at the
airport, escorted them to HQ Eastern Command. The Indian
team had come to discuss and negotiate the terms and conditions
for the cessation of hostilities. They had brought a draft of the
surrender document. The preliminary discussions between Jacob
and Bagqir, the two Chiefs of Staff, were carried out in Baqir’s
office. After the presentation of the proposal, Baqir discussed
the issue with me. I asked Bagir to call Generals Jamshed and
Farman and Admiral Sharif, the senior Pakistani Army and Naval
officers present at Headquarters. The Indian delegation
blackmailed us with the threat that, if their conditions were not
agreed to, they would hand over the local loyal population, and
our civilian officers who had taken refuge in the Intercontinental
Hotel, to the Mukti Bahini forces, who would massacre them.
Despite our objections to the use of the phrase ‘Joint Command
of India and Bangladesh’, and to the place and manner of
surrender, in the circumstances we were forced to comply.
Among the Generals, Farman’s demeanour underwent a
dramatic change. The guilt and weakness he had displayed during
the hours of crisis seemed to disperse. The despair and anguish

SURRENDER AND POW CAMP NO. 100 
233
visible in his eyes and actions dissipated. His having been a
Military Adviser to five Governors, coupled with his participation
in the drastic military action on 25 March, had aroused the
animosity and seething anger of the Bengalis, who wanted to
punish him for his alleged crimes against them. He was blamed
for the massacre of intellectuals, although here too the case has
been a little overstated, because some of the Bengalis named
therein are still alive. Thus encased in a cocoon of fear, he wanted
to escape. The Bengalis had vowed vengeance at any price.
After some discussion, the senior Pakistani officers agreed to
accept the Indian proposal, so I called the Indian team to my
office. Personally, I felt indignant and agitated, for the Indian
proposal was inadequate, failing to highlight the measures for
the safe custody of the civilians. As the Governor had resigned
on 14 December and the civilian officials had moved to the free
zone of Hotel Intercontinental, the onus now rested on me, as
both Military Commander and Civil Administrator, to ensure that
no harm befell the civilians. I therefore spared no effort to ensure
their protection and safe return to Pakistan. I put forward two
conditions to Jacob: first, that the Pakistan troops would retain
their personal arms for self-protection and the protection of the
civilians until adequate Indian troops were available for their
protection in Dhaka Area; and second, that all Pakistani civilians,
civilian officials, and staff should be treated like civil internees,
not left at the mercy of the Bengalis, and accompany the troops
wherever they went.
Jacob readily agreed to the first demand, but argued that the
civilians would have to stay in Bangladesh until swapped with the
Bengalis stranded in camps in the west. Further talks would be
useless if they failed to embrace the civilian issue in its totality, by
granting sanctuary in unequivocal terms on behalf of both the
Indian Army and the political leadership. My adamant posture
left Jacob with no option but to advise his superiors of the
preconditions. After hectic telephoning, Jacob was given carte
blanche powers to deal with the issue. With the impediment
removed, the matter was resolved.
The Bengali member of the negotiating team objected but his
protests were set aside. During this period, many senior Indian
and Bengali officers and reporters had come to Dhaka. They
risked being held as POWs if negotiations broke down, since

