WAR CLOUDS 
107
c. Have sufficient additional troops
Make up deficiencies so as to be effective on the front line
‘and in the interior: fight profitably an undeclared war
against the regular Indian Army; and deal with and
eliminate the rebels in the interior.
GHQ agreed with the third course because they were of
the view that in the case of the first two courses, the enemy
would be in a better position to achieve its mission and we
might lose the whole game; it was also in keeping with the
mission of not losing any area of importance and tying
down the maximum Indian troops in this theatre of war to
create a favourable troop ratio in the western theatre, from
where the decisive offensive was to be launched. We also
favoured this course, but we asserted categorically that
additional troops and making up our deficiencies were vital
for containing the Indian offensive and for creating
difficulties for the Indians. GHQ agreed.
Some of our important recommendations were:
1) Start a war of the minds: a majority of the population was
still strongly motivated towards ‘Bangladesh’. For this
campaign we suggested the establishment of a Central
Psychological Warfare Board, to be located in Dhaka, to
indoctrinate the population. This required full-time
intensive effort and dedicated people to conduct it.
2) A prolonged state of uncertainty was not in the interest of
the country and the morale of its people. Hence normalcy
was recommended to be restored as soon as possible.
3) Engage Agartala airfield to retaliate to Indian firing.
4) Gear up the civil administration and provide it more
support by strengthening civil law and order agencies, and
set up a command structure, training, and indoctrination
for the paramilitary forces like Razakars, etc.
5) Enhance our military capability by inducting more troops
into East Pakistan, so that we could be effective on the
front line and in the interior and fight profitably an
undeclared war against the regular Indian Army and also
against the rebels in the interior.

108 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
6) No war should be started in West Pakistan.
On their return from GHQ Major-General Jamshed and Brig.
Baqir Siddiqui briefed me as under:
(a) COAS General Abdul Hamid Khan had insisted that we
should keep on fighting in the forward defensive posture,
as well as against the insurgents in the rear.
(b) Our request for meeting the imbalances, i.e., additional
artillery and more troops, was partially agreed to. GHQ
promised to send immediately eight infantry battalions
and one engineer battalion.
(c) India was expected to attack East Pakistan on Eid Day.
(d) Our political mission remained unchanged.
Coup d’état against Yahya
My COS, Brigadier Baqir Siddiqui, told me about the discussion
he had had with the Chief of General Staff (CGS), Lt.-Gen. Gul
Hassan. I had asked for 111 Brigade commanded by Brigadier
Mumtaz Ali, plus ten battalions and my shortfall in tanks and
artillery. The CGS agreed to give 111 Brigade and ten battalions
plus some ancillary units. Discussions were to follow after lunch.
During lunch Brigadier Baqir was asked by his friend, a senior
officer, about the result. Baqir’s friend told him that he would
not get 111 Brigade from Rawalpindi as it was earmarked for a
coup d état and the designated Brigade Commander was staying
with Gul Hassan.
Sure enough, when the meeting started in the afternoon, he
was informed that 111 Brigade was not available and only eight
battalions would be flown to East Pakistan. He was instructed to
rush back to Dhaka as a report had just come in that the Indians
would attack on Eid Day, 21 November 1971. Only two battalions
reached us. The rest of the units never arrived. Apparently CGS
had misled us to fulfil his nefarious designs of a coup d état to
facilitate transfer of power to Bhutto.
The C.-in-C. Navy also attended the presentation by Brig. Bagir,
and on hearing my recommendation that no war should be

WAR CLOUDS 
109
started in West Pakistan, he remarked that in that case he could
switch his forces to East Pakistan. But General Hamid abruptly
left the presentation and took him away with him.
After the briefing, and as per GHQ’s requirement, Chandpur
was to be occupied, which I had left to elements from 14 Division
which were adequate for the task. However, I raised 39 ad hoc
Division under Major-General M. Rahim Khan, HJ, with the staff
to be drawn from HQ Martial Law and with communications
from HQ 53 Brigade, which was also moved to area Chodagram-
Laxam. The move of 53 Brigade, which was Command Reserve
and whose priority task was that of defence of Dhaka, was done
in view of GHQ’s promises of eight additional battalions. With
the move of 53 Brigade no regular formation was left in Dhaka
ull I pulled back some troops from the divisions. The two
additional battalions which arrived were sent to 9 Division 
‘to
make up the deficiency in Jessore Sector, and the remaining six
were planned to be deployed in Dhaka; HQ 39 Division was
established on an island near Chandpur, where civil
communications were available. With the induction of 39
Division, the area of responsibility of 14 Division was now changed
and the two divisions were responsible as follows: 14 Division
(seven battalions) from Sylhet to Kasba including River Meghna;
39 Division from and excluding Kasba to Feni (four battalions).
Lt.-Gen. Arora, GOC Eastern Command, had deployed three
corps and a communication zone round East Pakistan. The corps
under Lt.-Gen. Sagat Singh was deployed opposite Sylhet,
Chittagong Sector; 101 communication zone under Maj-Gen.
G. S. Gill was deployed against Mymensingh Sector; 33 Corps
under Lt.-Gen. Thapan was deployed opposite Rajshahi Sector;
and If Corps under Lt.-Gen. Raina was deployed against Jessore
sector.
Relative Strengths
When war broke out the relative strength of the opposing forces
was as under:

110 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Sylhet-Chittagong Sector
Pakistan 
India
14 and 39 (A) Divisions 
4 Corps consisting of 8, 23, and
consisting of eleven 
57 Divisions, three armoured
battalions. 91(A) and 
squadrons, Mukti Bahini Brigade,
53(A) Brigades. (A 
8 sectors of Mukti Bahini, and Kilo
Division usually has 
Force, of division strength, used
nine battalions.) 
for Chittagong Hill Tracts.
8 Division had six Brigades. One of
its brigades had seven battalions.
(A brigade usually has three
battalions.)
Dhaka-Mymensingh Sector
Pakistan 
India
36(A) Division consisting 
HQ 101 communication zone
of 93(A) Brigade of two 
acting as a divisional HQ with 95
battalions, and 314(A) 
Independent Brigade, 63 Infantry
Brigade of CAF. 
Brigade, and a Mukti Brigade. Para
Brigade dropped at Tangail came
under its command on 11
December.
Jessore Sector
Pakistan 
India
9 Division of two brigades 
2 Corps consisting of 4 and
(two more battalions were 
9 Divisions, one Independent
given about 25 November) 
Brigade, and two armoured
and one Independent 
regiments.
Armoured Squadron
(8 tanks).
Rajshahi Sector
Pakistan 
India
16 Division and 29 Cavalry. 
33 Corps consisting of 20 and
6 Mountain Divisions, one

WAR CLOUDS 
111
Independent Brigade, one Muku
Brigade, and two armoured
regiments. 20 Division had
4 Regular Brigades.
EPCAF including ISF and 
39 BSF battalions employed as
VP Forces—18,000. 
Infantry to relieve regular troops
from the area gained, plus central
reserve police—25,000.
Razakars—untrained, 
Mukti Bahini—well-trained and
well 
| 
|
ill-equipped, armed with 
equipped with modern weapons—
303 and 12-bore rifles 
well over 350,000 and four
and guns—60-70,000. 
brigades.
Others
Pakistan 
India
PAF (one squadron of F-86 
17 squadrons LAF, SU7 and
grounded 6 December). 
MIG-21, plus the planes of aircraft
carrier Vikrant..
One airfield. 
Five airfields plus aircraft carrier
Vikrant.
4 naval gunboats. 
Indian naval carrier squadron
including Vekrant.
Some of the enemy divisions consisted of more than three
brigades and some brigades more than three battalions, Their 8
Mountain Division had six brigades and 20 Mountain Division
had four brigades plus Mukti Bahini Brigade. A brigade in Sylhet
area had seven battalions. They invaded East Pakistan with the
strength of twelve divisions.
Major-General D. K. Palit gives the Indian Army’s strength as
under:
The total strength of the forces assembled for the Bangladesh
liberation, including the Mukti Bahini and the administrative units
spread over West Bengal, Assam and Tripura, exceeded a third of a
baloc
@ OA 
@ 
@A 
@ 
@ 
iL
Ae 
GAO GAOT,
VW/¥/ 
V/V) 
/V/
v\ 
v \ 
v\

112 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
million. The northern divisions facing Tibet accounted for another
100,000 or so, the overall figure in Eastern Command nearing half a
million men (this does not include the air and naval contingents).
No Lieutenant-General in military history has commanded so large
an army or borne so heavy a strategic responsibility.
The Lightning Campaign, p. 105
The ratio of troops between us and the Indians came to
approximately one to ten. Added to this was the hostile
population who provided all help to the Indian Army against us.
The East Pakistanis were against us, and the people in West
Pakistan had no heart for the war. According to General
Manekshaw, the ratio of troops in East Pakistan was one to four
(which does not include air and naval contingents and civil armed
forces). American intelligence gave the ratio of one to six. The
Indians were far superior to us in every respect. No other army
in the history of warfare has faced such heavy odds as Pakistan
Eastern Garrison faced in East Pakistan. To win a battle one
needs a three to one ratio and that too not overall but only at
the point where tactical success is being sought. The Indians, in
spite of an overwhelming superiority in every conceivable aspect,
could not beat the small, tired, but gallant Pakistan Eastern
Garrison on the battlefield, which is not only unbelievable but
militarily criminal.
Situation on the Eve of Eid Day (21 November)
Our troops were now being concentrated in their battle locations,
and the local Razakars were trying to eliminate the Mukti Bahini
and, at places beefed up by regular troops, were taking on the
Indian Army as well. The Indian Army had launched attacks in
the salients of Bhuranga Mari, Kamalpur BOP, Attgram,
Chandpura, Belonia salient, Benapole, and Hilli.
Most of the troops deployed for counter-insurgency operations
were withdrawn and replaced by Razakars and Mujahids. The
reserves at all levels had been committed in anti-rebel operations
in the interior as per GHQ orders. Their promised replacements
never arrived, Hence we recreated reserves.

WAR CLOUDS 
113
Our troops and their officers were fatigued after prolonged
operations in a most unfavourable and hostile environment with
limited resources and poor diet, and had had to resort to
improvisation in everything.
The divisions were without their tank regiments and medium
guns, and there were serious imbalances and shortages in units
and equipment. The regiments of artillery (one heavy and two
medium) and the tank regiment which had been authorized to
my HQ, had not been sent.
The second-line forces were not yet fully equipped and trained.
GHQ was asking about the progress of the clearance of certain
salients or border areas occupied by the Mukti Bahini.
We still had the political mission of ensuring that Bangladesh
was not established by giving up any chunk of territory. Therefore
we were required to fight both on the frontier and in the interior.
Of the promised battalions, the first one did not arrive until
24 November, and only two battalions instead of eight were
received. I was not told that the others would not be sent. This
was another practical joke on Gul Hassan’s part.
The enemy was poised for a major offensive. We decided to
create another ad hoc Division at Chandpur, and orders for
fighting the war according to the operational plan were issued.
Preparations for War
The troops were ordered to put the operational plan into effect
by fighting, delaying actions to gain time and cause maximum
attrition to the enemy, and by withdrawing to the designated
strong points and fortresses. Before I describe the conduct of the
war I wish to stress that most of the defensive positions in East
Pakistan were neither of concrete nor had they layers of mines
and wire in front of their positions, nor were they covered by
adequate artillery fire as in West Pakistan, because:
— No money was allotted for defence works except an amount
from the Governor’s job generation fund which was
inadequate and was later stopped due to protest by the
Americans.

114 
THE BETRAYAI. OF EAST PAKISTAN
— Some of the mines had already been used against Mukti
Bahini to stop their infiltration as per GHQ orders. Those
available were merely an apology for operable devices. The
mines did hinder the enemy’s attack a little, but otherwise
he had a free run due to the lack of artificial obstacles, unlike
in West Pakistan.
— Arullery is supposed to break up the enemy’s attack. We had
on the average only a few guns on each penetrant as opposed
to dozens of guns in West Pakistan.
— The same was the case with armour. Obsolete M-24 light
tanks which could hardly move were sent to us. We had to
complain to GHQ that in some, string was being used instead
of fan belts, and others had to be pull-started.
— No body of troops can stop enemy armour with their hands.
We were short of anti-tank guns by about fifty per cent and
heavy and medium artillery was not there to destroy or hold
up the enemy armour. Some mortars and anti-tank guns had
no sights.
— No air support was available.
— Above all, the population was hostile.
— The execution and outcome of a battle depends on the
intelligence available. The Indian Army knew of all our battle
positions, down to the last bunker, through the locals. Their
own junior commanders had been shown our defensive
positions. They did not have to fight for information by
sending patrols which under normal circumstances would
have cost them a lot of time and blood to obtain. They were
simply guided to or behind our positions.
— The troops had been fighting for eight months continuously
without relief or rest, with shortages of everything, and living
on improvisation.
In August 1971 a team of senior army doctors came from West
Pakistan. They went round and met the officers and jawans. At
the end of their visit, they submitted a report saying that the
troops had reached the point of battle exhaustion and were no
longer fit for battle. It was recommended that the troops should
be pulled back and sent on leave.
Since this could not be done and troops had to stay and fight,
I started a campaign to fire them with the sprit of jehad in order

WAR CLOUDS 
115
to raise their morale and battle efficiency. By our hectic efforts
we did succeed in our mission and by November 1971 the troops
were filled with the spirit of jehad, and were ready to do and die.
The motto became ‘With the board or on the board’.
Battle exhaustion is something which only those who have
hee a considerable time—several months—under fire can
} understand. The effect is shattering. John Keay, in his book, The
\Fince of Battle, points out that throughout history many famous
generals have been unable to cope with the stresses and strains
of the battlefield: Wellington wept copiously after Waterloo;
Frederick the Great had his surgeon bleed him during battle to
relieve his tension; Rommel, for all his derring-do, suffered
agonies of the stomach which twice took him away from the
front at moments of crisis; Guderian was invalided out of Russia
with heart-failure; and Ridgeway was advised to resign in 1945
after a severe blackout.
In spite of my shortages, difficulties, and handicaps, the step-
motherly treatment by my high command, the knowledge that I
was being used as a sacrificial lamb and that my troops were
deemed an expendable commodity, and despite heavy pressure
from a far superior enemy, I remained fighting fit till the end,
and kept moving on the battlefield. Similarly none of my officers
and jawans were affected by the heavy stress and strain of war
and fought like tigers, which is very creditable.
These were some of the handicaps which were not
encountered by our counterparts in West Pakistan, nor indeed
by any other army during war. With this in mind, compare the
performance of our troops in East Pakistan with that of our troops
in West Pakistan. Cut off from West Pakistan, among a hostile
population, the troops in East Pakistan fought bravely and with
tenacity; and lost less area to the enemy in twenty-six days of
intense war and several months of insurgency, against enemy
preponderance in everything, than the area lost in West Pakistan
in fourteen days of all-out war. Then we were ordered to
surrender, and remained in captivity for over two vears, and were
subjected to various forms of questioning, while those who lost
over 5,500 miles of territory under favourable conditions were
rewarded with promotions, etc.

116 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
The geography defied centralized control by General Niazi over
divisional operations. The geography defied mutual support between
divisions. Considering the troops to search and destroy even battalions
found it difficult to co-ordinate action of their companies...The
terrain and insurgency made it virtually impossible to hold defensive
positions with secure flanks. Troops facing the enemy in one direction
found themselves outflanked, their rear blocked. Troops moving
from one position to another got disoriented when they encountered
hostile fire where they expected friendly succour...By November 197]
most of our troops had lived and fought for nine months under
appalling conditions in a totally hostile environment. For nine months
they had moved on roads, by day and by night, inadequately protected
against mines and forever vulnerable to ambush. Their only
protection was the quality of their reaction...By November 1971, most
of the troops had been living in waterlogged bunkers, their feet rotted
by slime, their skins ravaged by vermin, their minds clogged by an
incomprehensible conflict.
Gen. Shaukat Riza, The Pakistan Army 1966-7]
I had to face the Indian onslaught with troops who were not only
tired and exhausted but had swollen feet, ravaged chests, and
bare legs, because clothing and footwear were not available in
the required quantity. We were likely to be vastly out-numbered,
out-tanked, out-gunned and out-ranged. The Indian troops would
be fresh, maintained from convenient bases, and, having the
initiative, could select times and places of attack, while we would
have to wait for them to show their hand. Moreover, their position
was given a tremendous boost with continued help from the
Bengalis, who were fighting their “War of Liberation’.
www.ba. ochlibrary.com
-\ZVWAAAALY A CUA 
Y 
e@WwN\/YJAAA
oe

