304 
APPENDIX
21. To reinstate the honour of the commander of East Pakistan
would end the last injustice done. He should not suffer as the
scapegoat for the sins and omissions of others.
I beg to remain,
Sir,
Yours Obediently,
Lt.-Gen. (R)
A.A.K. Niazi
1 Shami Road
Dated: 23 April 1995 
Lahore Cantt
To the above letter, the President of Pakistan chose not to reply.
www.balochlibrary.com

APPENDIX 7
Concepts of War
THE CONCEPT OF DEFENCE ON A BroapD FRONT
After Pakistan’s inception, no viable military strategy existed to
counter India’s jingoist designs. Various studies and trials were
carried out to try to evolve a functional defensive concept which
kept in view various tangible factors which influenced the military
experts in their decision. The following facts were taken into
consideration:
a. Pakistan lacks geographical depth and therefore cannot
trade space for time in the classical sense. The Russians, for
example, can vacate endless territory by burning and leaving
cities, lure the enemy to extend his L of C, and later defeat.
him in detail, as happened to Napoleon and to the German
Army in World War II. If Pakistan were to vacate territory
without fighting, substantial areas could be occupied by the
Indians without any effort.
b. Major population and industrial centres, road and rail
communications, and canal headworks are located near the
border. We cannot vacate them without causing attrition
on the enemy and making him bleed. National armies fight
on or across the borders. Every mile of our country is sacred
and worth defending. It should be kept in mind that only
armies of occupation ignore this vital aspect.
c. Also to be considered are the adverse psychological effect
and lowering of national morale following the loss of any
city like Lahore, Kasur, Sialkot, or Bahawalnagar in West
Pakistan, and Khulna, Jessore, Rajshahi, Dinajpur, Sylhet or
Comilla in East Pakistan.
1 
_ 
44°74
L x7 
a 
-g 
ry
KOCcnN
AX\YeA AERC 
I
|
VA/ XA/ XA/ 
7 Fe 
| 
» at @ We ad 
OD 
\ 
TM~ 4a
VY 
VV VY 
| 4 | 
| os | | 
X\/ 
(°O\1 |
VV 
VY 
VY 
@ 
WY oF 
©) 
Y 
| 
WA 
j
ets 
J 
e WW VJ 
J
~

306 
APPENDIX
d. Pakistan has long borders, numerous approaches, wide
areas, and peculiar operational environments. In fact the
space is too large and troops too meagre, and we are called
upon to hold frontages which are big by any operational
standard. It is therefore difficult for a defender to organize
the defence in depth according to idealistic tactical
teachings.
The Pakistan Army therefore adopted a tactical doctrine of
fighting a defensive battle based on different layers augmenting
each other. The concept envisaged causing maximum attrition
on the enemy to dissipate and weaken his forces and make him
lose cohesion before he attacked with the main force and made
deep thrusts in the area. Initially, the defences had to be located
as far forward as possible on likely penetrants, falling back on
successive lines of defence if forward defences were overwhelmed,
leaving important population centres near the border occupied
as Strong Points and Fortresses. This concept was applied in East
Pakistan, where initial defences on important penetrants were
placed as far forward as tactically possible, such as Hilli,
Chaugacha, Banapole, Akhura, Comilla, etc. The forward defence
lines were not based on BOPs, but on natural or artificially-
created ground features and obstacles.
The Strong Point and Fortress system was not only adopted in
East Pakistan, but is still the current operational policy in West
Pakistan, in that we fight a series of defensive actions on the
Strong Points and Fortresses in pre-designated towns and cities.
The Strong Points may not be mutually supporting, but their
gaps are covered by patrolling, nuisance mines, and Recce and
Support elements. A Strong Point is actually the base of
operations for that force, and is designed to take the fight to the
enemy, causing maximum attrition to his troops and weaponry.
This also slows down enemy operations and ties down his troops
in guarding the lines of communication in rear areas, thus
causing him harassment and disrupting his L of C. Manoeuvres
are carried out from the Strong Points to dominate the gaps and
cut off the enemy’s L of C. In our environment of a relatively
large space defended by a relatively small army, the concept
remains valid. It is up to the Divisional Commander to harass the
bypassing enemy, by allocating troops to do the needful.
ery
-<
ry wew 
y 
Lr 
art
tv" 
Wwow«rt 
sy 
kK or 
TM 7" | ye ] 
; lL. oY wy 
(%f\trr
WWW 
.VDALVULI ll Vidal y COLL
oe

APPENDIX 
307
‘Toe OVERALL CONCEPT OF War wiTtH INDIA, ITS
APPLICATION, AND GHQ’s ROLE IN ITs EXECUTION
Since Pakistan’s inception, for historical and geographical
reasons, the bulk of the armed forces were stationed in West
Pakistan, with a Divisional-sized force in East Pakistan. This
naturally gave birth to the concept, ‘The Defence of East Pakistan
lies in West Pakistan’, or, “The battle of the East will be fought in
the West’. Translated into coherent terms, this meant that the
decision in a war with India would be obtained on the Western
Front by launching a vigorous offensive to capture a sizeable
chunk of strategically important Indian territory. The East
Pakistan garrison, on the other hand, would fight a defensive
cum limited offensive battle, by keeping the maximum number
of Indian troops engaged and tied down for a given period, until
the decision on the Western Front was achieved.
This concept was adopted after protracted trials based on
copious studies, and remained the basis of our military strategy
till the end of the 1971 war. Within the context of this concept,
the plans for fighting a war with India in East Pakistan were not
to be in isolation, but an integral part of the overall strategy. The
battle plans of both the theatres were concomitant and
interdependent, to be controlled by GHQ. CGS branch
functioning under COAS was responsible for co-ordinating the
military operations and ensuring the successful implementation
of the war plans by the theatre and sector commanders. The
theatre plans were accordingly evolved to support each other.
Any action taken in isolation could result in a fiasco.
East Pakistan is encircled by India, therefore the garrison in
East Pakistan was in a state of strategic encirclement, with only
air and sea routes open, which as expected were severed at the
very outset of the war. To be encircled by an enemy is the worst
situation an army can face in war. Until and unless the
encirclement is broken from within, enabling the encircled force
to join the main Front, or in the other case,-where the theatres
of operation are wide apart, with the enemy in between, a
diversionary thrust from the other theatre forces the enemy to
pull out his forces or abandon the siege, it is only a question of
time before the encircled force is destroyed. Numerous examples

308 
APPENDIX
can be quoted from history: the Battle of Ukraine in 1941,
Stalingrad, Singapore, Crete, Malaya, Sinai, the Golan Heights,
and most recently Operation Desert Storm. In most of these
cases surrender orders were given by the military commanders,
without the permission of the Government or High Command.
Theirs were unconditional surrenders, while ours was negotiated
and carried out on the specific orders of the President, with the
persuasion of Gen. Hamid, officiating C.-in-C., and the advice of
Governor Malik.
In the overall concept of war with India, it was generally
accepted that, if the Indian Army launched a major effort against
Fast Pakistan, and a subsidiary action to contain the Pakistani
forces in West Pakistan, the Eastern Garrison would engage and
tie down the maximum number of Indian troops to create a
favourable troop ratio in West Pakistan, whose superiority or
parity in troops and weaponry would enable the elite Army
Reserve Army to launch a swift and violent offensive operation
and to capture sensitive and strategically important Indian
territory, thus upsetting the military balance. (The Army Reserve
was composed of highly-tramed Armoured Divisions, led by
efficient officers, and if utilized properly was a lethal weapon
which would completely alter the complexion of the war.) The
Indians in a bid to recapture the lost area would transfer troops
from the Eastern to the Western theatre, thereby releasing the
pressure from the beleaguered Eastern Garrison. In the
meantime a cease-fire would take place due to the intervention
of the superpowers. The captured Indian territory would be
retained for subsequent bargaining.
The strategic concept was based on the following assumptions:
a. War with India would be sharp, intense, and of short
duration. The world powers, keeping their politico-strategic
and economic interests in the region in view, would force a
cease-fire within a few weeks.
b. There would be wholehearted popular support for the war
effort in both East and West Pakistan.
c. To counter China’s physical threat, India would be forced
to deploy troops on the Chinese border; also, the Chinese
threat would restrain India from attacking East Pakistan.
WWwrmvwwrmwewey 
) Ln or ; 
TMTM 
J > 
- = POVYXT] 
am Vat aa

APPENDIX 
309
In the 1971 war, the Eastern Garrison had to fight an
impossible war against overwhelming odds. The Bengalis had
rebelled and the sympathies of the superpowers were tilted
towards them, and the Chinese were reluctant to intervene in
our internal affairs. The political and military reality was therefore
drastically different. Eastern Garrison was enmeshed in the
quagmire of the power-seekers’ intrigues. The insurgency added
a new colour to the war effort, alienating the support of the
masses. The troops deployed in East Pakistan were too meagre,
keeping in view the political and military mission and the nature
of operations, e.g, dealing with the Bengali insurgency and the
external threat by the Indian Army. According to the military
experts, the Pakistan Army required about 250,000 to 300,000
men to deal with the insurgency alone. To meet the additional
threat, the requirement was much greater. To give an example,
India has deployed 700,000 military forces to curb the Kashmiri
freedom fighters. To meet its Herculean task, Eastern Garrison
had only three ill-equipped understrength divisions, numbering
34,000 soldiers and 11,000 CAF. It was devoid of heavy tanks,
heavy and medium artillery, and anti-tank guns. The CAF had
.303 rifles. We had four gunboats meant for anti-smuggling. The
cruiser based at Chittagong was called back despite my protests.
We had only one squadron of obsolete F-86 Sabre planes. The
early-warning radar was removed to West Pakistan on the orders
of Air Marshal Rahim, and our C-130 was also taken away. The
Indians deployed twelve divisions, one para brigade, and thirty-
nine battalions of BSF, armed and equipped like regular Indian
infantry hattalions. Thousands of Mukti Bahini, organized into 
|
brigades and battalions, were merged with Indian regular
formations. Lacs of Bengali dissidents were also active against us.
The Indians had seventeen squadrons of SU-7s and MIG-21s
operating from four bases and its aircraft carrier, one hundred
and twenty helicopters based in Agartala, and a carrier task force
with many ships, and the aircraft carrier Vikrant.
In the Eastern Garrison, the ratio of troops to area was
completely out of proportion: 45,000 troops had to defend and
fight for 2500 miles of land border and 500 miles of sea. In 1940,
Franco-British forces had one hundred and eleven divisions to
defend 400 miles of the Western Front, a ratio of one division to
three and a half miles of Front; at 
Tobruk, 9th Australian Division
| 
a | 
ye 1
) 
IXX7XYX; 
Py : x) 
y, 
, 
a. 
a 
E 
y 
» 
1 
y® 6 
? 
,
IV 
UV 
VY 
ia 
a 
ope 
y 
a 
| 
X/ 
4 
\ 
|
V 
VV 
VW 
UALVULULLILULAL Yew

310 
APPENDIX
had a total of 24,000 troops to defend 30 miles of perimeter with
mines and obstacles and was considered poorly fortified and
thinly held; and in the second battle of El] Alamein, Rommel
defended 40 miles of area with 27,000 Germans and 50,000
Italians.
The Pakistani Western Garrison, meanwhile, was placed in a
highly favourable position, having the initiative to select the time
and place of attack. It had only to defend about 1600 miles of
border with India. Its rear was protected by the friendly Muslim
countries, Iran and Afghanistan. It had twelve divisions, plus the
swift moving Armoured Divisions, the complete air force, the
navy, the complete CAF, 3 C.-in-Cs under Supreme Commander
Gen. Yahya with scores of generals, Admirals, and Air Marshals
with ready plans. It also had the support of a loyal population
and the industrial back-up support. With half of the Indian Army
tied down in East Pakistan, Tikka’s Army Reserve could turn the
tide of the battle, depending upon his ability to launch the
devastating Armoured Divisions effectively and conduct and
control the fast-moving offensive with tactical finesse.
The success or failure of the war with India was directly
dependent on the successful offensive operations to be launched
by the Army Reserve. Any delay or inability to conduct a successful
operation by the Army Reserve would’ seal the fate of the ill-
equipped, numerically inferior Eastern Garrison and also have
an adverse impact on the operations in the Western Wing.
Under the changed scenario, Western Garrison’s role of
conducting a successful war gained greater importance. The
nucleus of the concept was in its timely and effective application,
Unfortunately, this was not to be. Yahya put in a belated, half-
hearted attack on 3 December. In only a few days he lost 5,500
square miles of territory, which is unforgivable. This attack was
late by thirteen days and gave the Indian Army time to
concentrate on the Eastern Front. On the Western Front, after
capturing 5,500 square miles of territory, the Indians as defenders
turned the military balance in their own favour. They threatened
Marala, and were positioned to cut off Reti, thereby isolating
Karachi from the rest of Pakistan. The Western Garrison despite
favourable odds floundered and was placed in a precarious
position. Due to Tikka’s mental immobility, the much-trumpeted
attack failed to materialize. The Eastern Garrison fought as a

APPENDIX 
311
forgotten Army, betrayed by its High Command. Laying down of
arms by Eastern Garrison suited all parties: Mujib, Bhutto, and
the Superpowers. By this act Mujib would emerge as the leader
of independent Bangladesh and Bhutto would inherit the new
Pakistan. Also, West Pakistan had to be saved before it was further
humbled. The ignominy meted out to Eastern Garrison was
considered a small price for saving West Pakistan. Within the
ambit of this plan, the action was enforced, West Pakistan was
saved, but the exe fell on Eastern Garrison. The battle of East
Pakistan was not only lost on the chessboard, but also on the
battlefields of West Pakistan.
Tikka’s role in the débacle had far-reaching repercussions and
consequences. His role in the breakup of Pakistan was in no way
less than Bhutto’s and Yahya’s, yet he was made chief of the
Army Staff, and the Hamood-ur-Rehman Commission ignofed
the role he played and exempted him from appearing before the
Commission.

APPENDIX 8
Doctor Malik’s Letter
London 13 March. In a letter to a relative, Dr Malik, Governor of
occupied East Pakistan, said that the Army, and East Pakistan's
Bengali and non-Bengali people, had rendered great sacrifices
for the defence of East Pakistan, which will go down in golden
words in history. He further said that if Pakistan Army had not
been cheated and not made the victim of conspiracy, it would
not have been defeated. He wrote, ‘to keep Pakistan united, |
gave every possible sacrifice, and now as a patriotic Pakistani, I
am waiting anxiously to get executed’.
He said that ‘President Yahya had conspired with the enemies
of Pakistan to destroy East Pakistan. If Yahya Khan had not
resorted to treachery, Pakistan Army would have captured Assam
by a counter attack, but ‘he did not allow General Niazi,
Commander Eastern Command, to advance into India. He kept
us in the dark and kept telling us that foreign powers would
come to the aid of East Pakistan’.
“When Indian troops were about to enter Dhaka, President
Yahya ordered us to stop the war and lay down arms. As a matter
of fact, the President had already requested the UN through
General Farman to order a cease-fire. He had also warned that if
General Niazi did not surrender, they would lose West Pakistan.’
Nawa-i-Wagt, 14 March 1972
Translated from the Urdu by the author,
ee a 
| 
_ 
| 
7 
7 | 
1 
oO 1
WUT NnainchitAnrar

The Betrayal of East Pakistan
Lt.-Gen. A.A.K. Niazi
Lieutenant-General A.A.K. Niazi of the Eastern Command was the
man whose fate it was to direct the operation which resulted in the
dismemberment of Pakistan. Many books have been written about
that unforgettable year in Pakistan's history. 1971, and the terrible
events that it soawned. But finally one of the main actors of the drama
has volunteered his own account of the events leading to the disaste:
This book fills 
a huge gap in the recorded history of the period
which could hardly be considered complete or authentic without th:
contribution of such a major protagonist.
Lt.-Gen. A.A.K. Niazi remains one of the most decorated soldiers
of the Pakistan Army. He was Commandant, School of Infantry and
Tactics, Quetta, and taught at Command and Staff College, Quetta
At present, General Niazi lives a quiet life with his children and
granachildren
Other Oxford Books
A History of the Pakistan Army
Wars and Insurrection
Brian Cloughiey
Pakistan
Leadership Challenges
Lt.-Gen. Jahan Dad Khan
The Pakistan Army—1998 Edition
With a New Foreword and Epilogue
Stephen P Cohen
OXFO RD
LeSIVERSEPY PRE
! 
4 
ft 
T 
a
iit 
an 
| 
1
i 
ij!
ty 
|
bp. Wu 
| 
i
OWtre

