294
WWww.bda.
APPENDIX
expense and finally given a military burial. On the
contrary, I was denied my pension because in a matter of
two months, I had:
(1) Restored the writ of the Govt. in East Pakistan, when
no one was a volunteer to take command of the
Eastern Wing and where two senior generals had
already failed.
(2) Normalized living conditions.
(3) Evicted the guerrillas and Indian agents who were
then in high spirits and held the initiative. I am the
general whose troops defeated the guerrillas in a
lightning campaign lasting less than two months.
(4) Gen. Fazle Mugeem rated our achievements in his
book as ‘a miracle’.
(5) The enemy was contained and later evicted during
insurgency by a handful of 45000 troops consisting
of 34000 regular and 11000 Civil Armed Forces
personnel. Whereas in terms of simple military
planning by experts we needed 300000 troops fully
trained in counter insurgency role with full support
of the local population.
Conditions both political and military were normalized
by the end of May 1971 and gave an ideal time and
opportunity for a political settlement. This opportunity
was missed on purpose to ultimately shed East Pakistan
and sacrifice 45000 troops from West Pakistan at the altar
of the political power game. The plan hatched for the
attainment of this unholy aim was to leave East Pakistan
without a successor government.
This could only be done if the Indians won and Niazi
lost the war. But when the junta saw that I could not be
defeated on the battlefield, I was told to surrender, and
when I hesitated the bait given was that West Pakistan
was in danger. Also defeat would absolve them from the
distribution of the assets, armament, and stores. They
had decided to leave poor East Pakistan and rule rich
West Pakistan.
General Hamid Khan, C.-in-C., in May 1971 had viewed
my plans for carrying the war into India as sound and
workable but they were shelved since the national aim of
the Government then was:
lochlibrary.com

5.
APPENDIX 
295
(1) No open war conflict with India. Hence our troops
are not to trespass into Indian territory nor fire into
a
(2) Evict by force of arms any intrusion by India in East
Pakistan. 
|
On 13 December 1971 1 gave the final orders of ‘Last
man-last round’ which was virtually an order to die. No
officer or man hesitated and the response was in the
affirmative. These orders had to be changed to
‘Surrender’ on the orders of the President of Pakistan
advised by General Hameed and persuaded by Dr Malik,
the Governor who told me that delay in surrender would
cause difficulties in holding operations in West Pakistan.
They wanted to cease hostilities in West Pakistan at all
cost. The panic and stress was so great that the Govt. was
hysterical to shed East Pakistan and save West Pakistan.
So to save West Pakistan, our base, from disintegration
and Western Garrison from further repulses I staked my
reputation, my brilliant career, and the high traditions
of Pakistan Army and agreed with a heavy heart to lay
down arms when we were nowhere near defeat and
tactically better placed than Indians at that particular
time. More or less the same thing happened with the
Japanese Forces deployed in the Pacific in World War II,
who had about fifty-eight Army Divisions with sufficient
aerial and naval support and tactically and strategically
were in a better position than the Allies. The use of atom
bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki forced the Japanese
Pacific Forces to surrender unconditionally in order to
save their motherland from further destruction.
My President, in the capacity of most senior military officer
my conduct of operations was governed by two important
undisputable constraints, firstly, the National Aim spelt out by
the government for the defence of East Pakistan, secondly, the
military resources that were given to me which encompassed all
the three services. The simple comparison given below would
suffice to prove that the achievements of Eastern Garrison were
gratifying by all standards with meagre resources and the worst
possible prevailing conditions.
4
ave i
V ° f J rau
4 
“1
aval a’ 
PATI, ON 
ry
Ocn| lit TAary. Com

296
6. 
Tributes to 
the East
Infantry Divisions
Armour Regts
Air Force
Airfield
Navy
APPENDIX
Pakistan
3 (two divs without
heavy weapons)
1 Regt comprising
three squadrons
(with light old-
vintage M-24 Tks
having 75 mm guns)
One squadron
(out of date F-86)
One
4 Gun boats
India
12 (full combat
divisions)
All told 18 Squad-
rons with latest
105 mm guns
and night vision
fighting devices.
14 (FGA)
squadrons
3 plus aircraft
carrier Vikrant
Bulk of Indian
Navy including
aircraft carrier
Vikrant which
could also act as
an air base.
The above does not include Indian troops engaged in
subversive activity, supporting the rebels in the garb of Mukti
Bahini since March 1971—some 4 lacs (360,000 Bengalis and
50,000 Indians). The local population was not only hostile
towards us but was also fighting against us,
Pakistan Garrison and their
Commanding General are no better projected than by the enemy
Commanders, foreign Press and our own High Command. Some
of these were:-
‘A veteran of World War H, tall, well-built and full of
confidence, he had the reputation of being a “soldier’s
General”. Flamboyant.’ (/ndian Army after Independence,
p. 438).
‘The beaming Niazi was depicted as a Soldier's General’
(The Liberation of Bangladesh, Major-General Sukhwant
Singh).
www.balochlibrary.com

APPENDIX 
207
c. 
‘Admiral Mountbatten complimented the Major on the
smart turn out of his men and inquired into his
distinguished war record, In 1943 he was “Mentioned in
Despatches” and in the jungles of Kohima he was
awarded Military Cross for outstanding bravery and
leadership.’ (Faujt Akhbar, 25 May 1946)
d. 
‘lam most impressed by the wonderful job done by you
and all ranks under your command in meeting the latest
challenge posed by the enemy in East Pakistan.’ (From
C.-in-C, Yahya, 29 November 1971)
e. 
‘The heroic fight put up by our armed forces in East
Pakistan against overwhelming odds will go down in
history as an epic of indomitable courage, reminiscent of
the highest traditions of soldiers of Islam.’ (Gen. Yahya,
speech on 16 December 1971)
f. 
“THE LIKE OF HIM ARE FEW IN THE WORLD. Reports
quoting US intelligence sources say that resistance put
up by General Niazi and his troops is unprecedented in
the history of war. No army, denied of supplies
completely, has ever fought so long with such undaunted
courage.’ (Star Special, Washington, December 1971)
7. 
My promotions from Major onwards were all accelerated and
I was invariably selected for special tasks and missions both before
and after partition and in return praised and decorated. I am the
highest decorated officer of the Army and compare favourably
with any officer of my age and service group in the armies of the
world as recorded below:-
a. 
World War II
(1) MC (Military Cross). Mentioned in Despatches, and
Commendation Card were awarded for conspicuous
courage, efficiency, endurance, and dedication
beyond the call of duty. (An Indian to get anything
from the British had to be really outstanding,
nothing less).
(2) In physical combat killed a Japanese Major in band
to hand combat in a duel in Assam during World
War II. Nicknamed ‘Tiger’ Niazi. Was promoted
Major from Lieutenant. (In Pakistan I was nicknamed
‘Tarig-bin-Ziyad’ for operations conducted).
wWww.baloc

298 
APPENDIX
(3) During World War II my regiment being Rajputs had
nicknamed me ‘Amar Singh Rathore’.
b, 
Pakistan Operations.
(1) Locust Operations: Sitara-e-Khidmat.
(2) 1965 War: Hilal-e-Jurat.
(3) 1971 War: Hilal-e-Jurat and Sitara-e-Pakistan.
(I have the honour of being awarded Hilal-e-Jurat
twice)
c. 
Medals. A total of twenty-four medals have adorned my
chest. (More than anyone else in the army).
8. 
My failing, I would say, was in not being part of any gang of
fortune seekers, sycophants, self seekers, social climbers, or
conspirators. I always called a spade a spade and never minced
my words. I abhorred power politics and held accumulation of
wealth in contempt. I was loyal to my superiors and juniors both.
I can say without hesitation that I did more for the good of the
country and its armed forces than anyone else.
9. 
I held authority to grant commissions to both officers and
JCQs, which was not even enjoyed by the C.-in-C. Pakistan Army.
I could award battlefield gallantry awards up to Sitara-e-Jurat. This
delegation of powers which was the prerogative of the Head of
the Govt showed their confidence in my being fair in my dealings
with all and that my judgement was beyond any suspicion. I don't
think there will be any other such example of a Commanding
General being given such sweeping powers.
10. Sir, when I got the orders for surrender (I got orders on 13
December 1971 but signed the surrender document on 16
December 1971) as a precautionary measure I had moved all
cash (including foreign exchange) and gold in banks to Dhaka
in order to protect my country’s financial wealth. Who was there
to stop me from grabbing a large chunk of cash and gold and
fleeing to a neutral country? Asylum is not uncommon in modern
society, and could have been arranged. I may not then have lived
in abject poverty as compared to the living standards of our top
brass today. I would have also escaped the humiliation of signing
the surrender document and living in India as a POW. I arranged
the burning of all currency under the supervision of Colonel
Muhammad Khan.
11. But thievery and deserting troops and people during crises
was not Niazi’s cup of tea. I decided to surrender with my troops
www.balochlibrary.com

APPENDIX 
299
instead of fleeing from Dhaka in the helicopters in which I sent
the women and children. I used all my resources for the
protection of the lives of West Pakistanis and Biharis, otherwise
they would have been put to death by the thousands, our
‘daughters and sisters would have been raped and sent to brothels
in Calcutta as was done by the rebels/Indians in February 1971,
and finally the fighting troops would have been placed at the
mercy of the Mukti Bahini. At one stage General Manekshaw did
send a message (because | was hesitating to surrender) that if
the surrender document was not finalized and signed he would
let loose the Mukti Bahini. This bluff I called, and finally all
actions were taken in consultation with me and in accordance
with the Geneva Convention. I stayed with my troops, whereas
some very famous generals left their troops when the Goddess of
War and fortune deserted them. Hannibal left his troops when
defeated at Zama. Napoleon left his troops twice, once in Egypt
and once in Russia. Lt-Gen. Yaqub Khan resigned and left his
troops in East Pakistan in March 1971.
12. Mr President, I see no cogent reasons for denying me and
my family the pension that I earned over a period of four decades,
especially when all others who were responsible for the military
and political débacle in East and West Pakistan went unscathed.
This was not the end—they were given lucrative jobs after
retirement. To single me out was to nail a scapegoat for East
Pakistan and to hide and protect the real culprits. I list below
some of the important actors in the great tragedy till the curtain
fell:
a. 
General Yahya Khan. Two pensions and treatment abroad
at Govt. expense. The kingmaker, conspirator, and
defaulter was given the honour and privilege of a hero.
b. 
Gen. Abdul Hamid. Right-hand man of Gen. Yahya and
virtually the C.-in-C. Granted pension and sent abroad
for treatment at Govt. expense.
c. 
Lt.-Gen, Peerzada, Principal Staff Officer to the
President, who never heard a shot fired in anger,
betrayed Gen. Yahya, and joined hands with those who
opposed him. Granted full pension.
d. 
Lt-Gen. Gul Hassan. Who never heard a bullet fired in
anger in Pakistan and vet rose to dizzy heights. Showed
reluctance when asked to take over command of East
] 
|
Te TTS 
LL . 
Liik 
is
\ ny, W W - D ld Bk pye * nN Lil D 
y Td 
VT “VV COM
) 
) ew Nt\/VAALA
e/

300
APPENDIX
Pakistan Garrison. All generals evaded posting to East
Pakistan; finally I, being twelfth on the seniority list, was
selected to command East Pakistan Garrison, because
the President, gauging the attitude and performance of
generals senior to me, decided to go for efficiency and
suitability instead of seniority and formality. As CGS, Gen.
Gul Hassan’s handling of Divisions and Corps was so
disastrous that the war in West Pakistan was lost in spite
of the fact we had everything in our favour. He
deliberately made false promises to me regarding
despatch of reinforcements and equipment for East
Pakistan, because professionally he wanted to run me
down, and was an active member of the junta which had
decided to get me defeated and so lose East Pakistan. He
was promoted as COAS in his present rank but was
removed by Mr Bhutto. He got his full pension and an
ambassadorial job.
Air Chief Marshal Rahim. Disgraceful conduct during
the 1971 War. He hid himself and his Air Force while
the Indian Air Force had more or less free run all over
West Pakistan. He was not only retired from his post but
made an ambassador and given full pension.
Lt.-Gen. Jahanzeb Arbab. He was removed from
command of his brigade in East Pakistan by his GOC
and sent back from East Pakistan for trial for corruption
and looting cash. He was found guilty by an enquiry but
was promoted from a Brigadier to the rank of Lt.-Gen.
and later retired with full pension.
Maj.-Gen. Rao Farman Ali.
(1) The crack-down in March 1971 was presided over by
Gen. Farman Ali. The action was so severe and harsh
that it resulted in closure of all avenues of
compromise with the Awami League. He contacted
the UN representative in Dhaka in December 1971
and divulged the contents of a Top Secret document
to him without the approval and knowledge of the
Governor or myself or the President. He was in close
touch with the Indian C.-in-C. and the Russians
without our knowledge.
(2) He sent Rs 80,000 (a lot of money in 1971) to his
B® 
|
4 
~~ 
7
L. 
J = 
Crqaewr vy 
ay 
as
\ / 
{ 
| 
pp
WW 
W 
UC Al OCNIIDIal Y 
WN Jill

APPENDIX 
301
wife through his nephew, a helicopter pilot. The
matter was reported but no action taken. He was
made Chairman of Fauji Foundation and later a
Minister. He is now rolling in money, which raises
eyebrows.
h. 
Major-General Tajjamal Hussain. Was court-martialled
and punished but his pension was restored after his
release on advice of Gen. Aslam Beg, ex COAS.
j. 
There were two other cases of officers whose pensions
were restored. These were:
(1) Colonel Khanzada. Joined INA (Indian National
Army) during World War II and was punished but
was granted pension by Field Marshal Ayub Khan.
(2) Maj.-Gen. Akbar Khan. Convicted in Rawalpindi
Conspiracy case in 1951 but granted pension and
made a Minister by Mr Bhutto in 1972.
13. From the above it will be seen that officers convicted of an
offence were given pension, but in my case no conviction yet
pension withheld.
14. Mr President, I have laid before you in brief all the pain and
agony that have come the way of me and my children for reasons
best known to those who were responsible for it. Your position as
Supreme Commander is unassailable in terms of undoing any
injustice. The basic pillar of justice is “You give concession to
one, you have to give it to all.’ This is the Law of Equity and no
exceptions can be made. There should be the same yardstick for
everyone. If the matter were referred to the Ministry of Law or
the Chief Justice of Pakistan, they would not deny the Law of
Equity which treats all at par in a given situation. Islam spread in
the world because it gave justice and fair play top priority and
became the saviour of suffering mankind.
15. Must I, therefore, continue to suffer for the reason that I
commanded a theatre of war cut off from the centre by a
thousand miles, where political expedients dominated the
military options? When the shedding of East Pakistan was decided
well before the anticipated war? When everyone else directly or
indirectly involved with East Pakistan was either fully rehabilitated
or granted full pension or given important assignments?
16. Mr President, must the last commander of East Pakistan live
his remaining life in misery and his children be made to suffer

302 
APPENDIX
and live under a shelter in gross disrepair and without private
transport? Must the general and his family be punished and
condemned collectively for:
a. 
Accepting the command of East Pakistan when the
shining stars of the army would not touch it with a
bargepole and where two generals had already failed.
b. 
Keeping the Pakistan flag flying for eleven months in
East Pakistan against all odds while those responsible for
the crackdown and bunglings were conveniently shifted
to West Pakistan.
c. 
Not abandoning the command after surrender in order
to provide leadership to the troops and thousands of
West Pakistanis and millions of Biharis who would have
been murdered in cold blood and lakhs of women raped
and sold to brothels.
d. 
Suffering the humiliation of signing the surrender
documents and remaining in POW camp when I could
have escaped without any difficulty.
e. 
Being the highest decorated officer.
f. 
Being denied the Law of Equity which forms an
important pillar of justice and Islam.
g. 
<A political disaster which emerged after years of
fermentation and ultimately exploded in a military
debacle. (Niazi a coward and scapegoat).
17. What could be a better projection of a soldier than the battle-
field performance report in the form of Annual Manuscript
Report by hts C.-in-C, under whom he fought a war. [See,
Appendix 2.]
18. Mr President, my petition is not nourished with malice
towards anyone. Names came up only in order to highlight the
injustice done to me. I seek justice at the hands of the elected
President of the Democratic Islamic Republic of Pakistan, justice
denied to me for over two decades, which is the restoration of
my pension as Lt.-Gen. with retrospect. By retiring me as a
[1.Gen. (the rank which I held for four years) and giving me
pension with retrospect, the era of victimization will finally come
to a close, and justice will eclipse the period of deprivation, for
which I would be very grateful.
19. What better support can be given to me when the troops
under my command fought valiantly against heavy odds. It was
only possible by excellent leadership provided by the command
at all levels. Some examples:
www.balochlibrary.com

APPENDIX 
303
a. 
A company comprising 75 men—30 regular troops and
45 Mujahids under a young Captain—at Kamalpur Post
held one Indian brigade (3000 men), supported by 18
field guns and 18 mortars, for 21 days. The position was
strafed, rocketed and napalmed by enemy aircraft twice
daily but the Pakistani troops held their ground.
b. 
One Pak battalion (900 men) at Hilli held one Indian
infantry division consisting of 5 infantry brigades (15
battalions) and one tank brigade (3 tank regiments) for
20 days. When the battalion was ordered to fall back to
their main position, they did so in perfect order on
Bogra, 40 miles behind. This position too was attacked
by enemy aircraft twice daily.
c. 
Dafadar Sarwar of a tank regiment at Bogra refused to
surrender and went into the Indian positions blazing the
guns of his solitary tank. When the tank was destroyed
he came out and charged with his personal weapon till
he was cut to pieces. The Indian troops reversed slopes
and gave him an honourable burial.
d. 
A military burial is given by the enemy to a soldier by
whose courage even the enemy is impressed. In World
War II millions of soldiers fought for years but there is
mention of only one military burial, given by the
Germans to a British sergeant. He had accompanied the
Commandos who went to kill Rommel in the Western
Desert. I had only 45,000 men from West Pakistan and
open war lasted for 26 days, during which four of my
heroes were given military burial by the Indians (this
noble gesture proves that the days of chivalry are not yet
over).
20. There may not be any other such examples of courage,
efficiency, devotion to duty, and acting on the proverb ‘with the
board or on the board’ in the history of warfare. Had the
commander of these troops made no contribution in building
their fighting spirit and acts of valour?
www.balochlibrary.com

