274 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Major-General Farman’s unauthorized signal to the UNO
without the President’s approval, his approaching representatives
of the USA, USSR, France, and Great Britain and telling them to
take over the administration of East Pakistan without my or the
Governor's knowledge and permission, his contacts with the
Russians and the Indian C.-in-C. without my knowledge or
approval, Air Marshal Rahim’s buzzing his aircraft over
President’s House after the cease-fire in East Pakistan—all these
acts were part of the planned coup to install Bhutto in power.
The ignominy of surrender is, for a soldier, a fate worse than
death, particularly when he is not beaten on the battlefield and
he is surrendering due to the fault and failure of others. This
ignominy was imposed on all the officers and men of Eastern
Command by our rulers and selfish officers sitting in GHQ, I
issued the orders ‘last man last round’ on 13 December—a death
warrant for a soldier, and the answer from all over was ‘labaik’ (it
will be done). We were all willing to fight to the last man and to
the last round to achieve the mission assigned to us so that
Western Garrison could complete its allotted task.
By mixing CAF with regular troops, mainly to compensate for
casualties, since no replacements were being sent, we raised our
fighting strength considerably. By intelligent deployment of
supporting arms, services, and CAF we reduced the area of
responsibility. We defeated the Russian-trained local guerrillas in
a lightning campaign of less than two months, which was nothing
less than a miracle, because according to expert opinion, 250-
300,000 troops trained in counter-insurgency would be required,
given the full support of the local population and the
government. We did it with 45,000 troops who had no experience
or training in guerrilla warfare while the locals were also fighting
against us and the civilian government was more or less non-
existent. We pushed the guerrillas out of the country and then
kept them at bay for eight months. Had I not been ordered to
stop at the borders and prevented from following the retreating
enemy into India, 
I would have destroyed them, because the
Indian Army at that time was not prepared to face such a sudden
unexpected onslaught by us in that strength. Things would have
been nipped in the bud and Pakistan would have remained
united and the Pakistan Army unbeaten. Politically, morally, and
militarily we had every justification to enter India in pursuit of

EPILOGUE 
275
the Mukti Bahini forces, because the Indians had been fighting
on our soil in the garb of Mukti Bahini. I was not allowed to
enter India because it was against the plans of the junta, which in
a nutshell were, that the Indians should not lose but win the war.
The Indians, having failed to establish the Government of
Bangladesh on the soil of East Pakistan through insurgency and
sneak raids, in eight long months over a frontage of 3,000 miles,
decided to invade East Pakistan to achieve their aim. The Indians
started their invasion on 21 November 1971 and entered our area
from multiple directions with a view to converging on Dhaka,
which they planned to capture in twelve days, but we brought
them to a standstill across or near the borders and held them at
bay for thirteen days. When General Yahya erred and started a 
-
late, inopportune attack in the west on 3 December 1971, it turned
the undeclared war—which was so far restricted to the borders—
into a declared war, which brought the Russians in on the Indian
side openly in accordance with their August 1971 treaty.
The Indian Air Force forced us to move at night or during
inclement weather and destroyed everything useful to us, We still
inflicted unacceptable losses on them both in men and material,
held them at the borders for another week, and eventually
succeeded in bringing them onto ground of our own choosing,
our strong points and fortresses, where they got stuck, particularly
along the main penetrants well away from Dhaka and from each
other. In the process, the Indian Army got vastly spread and lost
cohesion. They had long and vulnerable lines of communication,
while we had everything tucked inside our fortresses, even
artillery and supply dumps. We had cohesion.
I could have escaped the humiliation of signing the surrender
document and Indian captivity by leaving East Pakistan. I had
helicopters at my disposal and the time to leave East Pakistan
without difficulty. 
I could have flown to any neutral or friendly
country carrying all the money I needed out of the funds held
in Dhaka. But I decided to remain with my troops, because my
absence would have brought untold miseries to them, the West
Pakistani civilians, and the Biharis and their women. | considered
it my duty as a soldier and as their commander to stay with them
through thick and thin and to share with them the humiliation
of surrender and the hardships, isolation, and privation of Indian
Captivity.
/ 
= 
Wr 7
j 
oY \J

276 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
My troops fought bravely against heavy odds, with no rest or
relief, and with the enemy all around them, but their spirits
remained high throughout. Never in the history of warfare have
so few fought so well with so little for so long against such
overwhelming odds and so far away from their base.
Most of my senior officers displayed excellent qualities of
leadership, but adverse propaganda by Bhutto and his cronies
blurred their heroic deeds and created a negative image. Had he
been honest, and had he not had a guilty conscience, he would
have given wider terms of reference to the Hamood-ur-Rehman
Commission which should have included the political aspects of
the entire war. Lt.-Gen. Gul Hassan, as COAS, did not object to
these narrow and restricted terms of reference because he knew
full well that with these terms the entire blame would be thrown
on Eastern Command. He had sold his conscience, principles,
code of conduct, and honour by joining Bhutto’s bandwagon.
The Hamood Report was found even by Bhutto’s Cabinet Sub-
committee to be ‘biased’, and its conclusions ‘against evidence
and vindictive to the extent of character assassination’. Others
have called it lopsided, laconic, and inadequate, and it was
reported that the Commission had ‘not observed the norms of a
court of inquiry either in whole or in part’. Later the report was
tampered with by Bhutto and Tikka, so no authentic copy
remained.
The entire blame for the political defeat was being passed on
to Eastern Command. How this was brought about militarily is a
fascinating study of deception and double-cross imposed on
Eastern Command by Generals Yahya, Hamid, Gul Hassan, Tikka
Khan and Farman, with both the Government and GHQ faithfully
dancing to Bhutto’s tune as he unfolded his diabolical plot for
the dismemberment of the country.
Bhutto got rid of the Awami League by giving them
Bangladesh, and inflicted humiliation on the army so that it
could no longer pose a challenge. Through conspiracies he came
to power, and to build up a firm base he released Mujib and
ensured the prolonged detention of 45,000 POWs and 47,000
civilians, including women and children. If the POWs and civilian
internees had come back, he would have been fully exposed. He
sacrificed the national honour when he refused to discuss their
return at Simla. His contempt for the army, which he called

EPILOGUE 
a7 
7
‘cannon fodder for the British’, continued unabated. Bhutto's
undue haste to recognize Bangladesh so that he could perpetuate
his power finally scuppered the chances for a reunification of
Quaid-i-Azam’s Pakistan.
The action of Eastern Command could be viewed in the
following four phases:
Phase 1: Restored the border of East Pakistan by defeating the
insurgents and pushing them back to Indian territory
by May 1971—a feat described as a ‘miracle’ by Tikka’s
supporters.
Phase 2: Defeated the Indians who were supporting the guerrillas
in their endeavour to capture a chunk of East Pakistan
in order to establish Bangladesh. They were unable to
do so by 20 November, even over a frontage of 3,000
miles.
Phase 3: Having failed in the proxy war, the Indian Army
attacked openly on 21 November. According to their
plan they wanted to capture East Pakistan in twelve days,
but they were still fighting the war on the borders on 3
December and did not capture any area of significance.
Phase 4: The start of the delayed war in the west, despite our
recommendations to the contrary. Not achieving any
success there made my position very difficult, but my
troops fought tenaciously and kept the Indians on the
borders for another week. The Indians failed in their
mission, and even praised my withdrawal to the final
battle locations for the defence of Dhaka and the
fortresses. In spite of conspirators like Farman and Qazi
Majid, my troops put up a determined fight and I was
ready for the defence of all my fortresses including
Dhaka. But Yahya insisted on my surrender, and instead
of accepting the Polish and Russian Resolutions, Bhutto
inflicted humiliation and ignominy on Pakistan and its
armed forces.
If I had not been forced to surrender, we could have held East
Pakistan for a longer period, because the Indians were widely
spread, we were still holding all main cities, seaports and airports,
and they had only four weak brigades on initial contact with the
outer defence of Dhaka. To build up their strength, they would

278 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
have had to bring in fresh troops, which would have taken a long
time. Furthermore, all my fortresses except Jessore and
Mymensingh were still intact, were containing eleven of their twelve
invading divisions, and were in a position to hold for a long time
and inflict unacceptable casualties on the Indians. It would have
required their entire strength to capture Dhaka, if at all.
Eastern Garrison was not defeated. I was tricked and forced to
surrender to save West Pakistan.
To find out the truth about the 1971 débacle, it is essential to
appoint a new commission with wider terms of reference. A
military exercise should be held to find out how and why the
small, tired, and ill-equipped Eastern Garrison completed all the
given tasks under the worst possible conditions against
overwhelming odds, and why Western Garrison, with enough
forces and resources and having the initiative, failed and lost
5,500 square miles of territory in less than ten days under
conducive conditions, putting the Indians in such a favourable
position that if the war had continued for another week West
Pakistan would have been overrun. The exercise should be
presided over by the Chief of Army Staff. Two syndicates should
take part. One should consist of Tikka and Gul Hassan and their
team, and the other of myself and my officers. It would be a very
interesting exercise, with many useful lessons to be learnt. It
would also show up the difference between chairborne strategists
and practical, fighting generals.

APPENDIX 1]
Annual Confidential Report
Major-General (since promoted Lieutenant-General) A. A. K.
Niazi has commanded his Division well. He is practical and bold
in his approach to a problem and with his energy, military
backing and experience has forcefully executed his assignments.
He has sound knowledge of tactics and his performance in the
field of training and administration has been impressive.
He has constantly improved his defences and enhanced the
holding capability of his Division. His formation has undertaken
additional responsibilities most willingly and he himself has
performed the Martial Law duties satisfactorily.
General Niazi is a practical soldier and has commanded a
happy Division. He is loyal and patriotic and will, I am sure,
always rise to the occasion. I will have him on my side in war.
HQ 2 Corps 
Sd/-
Multan Cantt 
Lt.-Gen.
No: PA/31-A/CC 
. 
Coma.
8 November 1971 
(Tikka Khan)

APPENDIX 2
Manuscript Report
by
General Abdul Hamid Khan
I know Gen. Niazi well as he has served under me for a long time
in various appointments. Popularly known as ‘Tiger’ since World
War II, he is the highest decorated officer of our Army.
In 1971 he was specially selected as GOC Eastern Command
to replace Gen. Tikka Khan to sort out the complex intricate and
‘messed up’ situation in East Pakistan.
A practical soldier, reputed to excel under adverse
circumstances, Gen. Niazi is straight forward, honest, determined
and a dedicated soldier; has the ability to get the most out of his
men under stress and strain.
He handled the crises in East Pakistan in April 1971 ably: in
just two months cleared the insurgents and threw out the Indian
Border Security Force and Indian regular forces fighting in
disguise from Pakistan soil. The operations were conducted boldly
and swiftly displaying tactical flair, efficient planning and
dedicated hard work.
Gen. Niazi’s plan for the defence of East Pakistan and for not
allowing the enemy to establish a Bangladesh enclave in Pakistan
were sound and were approved by me and the President. The
events and battles of West and East Pakistan cannot be considered
in isolation. The bulk of the country’s fighting strength was in
the West Wing, and victory in the West would have assured victory
in the East as well.

APPENDIX 
281
Gen. Niazi’s three infantry Divisions had the additional task of
maintaining internal law and order especially on the lines of
communications and in the larger towns, and helping the civil
administration in dealing with the insurgent activities in the
interior of the country. 
|
These three gallant Divisions, lacking artillery support and
with practically no air cover, and [despite] persistent inter-
ferences by the enemy’s Fifth Column, fought with tenacious
courage, indomitable spirit, fanatical zeal and efficiency which
has seldom been paralled in history. They fought against twelve
Indian Divisions heavily supported by tanks and artillery and
helicopters, and hundreds of fighter aircraft, bulk of the Indian
Navy and Mukti Bahini fifth columinsts. In spite of such heavy
odds, our gallant, dedicated troops under the leadership of
‘Tiger’ Niazi fought on, till ordered to lay down arms. ‘Tiger’
had ordered his troops to fight to the last man and last round
but on orders of the President and on advice from me he had to
lay down arms. The defeat in the East was NOT a military but a
political defeat, a defeat whose seeds were sown years earlier
leading to political discontentment in the East Wing—Gen. Niazi
and his brave men, for that matter the whole Army, had to pay
the price for this in 1971. All their bravery, efficiency, and
dedication to duty in the face of such heavy odds could not alter
the situation.
A brilliant career came to an abrupt end. Gen. Niazi is one of
the best field commanders I have seen or worked with. I wish
him all success in future and he can rest assured that he has
done more for his country than many a so-called patriot.
Sd/-
Abdul Hamid Khan
April 1972 
; 
General

APPENDIX 3
CONFIDENTIAL
IMMEDIATE
HQ Eastern Command
Dacca Cantt
Tele : 251
721/R/A1
15 April 197]
To: 
Comd 9 Div 
Comd CAF
Comd 14 Div 
ACC PAF
Comd 16 Div 
OC 3 Cdo Bn
DG EP CAF 
OC Log Fit
Comd EP Log Area 
OC 604 FIU
CONCEP 
OC 734 FIC
OC 27 GL Sec
Info: 
HQ MLA Zone ‘B’ 
Det ISI
Internal: 
GS Branch 
Estb. Branch
Distr:, 
HQ Def Coy
Subject: 
Discipline — Troops
1. Since my arrival, I have heard numerous reports of troops
indulging in loot and arson, killing people at random and without
reason in areas cleared of the anti state elements. Of late there
have been reports of rape and even the West Pakistanis are not
being spared; on 12 Apr. two West Pakistani women were raped,
and an attempt was made on two others. There is talk that looted
material has been sent to West Pakistan through returning
families.

APPENDIX 
283
2. I gather that even officers have been suspected of indulging in
this shameful activity and, what is worse, that in spite of repeated
instructions, comds have so far failed to curb this alarming state
of indiscipline. I suspect that COs and OSC units/sub-units are
protecting and shielding such criminals.
3. Here I wish to sound a note of warning to all comds that if
this tendency is not curbed and stamped out at once, it will
undermine battle efficiency and discipline of the Army. It is a
contagious disease and you must be fully alive to its adverse effects
and far-reaching consequences, some day it may well boomerang
involving our own women-folk and your own person. It is not
uncommon in history, when a battle has been lost because troops
were over indulgent in loot and rape.
4. I, therefore, direct that the troops must be got hold of and the
incidence of indiscipline, misbehaviour and indecency must be
stamped out ruthlessly. Those, including officers, found guilty of
such acts must be given deterrent and exemplary punishment. I
will NOT have soldiers turn into vagabonds and robbers. Such
elements must be given no quarter, mercy or sympathy.
5. 
1 would also like to remind comds, that we have 
a sacred
mission before us and we are yet very far off the goal set before
us. Nothing must detract us from the fulfilment of the task
entrusted to us. Indiscipline will only undermine it.
6. 
I would like every soldier in this Theatre to be an embodiment
and an example of discipline. As far as the officers are concerned,
1 wish to remind them that they have a code of honour and
conduct, and as gentlemen and officers I would like them to
abide by it. This is necessary if we are to achieve the aim and win
back the people of this Province.
7. These instructions equally apply to all intelligence agencies
MP and SSG operating in East Pakistan.
Sd/-
Lt.-Gen.
Commander Eastern Comd
(Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi)
a 
re 
| 
11°41
OO 
OA 
© 
OA 
© 
@- 
l~ 
g 
m~ 
mil. 
- 
ane 
: 
; 
_ 
a
I 7 I ( v4 > r ) i | I} ») RATT RHR rN
VV 
vv 
VV eQVTUAvy J Wwhihid 
| J 
5 | Cal Y a YW LG ] iv i
e/

