Carrer 15
RETURN TO PAKISTAN
Twenty-eight months passed in the constricted and confined
environment of the camps. Bhutto had arranged for the return
of the prisoners of war to be delayed in order to dampen their
will to resist, and so that they would toe his line on their return.
As his role in East Pakistan’s tragedy had been so great, he was
very keen for the prisoners of war to stay in the camps in India,
so that none could expose his role.
To fool the nation he sent a delegation of women abroad to
request various nations to persuade India to send back our POWs.
There was none amongst them with political status. Though this
too was a practical joke on the nation, still no one said anything
against it. If he had been serious about this matter, he should
have sent a family member with the deputation. It should be
remembered that Mrs Gandhi went abroad herself to plead her
country’s case. Another degrading thing that Bhutto did was to
tell our film artistes to address the Indian film actors to persuade
their government to return the Pakistani POWs. I heard only the
voice of Muhammad Ali, who called Raj Kapoor by his first name,
as he would an old friend. Nothing can be more disgusting and
degrading for a nation than to adopt such cheap and undignified
methods for the return of their gallant soldiers.
Now the question is: why did Mrs Gandhi fall in with Bhutto’s
plan and agree to keep us in India, if not permanently, at least
for a long period? We were living in barracks while the Indian
troops were living in tents and other temporary accommodation,
and the Indians were feeding us and paying us—a nominal sum,
but all the same, it amounted to quite a lot. We were like white
elephants, being fed and looked after but doing nothing in
return. [The reason was that the Indians had seen the
performance of Eastern Garrison against overwhelming odds and

RETURN TO PAKISTAN 
245
under the worst possible circumstances, and it had been excellent
by any standard. The Indians had failed to achieve any of their
missions even under the most favourable circumstances ever
available to any army in the history of warfare. Indira Gandhi did
not want these troops to go to Pakistan as long as there was
fighting spirit and tactical flair in them. She wanted them to rot
in Indian custody until they became unfit to fight. I read in a
newspaper, while in Indian custody, that Mrs Gandhi had stated
that she could not allow the three crack Pakistani divisions to go
back to Pakistan. Major-General Lachhman Singh has written:
The Pakistan Infantry fought well. They showed aggressive spirit, good
leadership by junior officers and non-commissioned officers and
excellent use of ground and weapons.
(The Indian Sword Strikes Back)
Another pertinent question arises: if Bhutto did not want us
and Mrs Gandhi was willing to keep us, then how did we come
back? Although Bangladesh was established, until it was
recognized by Pakistan it had no status. So the Second Islamic 
—
Summit was exploited and cleverly used as a ruse by Bhutto to
recognize the new State. The second stage was its becoming a
member of the UN. When the time for this came, ‘China
threatened to veto...the entry of Bangladesh to the UN and thus
enabled Pakistan to secure the release of prisoners of war.’ (Dawn,
Karachi, 27 December 1993) So India had perforce to send us,
and Bhutto had to accept us.
When it became known that we were going home, General
Shah Beg Singh asked me whether the officers were to be sent in
two lots. [ told him Major-General Farman, Admiral Sharif, and
Air Commodore Inam should go in the first batch, while my
Divisional Commanders and I should go in the second batch.
[also informed him that, as the commander of the Garrison, I
would like to be the last to cross the Indo-Pakistan border. After
a few days he informed me that GHQ Delhi had not agreed to
my proposal as Tikka Khan, COS Pakistan Army, wanted Generals
Farman and Majid to come earlier than the other generals. He
also told me that he had found out from his own sources that
these generals were required for discussion and briefing. Tikka
was keen that Farman should come back earlier because, like
yg 
e-
> 
4 
a e at 
S 
fe 
ad q 
7 
fr ’ an’ ry
IU dad Y.CO!
LRAAREY A 
&@ “Ae A 
y 
eo 
LJ ASA
A
~
“
19, VA 9. VAS. 
G4 
a ' , ay i
VV VY 
WY 
| 4 
| 
q 
pe
WY 
WW 
WY 
y@ 
} 
4% 
|
VY 
VY 
VV 
-UUMALIY

246 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
him, he was an artillery officer and he had helped Tikka in
formulating and implementing the drastic action of 25 March
against the Bengalis. Maj.-Gen. Qazi Majid was the younger
brother of Lt.-Gen. Abdul Hameed (Corps Commander 4 Corps)
who at Lahore was telling officers to speak against me. I had
removed Majid from command because his performance during
the 
last days of the war had become erratic, but as
communications had been cut his replacement could not be sent.
I had informed him about my decision.
It was obvious that, as both these generals were under a cloud,
a concerted effort was being made to win them over to speak
against me in exchange for GHQ’s protection and patronage.
Farman’s involvement in the ‘UNO Signal Case’, when he told
the French, Russian, British, and American representatives in
Dhaka to take over the administration of East Pakistan without
my or the Governor’s knowledge, his hiding himself on the night
when General Nazar was ambushed and I wanted him to take
over 16 Division, and his connections with Russians and Indians,
had placed him in a precarious position, Majid’s adverse
performance during the last days of war, his blowing up of
Bhairab Bazar Bridge when his troops were still on the other side
of Meghna River and there was no danger to the bridge, his not
falling back on Dhaka to occupy the allotted area and not
attacking enemy heli landings within the range of his artillery
and in his area of responsibility, were all acts that discredited
him. So now they were being bailed out in exchange for their
co-operation and for toeing the government’s line. Farman had
made a few telephone calls to West Pakistan through the courtesy
of Colonel Randhawa, our camp intelligence officer at Jubblepur.
We had all been offered the facility but we had all declined it
with the exception of Farman, The camp staff informed me that
Farman had talked to someone at GHQ Rawalpindi. For the last
fortnight Colonel Randhawa had been visiting Majid and 
Farman
regularly and the two of them (Farman and Majid) had become
inseparable, walking and talking together.
The days passed quickly. Our meagre belongings were packed
carefully in our suitcases. The bubbling spirits of the inmates of
the camp were reflective of their eagerness to join their families
after a long period of separation and tribulation.

RETURN TO PAKISTAN 
247
Farman and Majid teamed up with Tikka on arrival in Pakistan,
and their role in discrediting me, their comrades, and Eastern
Command is indelible. The damage they did to their comrades,
colleagues, and commander, to save their own skins and cover
up their misdeeds, was irreparable. Farman’s subsequent career
has already been recounted. Majid was also rewarded with a good
job in the Foreign Office, while all those who had done well were
unceremoniously removed from the army.
In comparison to Farman and Majid, the other generals
displayed high standards of morality. During the PNA movement
I exposed the role of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. Infuriated, he wanted
some generals to make statements against me. General Abdul
Hameed (COAS) and General Mitha were approached through
Mumtaz Bhutto, who was holding a high position in the regime,
and were told to speak against me. Both were under a cloud and
were promised rewards, but they bluntly refused. What a contrast
between the officers! One pair selfish and intriguing, the other
so dignified, in spite of the fact that Hamid and Mitha were part
of the junta and Farman and Majid served under my command.
In fact General Peerzada told me on my return that Bhutto would
not try us. He would be opening a Pandora’s box if he touched
any of the officers of Eastern Command or the leading lights of
the junta in West Pakistan. No wonder none was tried by court
martial. Only [ and my COS were made scapegoats and were not
given a chance to defend ourselves in a court martial.
The day finally arrived. With smiles on our faces and joy in
our hearts, we moved to Jubblepur Railway Station to board the
special train for Pakistan. We were seen off by our camp staff and
senior officers of Jubblepur Cantonment. Gen. Shah Beg Singh,
when saying goodbye, told me, ‘I am sorry, your goose has been
cooked. They have planned to throw the entire blame of the
197] débacle on you and your command.’ | said, “Thank you. It
is Allah who decides man’s destiny. Man is too small to interfere
in His doings.’ The guard waved his green flag. The train slowly
started rolling towards Pakistan.
As the train went by, the lights of Jubblepur shone like
thousands of stars. Slowly they started blinking and disappeared.
Everything was engulfed in darkness, except the lights of the train,
which created an elusive pattern in the immediate vicinity of the
railway tracks. In the semi-dark atmosphere of my compartment

248 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
the feelings of happiness and acute apprehension mingled to
create a haze of uncertainty. Bhutto had replaced Yahya and
achieved his ambition. He had seen East Pakistan burn and
crumble. In the ashes of East Pakistan he found his destiny. From
the ashes he picked up the crown and placed it on his head. To
rule West Pakistan undisputed was written in his stars.
Seldom in the history of mankind has a man so blatantly
changed the nature of history. He blended history with fiction
and twisted stories to defame the gallant Eastern Garrison. His
spite and hatred were simply the outcome of conscience. For his
misconceived actions he wanted a scapegoat; for his undeniable
part in the amputation of East Pakistan he wanted a target. From
a destroyer, he wanted to become a builder; from an egocentric
chauvinist, he wanted to be known as a humble person; from a
feudal lord he wanted to be called a friend of the poor. He
wanted to assign the complete blame to Eastern Command, which
had established a record in guerrilla warfare, which fought against
overwhelming odds, under unprecedented difficulties, a
diminutive force which fought with courage and determination
for nine long months, without rest, without relief, and without
help. An army forgotten and disowned even by its own President
and deserted by the provincial Government of East Pakistan at
the eleventh hour. Their bravery, their sacrifices, their excellent
achievements, their defiance, all were trodden in the dirt.
The train reached Wagah in the early hours of 30 April 1974.
At Wagah, the Indians had pitched tents just near the border.
Before we entered Pakistan we were given a cup of tea. I was the
last man to enter Pakistan territory. Our period of captivity was
twenty-eight months, and if we count from March 1971, our time
in East Pakistan comes to three years. 
|
Beautiful shamianas were pitched on the Pakistan side of the
border at Wagah. The seniormost officer present was Lt.-Gen.
Abdul Hameed, Commander 4 Corps, brother of Maj.-Gen. Qazi
Majid, whom I had removed from the command of 14 Division
for his irregularities. Tikka was conspicuously absent. When I
entered Pakistan, a Brigadier by the name of Anjum saluted me
and said, ‘No statement to the Press, Sir’. Then he produced a
rectangular piece of cardboard about four inches square on
which ‘No. 1’ was written. He told me to stick it on my chest so
that I could be photographed. I asked if this was only for me, or

RETURN TO PAKISTAN 
249
for others as well. He said it was for other generals as well. I
asked him whether anyone else had been photographed and
whose idea it was. He said no one else had been photographed.
Jt was General Tikka’s orders. Even in India we had not been
subjected to such humiliation!
I got very angry and told Anjum to go away before I lost my
temper at his uncalled-for suggestion. He vanished. General
Hameed also approached me and told me not to give any
statement to the Press and not to say we would take revenge
against the Indians. I asked him why and he said, ‘This is the new
government policy.’
Tikka’s absence spoke volumes about GHQ and Government’s
attitude towards us. I felt really hurt. 1 had served with him on
several occasions and we knew each other well. Maybe he held
me and not his own inefficiency responsible for his removal from
Eastern Command and the Governorship of East Pakistan. I could
never have imagined that he would carry the grudge so far,
especially when he was holding the post of COAS, and was
supposed to be the guardian and protector of his juniors and
their interests, and I had come back from POW camp after a
long period under travail and hardship. It is under such
circumstances that the stature of a person can be measured.
Tikka’s absence was designed to indicate the Government’s
displeasure. Bhutto’s arrogance was understandable, but Tikka’s
attitude was intriguing. In India we were seen off by the senior
officers at the Cantonment, but in Pakistan I was being received
by a man junior to me.
After a few days Tikka’s role emerged with full force. He and
Bhutto had joined up to disgrace and belittle the armed forces
to ensure that they would never again prove a threat to Bhutto's
position. The Butcher of Bengal was exonerated by the Hamood-
ur-Rehman Commission, although in an interview given earlier
to an Italian reporter, Bhutto had blamed him for the bloody
and haphazard action of 25 March 1971.
Tens of thousands of people had turned up at Wagah to
receive me, in spite of the fact that the police had blocked all the
approaches to Wagah. There was a big crowd round the shamianas
where we were made to sit. People were shouting, ‘Show us
General Niazi, our ghazi.’ They had come from far-flung places,
even the Tribal Areas. Seeing the crowd, General Hamid got
| 
i | 
2 
| 
yew
a 
—~ 
| 
E 
= 
.
; 
V 
\ 
6 1 
i 
Irnh 
} i | EN 4 Yo 
Ye ad 
Os 
{% fy tran
‘ IN/ 
! a 
| 
| 
Di 
, 
| 
ye 
4% 
/ 
f 
~ 
a
IV 
UALVULULI 
JILAaAILV.CUTTSI

250 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
panicky and vanished. When he reappeared I asked him what
the delay was and where he had gone. He said he had spoken to
General Tikka and told him it would be impossible to reach
Lahore by car due to the presence of the crowd, which stretched
all the way to Shalamar Gardens, about eight miles from Wagah.
So I was taken to Lahore airport in the Cantonment by helicopter.
There was a big crowd outside my house as well. | came out of
the car, shook hands with a few people, and waved to the rest.
Many people brought sweets, garlands, etc. The gifts became so
many that we had to empty a room to put them in. I stayed for
ten days in Lahore and each day people thronged my house.
I left for Mianwali on the Mari Indus Train, which starts from
Lahore at eight o'clock at night. All the railway stations were full
of people who had come to greet me. I did not sleep that night. I
came out at every station and waved to the people. When the train
entered the area of Mianwali District, there were bigger crowds.
People had brought drums and flutes and were dancing. When
the train reached Mianwali Station, there were a lot of police but
no civilians. When I got off the train the Deputy Commissioner
and Superintendent of Police came and shook hands with me. I
asked the Deputy Commissioner the reason for not allowing people
to come on to the railway platform. He said, ‘Government orders.’
I said, ‘DC Sahib, I am a law-abiding citizen and a responsible
officer of the Pakistan Army. This is too much. Allow the people to
come.’ He said he was sorry but he could not do it. I told him that
in that case I would, and he should take himself and his men off if
he wanted to avoid getting into trouble. In the crowd there were
quite a few army officers who had taken leave to come and receive
me, and quite a few from the police. So I waved to them. Within
minutes they charged at the policemen, snatched their rifles, and
literally threw them over the iron fence. The police did not fire
because my people too were armed. Both the DC and SP
disappeared. The whole city and suburbs had come to receive me.
Nobody went to work or to his office, and no shops were opened
that day. Here too lots of people came to see me every day, The
majority were retired army personnel.
Bhutto, seeing my popularity, became cautious and tried to
patch things up with me, but I declined his offers. He kept me in
uniform for over a year with all the benefits of Generalship before
he took any action.

RETURN TO PAKISTAN 
251
After ten days’ leave, I was called to GHQ in Rawalpindi to
make my report there, and to write my report for the Hamood-
ur-Rehman Commission. GHQ gave me the cold shoulder and I
did not get any help or encouragement from there. I asked
General Tikka to give me the correspondence exchanged
between Governor Malik and the President and between my HO
and GHQ. He was unable to do so as it was all with Mr Bhutto. I
also applied to Chief Justice Hamood-ur-Rehman himself, who
was likewise unable to get the documents from Bhutto. We had
destroyed our records when the orders for surrender were
received. GHQ provided all facilities and all our correspondence
to Major-General Mugeem for his book on the 1971 crisis, but I
was refused help,in completing my reports in spite of the fact
that I was still in uniform. Mr Muzaffar Hussain, Chief Secretary
East Pakistan, gave me copies of some of the signals between
myself and GHQ, and between the Governor and the President.
This helped me a lot in completing my reports. It was a very
noble gesture on his part.

Cuarrer 16
HAMOOD-UR-REHMAN
COMMISSION
The East Pakistan scenario had never been explained to the masses.
Cocooned in a safe haven, they failed to comprehend the situation
in its true perspective. GHQ and the government failed to apprise
them of the reality in the province. They were too far away to see
the predicament and tribulations being faced by the troops. Fed
on false news and promises, their hopes were inflated, their
expectations high. ‘The news of the debacle jarred their senses.
The nation, ill-prepared for the shock, was stupefied. Its
expectations were fragmented and its pride scarred. Tempers ran
high and sentiment reached fever pitch. The masses were restless.
Their anger had to be cooled. It was essential to mollify them.
The demand of the public was to hang the traitors. The people
came out on the streets on 20 December 1971. In a press
conference, Bhutto was asked, ‘Will Yahya Khan be tried?’ He
replied that those who were asking for the trial of the traitors
had already been defeated in the 1970 elections. When told that
the nation wanted it, he said, ‘I will not be a party to it.’
The demand of the public was too overwhelming to be ignored.
Procrastination would have placed Bhutto in a vulnerable position.
He had to ease out of this dilemma to establish his credentials. On
24 December 1971, Bhutto as the new President and Civilian
Martial Law Administrator ordered the formation of a Commission
of Inquiry, to be headed by Chief Justice Hamood-ur-Rehman, to
probe the traumatic events leading to the breakup of Pakistan.
The formation of the Commission was hailed by all and sundry.
The people’s demand had been met. It was a high-powered
Commission. [t was hoped that the Commission would function
without fear, favour, or prejudice. The nation reposed its
Pa 
ew 
yat > 
y 
ay
1 
_ 
6 
| 
/ 
{ 
| 
|
\ 
| 
y 
"4 
| 
| 
\ 
aed 
/X 
J 
] 
)
AUS 
Ay 
y 
oS 
at
L 
= 
| 
> ~. |

HAMOOD-UR-REHMAN COMMISSION 
253
complete trust in the Commission. Even we in the POW camps
were delighted. The case was to be tried by the dispensers of
justice. Justice would prevail, the truth would come out, and the
real culprits would be exposed and the ominous clouds would
disperse. But the Hamood-ur-Rehman Commission (HRC) turned
out to be a farce. The terms of reference defined by the Head of
the State were ‘to inquire into the circumstances in which the
Commander Eastern Command surrendered and the members
of the Armed Forces under his command laid down their arms
and cease-fire was ordered along the borders of West Pakistan
and India and along the cease-fire line in Jammu and Kashmir’.
Lt.-Gen. Gul Hassan, the C.-in-C., the man who brought Bhutto
into power through a coup, gave not a whimper of protest at the
restricted terms of reference. As Gul Hassan, the then CGS, and
Tikka Khan who later replaced him, were both deeply implicated
in the debacle in one way or the other, the restricted terms of
reference suited them. In fact it bailed them out. Had both these
generals exerted pressure on Bhutto, as was their moral duty, to
widen the scope of the inquiry, they would have rendered
tremendous service to Pakistan and the armed forces, but
unfortunately they gave priority to their own security, their own
gain, even to the extent of cheating the nation and humiliating
the officers of the army.
From the very outset, it was never the aim to delve into the
causes which led to the amputation of the Eastern Wing. It was
more of a placating action to mollify the emotional upsurge of
the masses. It deliberately tried to conceal more and reveal less.
It was directed at finding a scapegoat to divert the attention of
the public from the devious underplay of a power-seeker who
had damaged the national edifice beyond repair. Even a cursory
glance would reveal the shallowness of the terms of reference.
The scope was confined to military operations, and even then to
operations in the Eastern Theatre, delinked from the national
war plan. Certain factors which had contributed towards
Pakistan’s disintegration were placed beyond the ambit of the
Commission's responsibility. The terms of reference were
specifically designed to exclude the political responsibility which
led to the holocaust. The overt and covert activities of the power
seekers which had cut deep into the national fabric were placed
beyond the confines of the Commission’s jurisdiction. Too much
wwrferwwfewweyrY 
a 
o~ 
rr 
aL 
eee 
~~ 
~
Oe 
GA 
@ 
GA 
@ 
@, 
arte 
freoh 
4 
I} eal 
® 
Ye ad 
OF, 
I’ f*Y. rw
WWW 
Ud L@y' 
1 
i 
| vial VU 
CO) | 
|
v 
Vv 
i 
| 
vv 
@ 
JFTAAN\T & 
A 
@e 
JRWUASL 
y 
nm TAG 
A

