78 
JHE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Mujahids
Some Mujahid Battalions and Independent Mujahid Companies
had been employed on operational duties along with the regular
forces. Their Battalion Commanders started arriving in East
Pakistan in November 1971. This force was also short of weapons
and equipment. A case was taken up with the Military Operations
and Infantry Directorate at GHQ, but they had their own
limitations. Most of the men were locals, and quite a few deserted
camp. 
,
Razakars
The proposal for raising an organized Razakar Force remained
under consideration with HQ CMLA and GHQ for a tong time.
Although their recruitment had started earlier, sanction for the
raising of this force was given at the end of August 1971. A
separate Razakars Directorate was established, and the whole set-
up started taking proper shape. Two separate wings called Al-
Badr and Al-‘Shams were organized. Well-educated and properly
motivated students from the schools and madrasas were put in Al-
Badr Wing, where they were trained’'to undertake ‘Specialized
|Operations’, while the remainder were grouped together under
AlShams, which was responsible for the protection of bridges,
vital points, and other areas.
The Razakars were mostly employed in areas where army
elements were around to control and utilize them. Being raw
and not fully trained, they were prone to subversion through
local influences, Their defection rate was four per cent in
October 1971 and six per cent in November 1971 and it increased
tremendously when the war started. Despite these handicaps, this
force was useful where available, particularly in the areas where
the rightist parties were in strength and had sufficient local
influence. They and their families were harassed and intimidated
by the rebels, which was a great strain on them. They badly
needed proper training, but the training capacity of Eastern
Command was limited due to operational commitments. It was,
therefore, recommended to GHQ to provide special training

THE MUKTI BAHINI AND OUR CIVIL ARMED FORCES 
79
teams from the training centres in West Pakistan, but there was
no response, 
i
Seventy per cent of the target ceiling of 50,000 Razakars,
spread over all the districts of the province, was achieved. Battle
schools were established to train Razakar platoon and company
commanders. To provide an effective command structure to this
organization, about sixty young officers were selected to be
appointed as Razakar Group Commanders.
Requirements of Arms for the Razakars
All those engaged in operations and having Razakar elements
with them, felt that in order to make the Razakars really effective
in the field, they must be equipped with automatic weapons.
This was important, as the rebels were carrying automatrc
weapons, which were far superior to those issued to the Razakars.
To cater for only one light machine-gun and one sten gun per
Razakar platoon, we required a minimum number of 2,500 light
machine-guns and an equal number of sten guns. Unfortunately,
we could only provide them with 275 light machine-guns and
390 sten guns. This reflects the poor state of weapons with the
Razakars. It adversely affected their morale and their overall
performance in the field against the well-equipped Mukti Bahini.
The Razakars felt that they were not being trusted with superior
arms. This state of affairs was further aggravated as the Razakars
were already exposed to the local negative influence and to
Indian propaganda. In order to keep them under control and
utilize them properly, they were mixed with West Pakistani police
and non-Bengali elements.

CHAPTER 7
OPERATIONAL PLAN
Viewing the mosaic of conflicts, we see that war is now more
complex and destructive. Modern war consists of a chain of
battles fought for protracted periods. War is no longer the affair
of the armed forces only. The army is simply a means to achieve
wider aims. The button for the commencement and termination
of hostile activities is pressed by the government. The democratic
governments have widened their scope of power to control the
military machinery. The barrel of the gun is just one of the
political tools available to governments to achieve their aims,
The mission given to me was: ‘Evict guerrillas. Do not allow
any chunk of territory to fall into enemy hands which they can
declare as Bangladesh. Defend East Pakistan against external
aggression.’ This should have been followed by clear-cut written
operational instructions from GHQ, assigning me a mission,
allocating me resources for the attainment of the mission, and
providing logistic support.
Lieutenant-General Tikka Khan was Martial Law Administrator
and I was Commander, Eastern Command. Each was independent
of the other, although there was some overlapping. I had no
doubt in my mind about my tasks so I got down to the verbally-
assigned mission and evicted the guerrillas from East Pakistan
and restored the borders and provincial government authority
within the shortest period. Tikka Khan started coming to my
meetings. | had to tell him very politely and tactfully to refrain
from coming to my meetings, because we had different tasks and
different HQs to control us.
The Government was then confined to the President's House,
with Generals Yahya, Hamid, Peerzada, Omar, and Mitha
conducting the affairs of the State and East Pakistan. At GHQ,
Lieutenant-General Gul Hassan was the Chief of the General

OPERATIONAL PLAN 
8]
Staff and responsible for the formulation of plans based on the
political objectives given to him. He never bothered to issue any
operational instruction either for counter-insurgency or for the
defence of East Pakistan, even when it was fully known that the
Indian Army was training Mukti Bahini on a large scale under
General Osmani at various centres in India with the help of
Russian guerrilla experts.
With the resources available, I had to plan for the conflicting
requirements. Insurgency required dispersion, while fighting the
Indian Army needed concentration. In spite of my repeated
requests, no artillery and tanks of the divisions and corps were
sent to me, nor was any logistics support, except for ammunition,
provided. The time came when the boots were worn out, fungus
and foot-rot cases were on the increase, and the ordnance stores
were virtually non-existent. I sent my Chief of Staff, Brigadier
Baqir Siddiqui, to the MGO, Lt.-Gen. Wasi-ud-Din, a Bengali
officer, who literally abused him and flatly refused to help. Later
he met Gul Hassan, the CGS, who gave him the cold shoulder.
So we remained short of not only heavy weapons, but were not
provided with even ordnance stores like vests, shirts, trousers,
and boots. The soldiers had to fight bare-footed and bare-chested.
The political mission of not allowing any chunk of territory to
fall to the rebels was reaffirmed by General Hamid when
Brigadier Bagir Siddiqui, my COS, visited GHQ in September
1971. 
I was getting reports of an Indian build-up around East
Pakistan. It was also reported that the Mukti Bahini had been
reorganized into an army of four brigades and eight sectors under
General Osmani. During the meeting at GHQ the enemy threat
was discussed, and the concentration of new Indian formations
from the Chinese border and the raising of II Corps under
General Raina at Krishnagar, near Calcutta, were confirmed. It
was anticipated that India would complete its build-up by the
end of October 1971. The enemy threat was expected as under:
— 
The main effort of three divisions plus a brigade of Mukti
Bahini against Sylhet, Bhairab Bazar, and Chandpur under
4 Corps (Lt.-Gen. Sagat Singh).
— 
An Indian infantry brigade and Mukti Bahini brigade
from Tura side against Mymensingh.

82 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
— 
Two divisions plus against Pachagarh-Rangpur and Hilli
sector under 33 Corps (Lt.-Gen. Thapan).
— 
Two divisions plus from Krishnagar under the newly-
formed 2 Corps (Lt.-Gen, Raina) against Jessore-Khulna
sector to capture Dhaka.
In addition, an overwhelming concentration of army artillery,
and about nineteen engineer battalions, with a lot of bridging
equipment, was also reported. The Indian Army was also reported
to be constructing roads along the eastern border from
Karianganj (opposite Sylhet) to Aijal down to the Chittagong
border which were expected to be ready by October.
In view of these threats, my plan was rehashed. After discussion
with Major-Generals Jamshed and Rahim, Air Commodore Haq
(who were in Dhaka), and my Chief of Staff, Brigadier Baqir
Siddiqui, it was decided to create certain ad hoc formations for
deception, as well as for the occupation of defensive positions
against the envisaged threats along the penetrants mentioned
above.
The border outposts (BOPs) were mainly to be manned by
the Mujahids, Razakars, Scouts, and Rangers, who were also to
protect the lines of communications. The bulk of the regular
troops were to be concentrated in strong points and fortresses to
fight a proper defensive battle. The BOPs covering main
approaches were to be held by regular troops or CAF beefed up
by regular troops, and the rest of the borders were to be held by
CAF under regular officers and JCOS.
During war, commanders are not always faced with the
situation of their own choice. They are at times put in a difficult
position and at times faced with adverse circumstances and the
worst possible conditions. Under those circumstances even their
soundest plans can fall flat due to reasons beyond their control.
My position and circumstances were not altogether that bad.
There were quite a few things in my favour which, if exploited
properly, could have helped a lot and might even have turned
the scales in our favour. Field Marshal Rommel says: ‘No plan
survives contact with the enemy.’ If a commander’s plan gets him
to the battle, it is enough. After that he will fight by instinct, by
ears and eyes and tactical sense, like a duellist.
1
~\ oO)
Ore
LJ CAL
_ 
Fava Zest
a 
OA 
@ 
CGA 
@,
y 
y 
Vv 
y 
Vv 
2)

OPERATIONAL PLAN 
83
There were quite a few courses open to me for carrying out
the allotted tasks effectively, even with meager resources and a
small, ill-equipped, tired force, but political considerations tied
me down to a few obvious courses which the enemy could guess
without much difficulty. So to hide my deficiencies, weakness,
and courses of action, I had to resort to improvisation, deception,
trickery, and bluff. By subtle strategical cunning and tactical skill,
I succeeded in foxing the enemy about my strength and
deployment. The best course for me would have been to follow
closely on the heels of the beaten, retreating Mukti Bahini into
India and not to allow them to reassemble, re-group, and
reorganize, but my hands were tied by the political mission of
not losing any chunk of territory and remaining inside Pakistan.
Not following the beaten enemy into Indian territory was a grave
tactical mistake for which we paid a heavy price at a later stage.
A government which has formulated a war policy and given a
mission to an army commander has to adapt to conditions, which
often change as the war progresses. The High Command is only
required to give clearly the nature of the tasks and then not
interfere with how the commander uses his tools to achieve them,
In this case the High Command intentionally put me at the mercy
of the Indian Army. Having given them the initiative, I had to
react to their actions; I had to wait for the Indian Army and the
Mukti Bahini to start the bidding. I had to do lots of guessing
and had to remain alert and prepared for various contingencies
and eventualities, which is annoying, tedious, and distracting
during operations.
The Concept of Defence
The concept of defence was based on having different layers
which would augment each other. The concept envisaged
imposing maximum attrition on the enemy to dissipate and
weaken his forces to make him lose cohesion before he attacked
the main force and made deep thrusts in the area. A forward
defensive posture based on strong points and fortresses, which
were to be stocked, was decided upon. A detailed explanation of
this concept is attached at Appendix 7.

84 
THE BETRAYAI. OF EAST PAKISTAN
The Pattern of Defence
Outposts
A line of outposts was to be located as far forward as tactically
sound and possible. The underlying idea of the posts was to act
as eyes and ears and serve as a buffer for the defence, and to
make the enemy cautious and delay him for as long as possible.
Posts covering main approaches were to be well-prepared strong
positions to be held by regular troops or CAF beefed up by
regular troops, commanded by regular officers. Alternative
positions, counter-penetration positions, were also to be prepared
on the main routes of ingress.
Strong Points
The next line was to be formed of small towns, minor
communications centres, or other features such as places of
tactical importance, covering any approach. These were to be
the mainstay of the defences and would offer strong resistance
and inflict maximum casualties on the enemy. This line of
defence needed to be well-prepared and stocked.
Fortresses
Next in the plan was a series of fortresses, which were to be the
main towns and main communications centres. This line of
defence was to be designated as the no-penetration line, and
positions had to be well-prepared and well-stocked. Troops were
to stay there dead or alive.
Conduct of Defence
The concept envisaged a forward posture in defence, with the
troops trading space for time in a gradual withdrawal from the
borders to fortresses which were prepared as killing grounds and
where last-ditch battles were to be fought, and where the enemy
would be kept tied down long enough to give ample time to the
Western Garrison to achieve their mission ‘The battle of the East
- 
1:1
———— 
P 
oTM~ 
7% 
~ 
yl 
ame ald be 
©, 
~~ ( Y T f 7 
|
— 
yww yt 
ry 
m~ 
O) 
\ {» 
» 
) 
| 
7] 
| 
]
WWW 
UD "6 | | Ul i LJ L l Ji 6 | 
| 
Y VU
] | 
1 
_ 
] -

OPERATIONAL PLAN 
85
will be fought in the West’. The fate of not only Eastern Garrison
and East Pakistan, but of the whole of Pakistan, hung on the
outcome of the battle to be fought in West Pakistan, the offensive
to be launched by Tikka’s Reserve Army.
To augment my strength, units were beefed up by elements of
Mujahids and CAF. Engineers were used to protect attacking
infantry flanks and rear. Similarly, artillery was deployed either
to cover the gaps, or where it gave depth to infantry.
Due to shortage of mines and wire, punjis were laid, punji pits
were dug on a large scale, and inundation was carried out on a
very large scale to cover the gaps, with a view to hampering the
movement of tanks and vehicles and channelizing and restricting
the enemy to certain lanes. Punjis are sharpened bamboo sticks
stuck in the ground.
Revision of Plans
The reorganization was as under, and completed by the end of
October 1971:
14 Division, previously at Dhaka, was assigned Mymensingh-Sylhet-
Chittagong sector, i.e., the whole area east of the Rivers
Brahmaputra and Padma/Ganges. This was allocated as under:
(1) 
14 Division (ten battalions) was made responsible for the
entire area east of Meghna River.
(2) 
A new ad hoc 202 Brigade with one battalion plus CAF was
created in area Sylhet under Brigadier Salimullah. 313
Brigade under Brigadier Rana moved down to Maulvi Bazar.
(3) 
27 Brigade (Brigadier Saadullah) ex-Mymensingh (two bat-
talions) was moved to area Akhora-Brahmanbaria to protect
the most threatened approach.
(4) 
17 Brigade at Comilla-Mainamati under Brigadier Manzoor
Hussain Atif.
16 Division: No change in their ten battalions, Rangpur-Bogra-
Rajshahi sector.
9 Division less one brigade (7 battalions): Jessore-Kushtia-
Faridpur Sector,
ry | 
. 
od
/ 
UALVUULLIDI dI
a. 
Ae, 
’ 
ew \YJAASD

86 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
A new ad hoc 314 Brigade under Colonel Fazal Hamid with
EPCAF was created for Khulna sector.
A neéw ad hoc 91 Independent Brigade (Brigadier Ata Malik) was
created in Chittagong with one battalion, two companies, local
garrison troops, and naval troops.
53 Brigade (Brigadier Aslam Niazi) on relief was moved to
Dhaka as command reserve.
A new ad hoc 36 Division under Director-General EPCAF
(Major-General Jamshed) was created at Dhaka with a new ad hoc
93 Bngade (Brigadier Qadir Niazi) at Mymensingh with two
battalions and CAF in the area.
Later an ad hoc 39 Division under Major-General M. Rahim
Khan with 53 Brigade was raised to defend Chandpur under
GHQ orders. GHQ did not send the promised replacement for
Dhaka.
Due to the shortage of field artillery we could not give one
regiment to each brigade, which is authorized. The artillery was
proportionately distributed, keeping in view the main routes of
ingress into a given area.
The ad hoc formations were not like actual formations. They
were short of trained staff, officers, and transport. Communi-
cations were provided from existing resources of Command HQ,
Divisional HQ, civilian VHF, and line communications, They were
good enough for command and control. The troops could see
senior officers visiting their areas, which is necessary for their
morale during war. Their disposition also foxed the enemy about
our real strength and resources.
The following basic points detailed in our operational
instructions of March 1971 were emphasized: forward defensive
posture, and causing maximum attrition to the enemy by trading
space for time and falling back on to the designated fortresses
and strong points; in case of fortresses becoming untenable, it
was decided that the troops would fall back on predesignated
final lines to block the approaches to Dhaka. 14 Division, 93 ad
hoc Brigade from Mymensingh, and 314(A) Brigade from Khulna
were to fall back on Dhaka area.
In spite of major changes in the intelligence estimates, GHQ
did not issue us any written operational instructions. In my plan
I had to cater for both adverse conditions and the conflicting
requirements of defence against Indian invasion and insurgency
| 
; 
] 
_ 
7 
- ~
\ M / \ MN \ N ; 
{ 
|
> 
aie A 
lf. f°. vrw
~~ 
/ 
( ~( 
» | 
} 
|
= 
wo. 
ew \/ZY 
ABD

OPERATIONAL PLAN 
87
in a country which had the support of the Indian Army and the
advisers from Russia. The defence was based on fortresses and
strong points in depth to restrict the enemy’s freedom of
manoeuvre, to maintain mobility, and to engage the enemy in a
series of defensive battles, thus causing him attrition.
since the East Pakistan Civil Armed Forces had disintegrated,
local Razakars, mainly consisting of ex-Biharis and loyal East
Pakistanis, were trained initially to man the border outposts and
fall back on to the strong points and fortresses manned by the
regular Army. The officers were from the regular Army. They did
an admirable job. They gave a tough fight to the Mukti Bahini
and fought minor patrolling and tactical actions.
I received an intelligence report from GHQ that, in spite of its
threatening stance, India was unlikely to resort to an all-out war
with Pakistan, but might carry out nibbling attacks to support the
rebels and capture some territory. It was recommended that the
borders should be sealed on top priority basis. We did that by
deploying locally-raised civilian armed forces, backed up by
regular troops where required.
Dhaka was the linchpin. The whole defence concept was built
on various lines of defence based on rivers or other water
obstacles, or on major centres of communication acting as
fortresses which the enemy would have to clear before advancing
any further towards Dhaka. At most places the enemy would have
to launch major river-crossing operations, carry out heliborne
landings, or drop paratroops. Incidentally, GHQ and ISI
Directorate never informed us of a heliborne threat, nor of the
Indian capability. The plan was discussed and finalized in the
formation commanders’ conference, at which I was accompanied
by General Jamshed, acting as my No. 2, and the commanders of
the supporting arms. In October 1971 we were visited by COAS
General Hamid. He was briefed on these changes, which were
later incorporated by GHQ in the ‘Order of Battle’ issued by
them that month.
My plan proved functional ea, given the prevailing circum-
stances, the most practical. It was evolved to encompass various
missions, especially the political requirement, which over-rode
all other considerations and which I could not ignore. Whereas I
could visualize only a portion of the overall plan of Pakistan, the
High Command could comprehend the complex panorama of
. X 7X X ) X x ) 
~» —» 
| 
/ my (° ¥ 
7 a @ 
lew } 
\ lm 4ta—
VV VV VV rd | J 6 LO YW | 
oS ) I L Al Y oO ( L Orn
~~

