DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN — 197
‘there to the western sector unless I kept all of them involved. All
that could have been done only by remaining where we were
and not where the Indians wanted us to be, in the Dhaka
Triangle or Bowl.
Over and above political, economic, and tactical drawbacks, I
had many other problems which would have increased further.
We had no proper supply and maintenance system. We were
working on ad hoc systems and a makeshift basis. We were living
and fighting mostly by improvising on a large scale. We could
manage because we were holding vast areas. By moving to the
restricted area of PBM we would have found it difficult to collect
enough fresh rations for my entire force, so we would have been
living on hard and dry rations, and the already under-nourished
troops would have developed various diseases due to shortage of
fresh supplies. Thousands of Urdu-speaking people would have
thronged to this area for protection, and it would have been a
problem to supply them with food when supply routes were
blocked by the enemy. Due to hunger, and the lack of medical
cover, medicines, and sanitation, an epidemic would have spread
and people would have died like flies, including my troops, and
it would have been a problem even to bury them properly.
The concept of defence based on the rivers Padma,
Brahmaputra, and Meghna (PBM) fizzes with controversy.
‘Sentimentalism has played a large role in complicating the issue.
The PBM idea was mooted by the Indians for the ulterior motive
of covering up their follies and failings and the inefficiency of
their High Command, its faulty planning and the poorly-
conducted operations by their field commanders, despite the
most conducive circumstances. The Indians wanted to convince
their people that the performance of their Armed Forces had
improved since 1965 and not deteriorated. If the war of 1971 is
analysed properly, it will be shown that India was unable to win
the war on its own, without outside help. In the 1971 war, this
help was provided t to them by my High Command who, like the
Indians, wanted to break Pakistan.
The Dhaka 
Bowl Concept was neither studied in its true
perspective nor critically analysed. Certain Pakistani writers, like
| Major-General Fazal Mugeem, Major Siddique Salik, and Major-
"General F arman, adviser to the Governor of East Pakistan, bleated
in consonance with the Indian tune that the PBM was the only
i

198 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
solution for the difficulties of my beleaguered Eastern Garrison.
They did not have the moral courage to say that the small, tired,
and ill-equipped Eastern Garrison not only held the enemy, but
did not allow them to carryout any of their tasks. Western
Garrison, which had freedom of movement and no fear for its
flanks and rear, had a choice of initiative and every other
conceivable facility to win the war but could not do so. Thus, the
misconception deliberately propagated by the Indians was given
credence without taking into consideration the relevant points.
Evolved doctrines and concepts have a tremendous bearing
on postures, both defensive and offensive. The forward defensive
posture was followed in the 1965 and 1971 wars, and the area
defence and forward defensive posture is still practised in the
Pakistan Army. In other words, we defend completely our
national territory—cities, towns, communication centres, head-
works, ports, etc. This concept is a legacy of the British, inherited
by both Pakistan and India.
One of the major reasons for adopting a forward defensive
posture is geographical depth, which Pakistan lacks and therefore
cannot, under any circumstances, trade space for time like Russia,
which has hundreds of miles of depth and can lure the enemy to
destruction. Loss of cities, headworks, or communication centres
located near the borders creates an extremely adverse psycho-
logical impact. In the 1962 war with China, India defended Sela
although Bomdila was an ideal place to defend. The Cabinet and
the Indian nation could not reconcile themselves to the idea of
losing national territory without putting up a fight.
Eastern Garrison was fighting a complex war against both
internal and external aggression, having to cope with insurgency
nurtured and supported by the Indians and with the Indian
threat. The political mission spelled out was to defend East
Pakistan, ensuring that no area fell into the hands of the Mukti
Bahini and the Indians which could be declared as Bangladesh.
Eastern Command was also shackled with the military mission of
engaging and tying down the maximum Indian troops to ensure
that the parity which existed on the western front was not turned
into enemy superiority. This was directly linked with the
operations in the western theatre, as both theatres of war were
controlled and co-ordinated by GHQ.

DHAKA BOWL. MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
199
~ 
Western Garrison, which had five strike formations as opposed
to the Indians’ three, had the initiative and should have been
able to achieve the desired results by offensive-oriented
operations. They should have forced the Indians to abandon
‘their support to the Bengalis and to come to terms in order to
get those areas captured by us in the west vacated. This would
have kept Pakistan united.
I kept my part of the bargain. I tied down twelve infantry
Divisions of the Indian Army, thirty-nine BSF battalions, many
squadrons of tanks, seventeen squadrons of aircraft, and the bulk
of the navy, and ensured that a favourable troop ratio existed in
the western theatre. But regrettably, Western Garrison did not
do their job. If we study the Dhaka Bowl, we find that it only
encompasses a small portion of Dhaka civil division, whereas the
bulk of the Dhaka division and the other three civil divisions—
Chittagong, Khulna, and Rajshahi—are outside the cauldron.
Could I have left out cities like Chittagong (seaport) and
Divisional HQ, the Chittagong Hill Tracts, Chalna (seaport),
Khulna (seaport) and Divisional HQ, Jessore, Faridpur, Rajshahi
(Divisional HQ), Hill, Saidpur, Nator, Pabna, Bera, Rangpur,
Bogra, Sylhet, Mymensingh, Comilla, Brahmanbaria, Barisal,
Chandpur, Teknaf, and Noakhali? Except for Dhaka city and its
periphery, the rest of East Pakistan was outside the Bowl.
Withdrawal would have meant vacating more than three fourths
of East Pakistan without fighting or firing a single shot. The war
would have been lost before battle began. Similarly in the western
sector, we could not have left border towns and cities like Marala
(headworks), Sialkot, Pasroor, Narowal, Zafarwal, Shakargarh,
Wagah (headworks), Bedian (headworks), Kasur, Bahawalnagar,
Reti, Dharki, Umerkot, Mirpur Khas, Chhor, and Badin, and
withdrawn behind the rivers. If we could not do that in the west,
why should we have done it in the east? Why the two yardsticks
for the same country and the same army?
Besides jeopardizing the complete war plans, withdrawal
without orders was both disastrous and a court martial offence.
By withdrawing to the Dhaka Bowl, I would have contracted my
defence to a very small area—equal to the area my troops
occupied to defend Dhaka city—by vacating three fourths of East
Pakistan. It should also be kept in view that under the prevailing
battle situation I would have had to leave the bulk of my heavy

200 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
equipment, tanks, and guns behind. It would have been a blessing
for the Indians. The bulk of the twelve Indian divisions would
have suddenly become surplus; they could have encircled and
held the Pakistan Army in the Bowl with just three or four
divisions with the help of Mukti Bahini and the Bengali dissidents,
and could have shifted seven or eight divisions, most of their
armour and BSF battalions, the bulk of the Air Force, and the
navy with considerable ease to the western theatre.
With an additional seven to eight infantry divisions, thirty BSF
battalions, many squadrons of tanks, seventeen squadrons of
aircraft, and the bulk of the Indian Navy—including the aircraft-
carrier Vikrant which would have provided a mobile airfield in
the south—the Indians would have been in a comfortable
position to occupy West Pakistan without much difficulty.
Crossing the rivers may have been a formidable task for the
infantry, but the Indian Army, with its vertical envelopment
capability, could negotiate any obstacle, more so when we lacked
air capability and mobility to intervene, intercept, and destroy
the enemy airborne forces. Their complete air supremacy,
support from the local population, and paratroop landings—in
conjunction with the major thrust from the obstacle-free north—
could have made the Dhaka Bowl Defence not only redundant
but a death-trap for the troops of Eastern Command. Also, most
of the rivers rise in India and then enter East Pakistan. Thus the
Indians could carry out operations deep into Pakistan without
crossing the rivers. Only for converging on Dhaka did the need
for crossing the rivers exist, which they could have done by aerial
envelopment, amphibian vehicles, naval craft, and with the help
of the local boatmen. The best way to protect Dhaka, the nerve
centre, was not to allow the Indians to cross into Dhaka area in
strength. To keep them separated from each other, and away
from Dhaka, meant holding them on the other side of the rivers.
An army, like a man, cannot properly defend its back against a
blow without turning around, which temporarily unbalances it.
The brain is more sensitive to a menace in the back. When
deployed beyond the rivers, the Pakistan Army divided and
dispersed the Indian Army and the Mukti Bahini. I could take on
the attacking Indians frontally, but did not have sufficient troops
to protect my rear and flanks, so I utilized the big rivers to
protect my back and separate ‘the bulk of the Mukti Bahini and

DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN =. 201
‘the Bengali dissident elements from the Indian troops. The
Dhaka Bowl would have simply proved a death-trap—an answer
to the Indian prayers.
To protect the lives. and property of the loyal population,
especially the Urdu-speaking local Biharis, was one of the tasks
of Eastern Command. We were able to fulfil the task, otherwise
there would have been ethnic cleansing.
During the Balochistan operations, Bhutto asked General Zia,
COAS, in the presence of the PNA leaders, how much time was
required to move the troops back to their peacetime locations
after halting activities. The minimum time calculated was forty
‘five days. In Balochistan there were only 300 to 400 hard- ae
| guerrillas, whereas in East Pakistan there were lakhs of Mukti\
‘Bahini as well as twelve divisions of the Indian Army and |
‘hundreds of thousands of armed Bengali dissidents. ant
‘Balochistan, most of the troops simply had to move to the cities ;
of the province with no opposition, and with ail nietiepnurligationsh
intact and available. In East Pakistan, the troops were to move
from Noakhali, Chalna, Khulna, Jessore, Faridpur, Rajshahi,
Hilli, Dinajpur, Bogra, Rangpur, Saidpur, Sylhet, Mymensingh,
Brahman Baria, Comilla, Chittagong Hill Tracts, Chittagong,
Teknaf, Cox’s Bazar and many other cities. All communications
were blocked, there was no transport, no air cover or naval
support, and no long-range artillery or tanks to protect our
withdrawal. It would be an interesting exercise for somebody to
work out a plan for troops deployed on forward defensive
positions in Punjab, Balochistan, and Sindh to withdraw behind
the rivers or towards the rivers. No one would be prepared to do
so, I dare to say no one can do it, because it is easier to be
critical than correct,-and easier still to suggest a solution to a
problem for which you have no responsibility.
Niazi could not concentrate his command to, defend just Dhaka or
three major cities or even nine major cities. The Mukti Bahinis and
Indian Army could have occupied remainder of East Pakistan and set
up Bangladesh. The divisions and brigades would have been harried
and starved until there was no fight left in them. There would have
been no hue and cry in the United Nations.
(Major-General Shaukat Riza, The Pakistan Army 1965-1971)

202 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Defence Lines
The Indians, followed by Major-Generals Fazal Mugeem and
Farman, have criticized my defence plan, saying that I should
have pulled back all my forces to Dhaka (Bowl) Triangle. On
page 113 of his book, How Pakistan Got Divided, Farman
contradicts himself by saying ‘there were three lines of defence’.
He further states that ‘East Pakistan could best be defended by a
mixture of intermediate ring lines and close defence by
deploying as far forward as water obstacles would be available.
Then fighting delaying actions finally to fall on close defence of
Dhaka.’ Deployment depends on the task allotted to
commanders, which he has not kept in mind while giving this
vague suggestion. You have to give specific areas to formations:
boundaries left and right, and line of FDLs if required (keeping
in mind the level of command). My plan of fighting delaying
actions succeeded and the enemy was contained, or stopped, at
most places without our having abandoned any major cities
except Jessore. There is no major difference in Farman’s
intermediate lines and my solid lines of defence.
Farman on the Dhaka Bowl
Major-General Farman says in his book:
But if we consider it from the point of view of an East Pakistani this
was a frightening concept in which one was to surrender a very large,
actually a major portion, of East Pakistan to the enemy. From purely
political point of view, the concept would be unacceptable to East
Pakistan to whom their hearth, homes and honour of womenfolk
were as sacred as to the West Pakistanis.
Here he recognizes that his own theory of withdrawing from
the borders and defending the Dhaka Bowl only was ethically
unacceptable, yet he continues to advance it unashamedly.

DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
203
Time Factor
Withdrawal in the face of an enemy who enjoys preponderance
in weaponry, manpower, air power, sea power, and, above all,
assistance in overt and covert operations by the local population
(who not only disclosed our defensive dispositions but also
destroyed bridges, vehicles, and ammo dumps, ambushed our
troops, impeded the movement of troops, and poisoned our food
and sources of drinking water), is extremely difficult. Orders for
withdrawal had to be passed by GHQ. Untl mid November,
GHQ's orders were to fight from the same positions. After 21
November, when the Indians launched the offensive, withdrawal
was extremely difficult as the troops were engaged in fighting. By
comparison, under peacetime conditions, it took fifteen to twenty
days to withdraw a division to Dhaka from Rajshahi with all theit
ammunition, etc., and with no interference whatsoever.
The Defence of Dhaka
General Jamshed was in overall charge of Dhaka Fortress. Work
on the construction of defences had started in October 1971. On
7 December a conference under General Jamshed was held to
review the defences of Dhaka. The immediate threat was expected
to come from the eastern side. It was estimated that the enemy
would take about two weeks to build up for an attack on Dhaka.
General Jamshed gave out new areas of responsibility and
command and control: 93(A) Brigade of 36(A) Division on the
area of Mirpur bridge; Narsingdi approach was given to 14
Division; Narayanganj to 39(A) Division; and Manikganj approach
to 314(A) Brigade under Col. Fazal-e-Hamid; Cantt, including
Tongi, was to be under the command of Brig. Qasim. The city
was to remain with Brig. Bashir. In the original plan, Dhaka was
to be defended by 53 Brigade, other troops in the area, and the
EPCAF. On orders from GHQ, when 53 Brigade moved out of
Dhaka for counterinsurgency I earmarked troops from the
holding formations for the defence of Dhaka.
I had planned the defence of Dhaka in four layers (see, map
no, 12). The final battle was to be fought in the built-up areas.

204 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Cities are not defended by taking positions inside or around
them. They are defended by deploying troops as far away from
them as possible, so that they are safe from enemy artillery fire.
Of course tactical considerations take priority, and last-ditch
battles are fought in and around the cities. In West Pakistan we
defended Lahore by deploying troops in Wagah, Ghavindhi, and
Kasoor areas, which are well away from Lahore. No regular troops
were left inside Lahore for its defence.
When one fights a defensive battle, one useful policy is not to
allow the enemy to use his mobility and manoeuvrability. This
can be done by putting in spoiling attacks, blocking positions,
resorting to guerrilla tactics, and by intelligent use of natural
and artificial obstacles. The enemy can be induced to wear
himself out in attacking unexpectedly strong defences, and then,
when he is tired, disorganized, and disheartened, he can be
countered with a devastating blow. The position one occupies
must be such as to permit this—particularly the final blow—so
when one is preparing defences, one must keep these
requirements and factors in view.
Tactical skill is the only insurance against loss of initiative
when on the defensive, namely, skill in employing deceptive
measures, effective fire control, rapid and reliable communt-
cations, and good plans for moving troops from one place to
another. Intelligent use of obstacles, both natural and artificial,
mobility, fire-power and communications, the fighting spirit of
the soldiers, and good leadership in all echelons are the factors
that determine the outcome in the battlefield.
I had prepared the defences in East Pakistan keeping in view
the enemy resources and intentions and the tasks allotted to me.
The tasks given to the commanders by me were not only to repel
enemy attacks but also to lure them on to strong positions and
tie them down there, thus keeping them away from each other
and from Dhaka, and in the process to inflict casualties on them.
The area around Dhaka was very suitable for defence. It was
shaped more or less like the letter U. Both its flanks and the rear
were covered by rivers. At the base of the U was the town of
Narayanganj, which provided depth and covered the rear of
Dhaka defences. On the fourth side, the northern side, there was
no big obstacle. All around the defensive area were pools, ponds,
marshy areas, and small islands. There were thick clumps of trees,

12. 
DHAKA DEFENCE PLAN
21 NOVEMBER 1971
5 
Mymensingh
& 
s
Sirajgan;
Ishurdi 
,
S06 } 
BHAIRAB
BAZAR
Jaydebpur
\
Pe ;
J
Goalundo
is
| Faridpu ~
Kamarkhali 
TMs 
Daudkandi
AQ arayanganj
S 
—<— SS
wat 
Sy 
oS
=
Jt \p)
Chandpur
f \ 
q.
° 
TM%
INDEX
OUTER DEFENCE LINE
INNER 
DEFENCE LINE
CLOSE DEFENCE LINE
BUILT-UP DEFENCE AREA
SS
FORTRESSES 
)
STRONG POINTS
www.balochlibrary.com

DHAKA BOWL MISCONCEPTION AND THE INDIAN PLAN 
205
and at places there was dense vegetation which provided cover
from view and good defensive positions. As cement and bricks
were not available, bunkers, rather than pill-boxes, were
constructed using local material. As most of the houses and
buildings were pukka, it was easy to convert them into strong
points. It was an all-round defence, positions mutually supportive
with plenty of depth and reserves available at battalion level and
above, and there was maximum elasticity and mobility inside the
defence area. The position was based on company and battalion
strong points. Alternative positions and counter-penetration
positions were also prepared.
In defence we made extensive use of snipers, whose task was
to pick off the commanders and their signallers. If the
commanders were hit the attack was likely to bog down, and
similarly if the signallers were hit, the commander's
communications with his superiors and juniors would be effected.
We also used troops and weapons for spoiling attacks from the
flanks, if possible. Attacking units or sub-units coming under fire
unexpactedly would lag behind, if not bogged down. The
attacking troops not affected by the fire from the flank would
keep moving towards their objective which would be under the
fire of the attackers’s artillery and Mortars, which continue
according to the fire plan.
If the enemy reached our trenches we would bring the fire of
our own artillery and mortars onto our own trenches, The enemy
suffered casualties while our own troops, being in trenches with
overhead protection, were safe. If the enemy still survived, we
would counterattack with bayonets, and eject or destroy them.
Our bayonet charges always succeeded.
It was not a continuous defensive position in one line, as in a
desert or open country. Instead, it was in a circle, though in
zigzag manner, consisting of a series of strong points like the
knots of a net. Because of the layout of the defences, and the
nature and extent of the terrain, most of the attacks against the
middle line of defence outside Dhaka had to be company attacks,
supported by a troop of tanks. Similarly, artillery support would
be limited to point concentration, which is not very effective
against a position with overhead protection. In the event of any
position being captured, the enemy could not go deep, because
he could be halted by the next strong point in the immediate
rear or on its flank. 
; 
:
" 
a 
i 
|
]
OA 
@ 
GA 
@ 
@, 
r~ 
¢ ~ 
~ 
in 
. 
.
LA/ AXA/ XA/ 
| 
yr oe 
} 
f°’ 
) 
}
VAY, 
VAY, 
] C 
) | 
y, 
| 
( 
|)
VV 
VV ov a iC 
XY J L SSCS GS, 
A q \ -AVAUSE
a= J]

