OPERATIONAL PLAN 
97
against us in case of an all-out attack by the Indian Army against
East Pakistan, vide their intelligence note of October 1971.
Neither ISI nor MI Directorates warned us of the Indian
helicopter-gunship capability, which we encountered during the
war. However, we stuck to our estimate of an attack by about
eight Indian divisions. On the other hand Mukti Bahini and
hostile locals provided the Indian Army with ready intelligence
about us.
Due to our lack of intelligence resources and set-up we could
neither deny information to the enemy nor get information about
the enemy. So, to hide information about our plans, weaknesses,
and strength, we had to resort to deception, bluff, and whispering
campaigns on a large scale in an organized manner, We
succeeded in foxing the enemy about our fighting strength and
our weaknesses and deficiencies till the end, and the enemy
planned his invasion on our exaggerated strength.
Chinese Influences
Bhutto visited China in early November 1971 as the head of a
political-military delegation and met the Chinese Prime Minister
Zhou Enlai on 7 November. The Chinese Acting Foreign Minister
accused India of interfering in Pakistan’s internal affairs. He said
that the Chinese Government would resolutely support the
Pakistan Government in its just struggle to defend Pakistan’s
integrity.
This weighed heavily on the Indian planners, At the time of
the formulation of Indian plans, ‘collusion between Pakistan and
China could not be-ruled out. As such, borrowing formations
from the holding force against China had to be very judiciously
exercised both in terms of quantity and time’ (/ndia’s Wars since
Independence by Major-General Sukhwant Singh, oe nt ia 
Director
of Military Operations India).
Another disturbing effect of Bhutto's China visit was the
conspiracy to carry out a coup détai against Yahya, in which
Lt.-Gen. Gul Hassan, Air Marshal Rahim Khan, and some others
were the main actors.
During my discussions with General Hamid, I had stressed
that no war should be started in the west because we could deal

98 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
with India in the limited war which India was expected to launch
because she would not like to be declared an aggressor by the
world, They would be worried about the potential threat from
China in case of war. The events up to 3 December proved our
contention when we did not lose any significant territory. Pakistan
attacked India on 3 December 1971 without even informing us.
The Indian Air Force became active and crippled our mobility
and air support. The Indian Navy imposed a sea blockade, thus
isolating us from the Centre (West Pakistan), and the Russians
openly joined the war on the Indian side.
I had also submitted to General Hamid that I was already
more or less cut off from the west. In the event of a sea and air
blockade, I would be completely isolated and abandoned. He
told me that I would not be either isolated or abandoned. The
Centre would maintain me and keep in touch via the ‘hump
route’ (over China and Tibet). When the Indians did impose the
blockade, I spoke to General Hamid about using the ‘hump
route’. He said, ‘Sorry, Niazi, we cannot use that route, you are
on your own, carry on with whatever you have—good luck.’ I was
abandoned in midstream.
Starting an unnecessary, unasked-for, soulless attack in the
West and abandoning me was in accordance with the plan to get
me defeated. But having knowledge of their evil designs I had
made arrangements and prepared my troops to take on the
Indians on their own, without any outside help. The attack,
deliberately delayed by thirteen days, turned into declared war
from the undeclared one. This intentional delay was part of the
plan to let down Eastern Garrison. It favoured the Indians, who
were able to carry out large-scale operations with Russian help.

| CHAPTER 8
WAR CLOUDS
On the eve of the war, my troops had occupied battle positions.
In his book Pakistan’s Crisis in Leadership, Major-General Fazal
Muqeem has in many places given an inaccurate account of
Eastern Command, yet even he has not always been able to hide
the truth. About the state of the troops at that juncture he has
the following to say:
The state of the troops in East Pakistan is worth accounting in some
detail. 14 Infantry Division, which was permanently stationed in East
Pakistan, had already undergone the stresses and strains of continuous
Martial Law duties for about two years before the military action. Its
later confinement to the cantonments, and the Awami League's well
planned campaign against it had also had its toll. Since the end of
March 1971, this formation along with 9 and 16 Infantry Divisions,
which arrived in April, had been fighting counter-insurgency actions
against the rebels, actively supported by Indian forces. These were
strange operations for which the troops were neither equipped nor
trained. It was also a peculiar type of fighting for which they had not
been mentally and physically prepared. The enemy was neither well-
marked and identified nor were his lines of operations fixed, nor did
it fight in accordance with the rules and methods of war known to
the troops. In fact, it was worse than normal war.
The troops had been operating continuously for eight months
against the daily mounting Indian and rebel activities. Although there
had been spells of lull they had been very brief. Since September, Nhe 
|
Indian artillery and mortar fire had been stepped up and their attacks
along the borders were becoming common. The deployment of
Pakistani troops was widespread at places in platoons and sections.
There was no hope of relief, and as a consequence, there was little or
no rest for them. The man who had gone into the trench in April, if
he survived and remained fit, was still there in November. The
supplies were indifferent too. There was hardly any security, because
7 
7~
L. 
. 
~1
WWW. D alOoOCcnilorary.com
4 
|
L

100 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
enemy agents were present in every organ of the civil government
and amongst the locals. No action, even if taken with the utmost
secrecy, could escape these numerous agents. All these factors had
put a heavy and constant strain on the troops.
The casualties that the forces were taking without fighting on
account of the Mukti Bahini’s guerrilla activities, were adding to the
strain on the proud army. The public in West Pakistan could not
appreciate the staggering task that the armed forces had been given
in East Pakistan. Nor were any steps taken to keep the people
informed, To understand its dimensions and appreciate the
performance of troops, it is essential to compare the guerrilla war in
East Pakistan with one recent and one current example. First take
the case of Algeria in 1960. It was a French colony situated about 400
miles away from France. Its population at that time was only 10 million
as compared to France's 50 million. Out of 10 million approximately
one million were French settlers who were loyal to the mother
country. Algeria was completely surrounded by French military power
where she had committed about one million troops. Egypt, USSR
and China, who supported the Algerians guerrillas, were far away
from Algeria and were not assisting Algeria with advice and technical
manpower inside the country. The second example is that of South
Vietnam. The population of USA, the leading military, industrial
power in the world, is about 200 million. The population of South
Vietnam is approximately 15 million, out of which two million are
fighting with one million American troops, which have been steadily
reduced in 1969. South Vietnam’s border with North Vietnam with a
population of 20 million is only about 100 miles long. The whole of
South Vietnam is surrounded by US and South Vietnamese military
power. There is no dearth of war material and equipment for the
forces.
Fast Pakistan on the other hand, had a population of 70 million,
most of which had gradually been alienated. East Pakistan’s border
with India is about 2,000 miles long whereas the distance from West
Pakistan is 3,000 miles with hostile waters in between. Pakistan had
only three infantry divisions without their own components of heavy
¢veapons, and could not look forward to any substantial relief or
reinforcements. Some foreign experts at the time had estimated that
Pakistan would need 250,000 to 300,000 troops trained in counter-
insurgency operations and fully backed up by socio-political
campaigns to control the situation in East Pakistan. India, a major
industrial power at least five times as big as Pakistan, was openly
supporting the East Pakistan guerrillas with men, material and
technical advice and training. Unlike the other countries mentioned
eon 
@ 
@A 
@ 
@ 
~~ 
4 
~1 »
www.baloch
e 
~
I
.
Drary.cOm

WAR CLOUDS 
101
_ 
above, Pakistani troops were not backed by any political and
psychological campaign from the Central or Provincial Government.
Even West Pakistan was not united behind them, Against all these
great odds the troops had still succeeded in securing their initial
objectives and defied all the Mukti Bahini efforts fully supported by
India. But no political advantage was taken of their success.
Considering the dimensions of the task given to them, their
performance was nothing short of a miracle.
India’s continuous and daily increasing pressure on the borders
was affecting the morale of the troops. A feeling was setting in that in
the event of war they would be cut off from West Pakistan and no
help would reach them. They would be left in the lurch to fend for
themselves in the face of the Indian Army and the hostile population.
The officers and men were affected by homesickness and a sense of
isolation was creeping in. These feelings were further heightened by
the fact that the President, who was also the C-in-C, did not visit East
Pakistan even once during those dark months, and the visits of the
COS, Army and other senior afficers too were few and far between.
This absence gave potent handle to the Indian propaganda. The East
Pakistan population, including the West Pakistani elements were
anxious that the President should come and see the prevailing
conditions for himself. There were whisperings, rumours and
speculations as to why he did not come. Some thought that he was
too scared to visit the province; others believed that he was too
engrossed in his gay living to bother about what happened in East
Pakistan. The troops particularly wanted to see their C-in-C in their
midst. They argued that if he could visit the Lahore and Sialkot
borders, he could come to them as well. His visit would have helped
to counter the Indian propaganda that they were hostages at the
mercy of the Indians and the Mukti Bahini. But the President never
visited them even once since the military action started in March
1971. There would hardly be a case in military history where an army
fighting a most difficult operation did not at all see their C-in-C for
nine months, and saw the second-in-command (the COAS) only twice
during that period, once in August and again in October 1971. They
had become a forgotten army after having successfully put down the
well-planned insurgency, They had carried out the task given to them,
efficiently and swiftly and had now been engaged for eight long
months in futile operations whose objectives had not been defined.
They were still fighting tenaciously but had reached the last stages of
battle fatigue. In spite of all the handicaps, they still projected the
impression of being full of fight and confidence. With all their visible
high spirits the three divisions of the army in East Pakistan, without
®@ 
-
www.balochlibrary.com

102 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
their normal heavy weapons and logistic support and, still worse, with
only one brave PAF squadron which had already been reduced in
size by frequent calls on it during the last eight months, were not
sufficient to fight the insurgency on their hands. The small Navy of 4
(four) gunboats, which like other services, had given a yery good
account of itself was not strong enough to control the rivers of East
Pakistan, leave alone the sea route from West Pakistan. India’s massive
invasion was looming large on the horizon and in the event of that
happening the armed forces in East Pakistan would be confronted
with an impossible task, strategically and logistically. Therefore, the
maintenance of their morale would become an acute problem unless
succour came from West Wing and the armed forces in West Pakistan
played the role according to plan, effectively and quickly. These
officers and men in East Pakistan were facing an all-out invasion.
(Pakistan’s Crisis of Leadership, Major-General Fazal Muqeem).
According to David Loshak, to combat the insurgency the
Pakistan Army required 250,000 troops. Other foreign experts
had estimated that Pakistan would need 250,000 to 300,000
trained in counter-insurgency and fully backed by socio-political
campaigners to control the situation in East Pakistan. I had only
45,000 regular and paramilitary forces from West Pakistan. I still
succeeded in evicting the guerrillas from East Pakistan in less
than two months, when the local population was against us and
helping the guerrillas. My troops had no training in anti-guerrilla
warfare and the provincial Government was not functioning.
I suggested to General Hamid that, the Bengalis being hostile
to us, the situation had changed completely, circumstances had
changed, enemy capabilities had changed, so my mission should
be changed and J should be allowed to fall back on my prepared
positions if, as, and when required. The plan of not losing any
chunk of the country and sealing the borders was based more on
political requirements than tactical considerations. The change
of mission would give me more flexibility, manoeuvrability, and
freedom of action. He did not agree. He also refused to give me
additional troops and resources with a view to entering India
and destroying the Mukti Bahini bases and sanctuaries from
where they were launching operations into our territory.
era
)
\_\
a

WAR CLOUDS 
103
Overall Concept of War with India
Since the inception of Pakistan, tor histsrical and geographical
reasons, the bulk of the armed forces were stationed in West
Pakistan, with a divisional-sized force located in East Pakistan.
The concept involved was The defence of East Pakistan lies in West
Pakistan. Translating this into more coherent terms, it meant
that the war with India would be decided on the West Pakistan
front, whereas the garrison in East Pakistan, while defending
East Pakistan, would keep the maximum Indian forces involved
and tied down for a given period—I repeat, given period—during
which the decision on the western front would have been
concluded. This concept remained the basis of our military
strategy until the day we were ordered to surrender at Dhaka—a
detailed explanation is attached at Appendix 14.
Presentation at GHQ
In compliance with GHQ orders I sent my Chief of Staff,
Brigadier Baqir Siddiqui, and Major-General Jamshed, my
Second-in-Command, to GHQ to give detailed briefings on past
and likely future enemy actions, deployment of troops including
Mujahids, EPCAF, and all other forces, and to present my
appreciation of courses open for counter-insurgency and meeting
the external threat. I conveyed to GHQ that:
Having succeeded in combating insurgency I expect India to start a
war against us when the terrain in East Pakistan is dry and Chinese
passes are blocked. Recently there has been extraordinary activity of
Mukti Bahini and guerrillas. Reports of Indian troop concentrations
all along our border are pouring in. The war appears to be imminent
as soon as enemy build-up is completed in November or it may extend
to December, 
.
The operational environment at present is not conducive to us to
fight a full-fledged war. The guerrilla activities are directed against us
and destruction of bridges, culverts, roads and railway lines and the
majority of the local population is hostile. The civil administrauon is
symbolic only. However, law and order is under control where
Razakars and Mujahids are operating beefed up by regulars. The
industrial workers, who have succeeded in restoring production to
7 
a |
v
Jalochl
hech 
0
=a
VV VV VV.

104 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
80%, are threatened with dire consequences. The major cities are
carrying on normal business but strong attacks by guerrillas do cause
fear and panic among the population.
Acceptance of my recommendation for amnesty and a political
solution by inducting Awami League Members of Parliament
would have simplified my task of dealing with the invaders if they
attacked. But now I would have to fight in the rear as well as in
front.
Enemy Capability
I expected an attack by eleven or twelve Indian divisions, plus
four independent brigades, an armoured brigade, and thirty-nine
BSF battalions available for operation in the theatre. Depending
upon Chinese involvement, India was likely to use four or five
divisions against China and its likely capability against East
Pakistan thus would be eleven or twelve divisions, four
independent brigades and one armoured brigade. The divisions
left to watch the Chinese would be used as reserve because, all
passes being snowbound, Chinese formations could not cross
and thus more than twelve divisions were likely to be used against
East Pakistan. 
|
The following developments around the time the above
presentation was made indicated the enemy's aggressive designs
and state of operational preparedness:
a. The Russo-Indian Pact of 1971 strengthened the strategic
military balance in favour of India. Russia through
collaboration in the supply of military advisers and
equipment, took on the responsibility of countering the
Chinese threat.
b. Concentration forward of 4 and 6 Mountain Divisions and
using 20 Mountain Division to complete encirclement of
East Pakistan land borders.
c. Allotment of army and command engineer resources to
COrps.
d. Improvement of tracks and construction of roads and
bridges, especially in Tripura area.
« 
| 
7 
1 
7] 
e+ |
. 
, 
_ 
~ 
o> 
—} 
> 
P 
TM 
derr 
dew 
Y 
~~ 
ff» 
tana
XK 7XX J 
r~ 6) 
| I~ (® 
y 
| 
o~ 
7 ad 
@ 
Ve 
7 
Y
' 
/ 
a 
FU 
) 
- 
\ 
A 
{
} 
A 
/ 
Y 
a 
{ 
{ 
Z 
|
\ 
JN 
©, % 
/ 
Dd 
} 
\ 
J 
{ 
7 
I 
( ‘4 
(
etYOAANY WV 
SBA 
ALYSSA 
LC 
e 
*

WAR CLOUDS 
105
e. Intensification of aggressive activities along the borders.
f. Visit of the Indian Prime Minister abroad to muster
sympathy and support.
Hypotheses
In view of the Mukti Bahini’s activities and the indirect involve-
ment of the Indians, the following hypotheses were submitted:
a. H-1 
;
(1) Intensification of rebel activity in the interior:
(a) Disruption of lines of communication.
(b) Movement 
of 
non-co-operation 
and_ 
civil
disobedience.
(c) Frustration of elections and transfer of power to
civilians.
(2) Capture chunks of territory and establish Bangladesh.
Priority Eastern Sector:
(a) All-out rebel attacks, supported by Indian infantry
and artillery in all sectors.
(b) Nibbling at borders and capture of our BOPs one
by one with full Indian support.
(c) Exploit weak spots and creep forward wherever
possible in order to cut line of communications
along Chittagong-Comilla-Sylhet border.
(d) Establish Bangladesh territory.
(3) Recognition of Bangladesh.
b. H-2 (most dangerous):
(1) Full-scale Indian offensive.
(2) H-1, now already in progress.
T 
T 
1
r~> 6» 
~~
ye
AN 
/ 
ve, fe 
<| 
rr 2D qew 7 
( YfrvrTrN
LUUCIUIDIdGLY.COM
oe
4
Y 
x 
X ¥ 7’ a ¢ }

106 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
c. H-3
(1) H-1 for a month or so.
(2) If no tangible results, go for H-2.
We clearly warned GHQ in this presentation that the ‘best
possible time for any offensive by Pakistan would have been either
before October or May, now it must be after March.’
In the context of the overall internal and external situation we
submitted that there were three courses open to us to successfully
prosecute the war against India:
a. Pull back the bulk of the troops to battle locations
This would leave the actual borders and some of the
adjacent areas undefended or lightly held. Such areas and
small posts would be overrun by rebels with direct support
from regular Indian troops; their occupation of such areas
could well be construed by the rebels and the Indians as
Bangladesh. The enemy would achieve their mission
without much fighting and bloodshed. All our hard work,
hard fighting, sacrifices, and wonderful achievement would
go to waste, and the disintegration of Pakistan would
become a certainty.
b. Hold the borders strongly
This would give us cohesion and, if successful, no land
would be lost. But tactically it was not sound due to the
vastness of the area to be held and the lack of troops, fire-
power, and mobility. 
I would have litthe depth and no
reserve, no flexibility or manoeuvrability, and limited
freedom of action. There was the possibility and risk of
being defeated in detail. This would also result in
unnecessary casualties. 
A war of attrition would suit the
objectives of the rebels and the Indians. On the other hand,
we would be in a position to fire and carry out raids into
Indian territory, which would force them to send troops to
protect their tank harbours, gun areas, etc., which would
help me to hold on to my positions, and their own refugees
would cause them added problems.

