126 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
Bahini would infiltrate or bypass the same position and establish
a blocking position in the rear of that area and try to block the
withdrawal of our troops. The attacks were generally in battalion
or brigade groups, with up to eight tanks supporting the force
on each major approach, except at Hilli, where a full regiment
supported the attack in the initial stages. The Indians would
attack a position, try to capture it, and spend a couple of days on
it for re-organization, then try to carry on a further advance. This
continued up to 3 December 1971. Thereafter, the attacks
increased in size and intensity, and then the air and navy
contingents came into full swing. Still we held them at the
borders. Had the Indians not had aerial enveloping capability, or
had 1 had my full quota of tanks long-range, and anti-aircraft
artillery, 
I would not have withdrawn from the borders and would
have held the enemy there.
The Indian strategy was to contain our regular troops and to
stop them from withdrawing to Dhaka. Their aim was to capture
a major town as soon as possible, declare it as Bangladesh,
recognize it, and then follow up as liberators, which they did
after we vacated Jessore. They occupied it after thirty hours and
established a joint command of the Indian Army and the Mukti
' Bahini forces.
They carried out interdiction of our forces and destruction of
transport-vehicles, rolling stock, railway lines, boats, and ferries.
The Mukti Bahini assisted them by increased destruction of our
lines of communication and means of transportation. By and
large they succeeded in hindermg transportation; nevertheless,
some moyement was always possible to the rear areas and to
Dhaka till the last day.
On both sides, the air force also came into action. Our flight
of three F-86 aircraft was attacked by eight Indian Gnats and
MIG-21s. We lost two aircraft against one of the Indians in Jessore
sector on 23 November. The President, in his capacity as C.-in-C.,,
appreciated and commended our performance in a signal, the
text of which is reproduced on p. 133.
By 29 November 1971 we had put up a tough fight and their
offensive had bogged down. They suffered heavy casualties.
In spite of all the Indians’ advantages, in the thirteen days of
war, up to 3 December 1971, their gains were neghgible and of
no advantage, whereas in twelve days of war in West Pakistan,
oO I
j 
[
A A LU) A WHA

5. DEPLOYMENT OF OWN TROOPS ON 21 NOVEMBER 1971
BlHAR
oy a 
ASSAM
sve,
r 
» BS Wie ‘
¢ 
SAIDPUR 
»
~~
Nes
hed
wo 
—.
f 
=
Pe 
93(A) 
. 
is
®MYMENSINGH 
nfs 
}
MAULYV! BAZAR
4 
Oe a
oe
BRAHMANBARIA ¢
»
r 
° 
EASTERN 
Pr
: 
KHUSTIA 
AGARTALA Q 
:
v 
Lia ‘ana
WEST 
ecomuag 
=f = \
, 
; 
7
BENGAL W 
9x 
HANOPUR J 
; 
)
? 
107 
bah a: 
(
( 
JESSOR 
( 
J
4 
ren 
= ¢
a
} 
31414) 
A
; 
SKHULNA 
RANGAMATI 2
CALCUTTA
°
1)
www.balochlibrary.com

THE INVASION 
127
from 4 December to 16 December, they gained thousands of
square miles of territory and were threatening Sialkot-Wazirabad
from Shakargarh, Marala Headworks from Phuklian side, and
Reti and Dharki from Rajputana. Karachi Harbour and Port
Qasim were dominated by the Indian Navy, while our fleet had
disappeared. Indian aircraft had command of the skies over West
Pakistan as PAF was nowhere putting up effective resistance. At
this point I was ordered by the President to surrender due to the
unfavourable situation in the west. On my refusal, I was contacted
by General Hamid, COAS, personally and was ordered to
surrender to save West Pakistan.
Visits
After the war started, I visited the most threatened areas as under:
On 25 November I discussed the battle situation with Division
and brigade commanders at Jessore and ordered that all
fortresses were to be held at all cost and there should be no
withdrawal without permission or before suffering 75% casualties.
On return to Headquarters I told my COS to send a signal in
writing to that effect. At the end of the month I received a
request to evacuate Darshana when only a platoon of Mukti
Bahini supported by some tanks had by-passed this position. |
told Commander 57 Brigade as well as GOC 9 Division to hold
on to Darshana for as long as possible and then fall back on to
the next delaying position, but Darshana fell on 2 December.
On 26 November I visited Nator to discuss operational plans
with GOC 16 Division. I was not happy with the way 23 Brigade
had fought in Pachagarh, However, the brigade commander,
Brig. Ansari, was relieved of command by the GOC. I was fully
satisfied with the Hilli operation by 205 Brigade and with the
deployment of 107 Brigade in the south. My visits to 14 Division
around Sylhet, Comilla, and Chittagong resulted in some
adjustments of their positions. I was fully satisfied with the way
they were fighting the battles.
The President in his capacity as C.-in-C. had to appreciate our
fighting. A signal from the C.-in-C., dated 29 November 1971,
stated:

128 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
For Commander, from C.-in-C.: I am most impressed by the wonderful
job done by you and al] ranks under your command in meeting the
latest challenge posed by the enemy in East Pakistan. The whole
nation is proud of you and you have their full support. The gallant
deeds of our soldiers in thwarting the enemy’s evil designs have
earned the gratitude of all countrymen. Keep up the noble work tll
the enemy spirit is crushed and they are completely wiped out from
our sacred soil. May Allah be with you.
I replied on 30 November 1971:
From Commander Eastern Command to C.-in-C. Pakistan Army:
Reassuring you and pledging afresh at the critical juncture of our
history. We will /nsha Allah fully honour the great confidence that
has been reposed in us and no sacrifice will be considered too great
in defending our sacred fatherland. By the grace of Almighty Allah,
the initial Bharti onslaught has been blunted. God willing, we will
take the war on to Indian soil to finally crush the very spirit of the
non-believers through the supreme force of Islam. Pray and believe
that ultimate victory will be ours. Jnsha Allah.
This situation—the Indians held up across the borders and we
fighting commando and guerrilla actions in East Pakistan and
India—lasted till 
2 December 1971, when our President, without
bothering to tell us, started a pointless, belated, and unnecessary
attack in the west. It was too late to open the western front. The
consequence of opening up the western front at this stage was
fatal, for it served to drag the Soviet Union openly into the war. I
sincerely believe that Gen. Yahya was misled by the Indians,
working through their Pakistani agents, into taking this unwise
decision.
We had succeeded in stopping the Indian onslaught on the
border; we were organized into companies, battalions, and
brigades located in our strong points and fortresses. We were
firing into Indian territory. We were fighting on interior lines, 
|
had more freedom of movement, and we were in a position to
raid targets of our choosing and lay ambushes and road blocks in
our area. We were creating difficulties for the Indians which
would have increased if Yahya had not attacked in the west. If
this attack was intended to help us it should have come promptly
on 21, 22, or latest 23 November. Coming when it did it was of

THE INVASION 
129
more help to the Indians, bogged down as they were, than to us,
who were in a better position at that stage.
Operation of Command Reserve
53 Brigade was command reserve. As mentioned earlier, it was
moved to Chandpur-Laxam sector under orders from GHQ. The
eight battalions promised in November would have given me
some flexibility. 
I was told by the COS an; vide his signal G 430
of 17 October:
Your appreciation regarding rebel activities correct from the situation
reports received here. Crushing rebels with reserve has a direct
bearing on your operations against India. Reserves at formation level
including your command reserves and others available be used against
rebels. Meanwhile your request for additional troops under
consideration.
It clearly shows that it was not me who was oblivious of the
importance of command reserve, but that it was GHQ who wilfully
cheated me by not sending the promised battalions and ordering
me to commit my reserves. I tried to recreate the reserves and
Col. Fazal Hamid’s Khulna ad hoc Brigade was called back to
Dhaka. A battalion from 14 Division and some ex 9 Division
troops had arrived by 3 December, and General Rahim’s ad hoc
Division was withdrawn to Dhaka and deployed in Narayanganj.
93 ad hoc Brigade was also ordered to Dhaka and they took up
positions opposite Mirpur area. I was prepared to fight for every
inch of the ground in Dhaka and established communications in *
Government quarters to fight in built-up areas.
I preferred undeclared war because so far it had been
restricted mostly to the areas of the borders—the Indian aircraft
were not coming for deep targets, and their navy had neither
effected a sea blockade nor attacked either seaports or targets
along and near the sea coast, nor had they entered our rivers.
Our PIA flights were coming from the west, and some officers
and mail were getting through. Serious war casualties and the
sick could be evacuated to West Pakistan. Similarly. air traffic
within East Pakistan could trickle through; tnovement along the

130 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
roads and rivers was possible—for example, on 25 November I
went to Jessore and saw the battle activities of 9 Division in one
of the sectors; on 26 November I went to 16 Division area and
saw Hilli sector, taking with me Lt.-Col. Mumtaz, relief of Lt.-Col.
Abbasi, CO of 4FF, who had been wounded and evacuated the
previous day; and on 3 December I went to Mymensingh sector
and visited the troops of 93 ad hoc Brigade of Brig. Qadir Niazi.
Likewise the sea lanes were safe because the Indian Navy had not
resorted to a sea blockade and the movement of ships was
unhindered. The main advantage, that we could carry the war
into India, lay with me, though so far we had only been firing
into their territory and making commando and guerrilla raids
and ambushes, but these were showing their effects. Their gun
areas, dumps, and medical installations were still on Indian soil,
which was not good for the morale of the Indian civilians. Indians
living near the borders had started moving to the interior,
creating a refugee problem. So far the Russians had not joined
the war openly. Anyway, the ill-timed, ill-conceived, ill-conducted
attack in West Pakistan deprived us of our opportunity. Now
everything would be happening on our soil. We would be on the
receiving end.
The offensive in the west put an end to the undeclared war
near and across the borders started by the Indians on 21
November. The second round, in which we had pushed the
Indians to the ropes and kept them there for three weeks, was
finished. We could have kept them there if the offensive in the
west had not been started by Gen. Yahya. (The first round was
pushing the Mukti Bahini forces into Indian territory). Now the
third round started and the war spread to the interior of East
Pakistan as well.
The Bengalis sitting on the borders joined the Indians en masse.
The Indian Navy blocked our sea communications with the west,
entered our rivers, landed troops on our flanks and rear along
the banks of the rivers, shot up our boats and ferries, and attacked
our positions near the sea coast and river banks. Our four naval
gunboats were no match for the Indian ships. The Indian Air
Force, finding no opposition, paralysed our mobility in a couple
of days. The Indians achieved their mastery of the skies when, on
6 December, our only airfield at Dhaka was damaged beyond
repair and our only squadron of aircraft was grounded. Most of

THE INVASION 
131
the bridges, ferries, ferry sites, dumps, railway yards, rolling stock,
and oil storage tanks were destroyed or damaged and our
positions and moves were constantly under air attack. Anything
useful to us not destroyed by Indian aircraft was destroyed by the
Bengalis. The Russians used poison gas against my troops in
Mymensingh sector.
In a nutshell, though I was already cut off and surrounded,
now I was completely isolated and had lost my freedom of
movement even inside East Pakistan to a great extent. Any move
forward during the day meant some human lives extinguished, a
boat sunk, a vehicle destroyed. 
|
The War Spreads to West Pakistan
ra
The war in West Pakistan was started despite our firm recom-
mendation that it should not be started there between October
and March, and despite our appreciation that India would not
start a war against West Pakistan when she could conduct a
limited war against us in support of the Mukti Bahini. We had
warned GHOQ that an all-out war with India would be the most
dangerous contingency. Our appreciation was proved to be
correct by the nature of the conflict between 21 November and
3 December 1971. During this period the enemy gained very
little, and sizeable attrition had been inflicted on the Indian
Army, as was known to GHQ from our intercepts of enemy
communications. Moreover, by 
1 December the fury of the battle
had subsided, the Indian troops were spent and had gone on the
defensive. The Indian Army was held up all along the front.
On 3 December 1971 I received a signal from the COS Army
advising me that, since India was likely to launch an offensive
against East Pakistan, I should deploy my forces with que regard
to the existing operational situation and, while trying to occupy
new positions, I should take into consideration areas of tactical,
political, and strategic importance. This signal was followed by
another on the same day stating that India had attacked in
Kashmir and various other places in West Pakistan. I had already
issued orders on the occupation of positions as per the plan at
the outbreak of war on 21 November 1971, followed up by
personal visits to formations. The contents of the COS Army
WWW .UdlLOUIUTOI aly COMTI)
e/
Cc

132 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
signal were, however, immediately passed to formation
commanders, re-emphasizing occupation of fortresses after.
causing maximum attrition to the enemy.
I did not understand why such a vague signal for redeployment
to tactically, strategically, and politically important areas should
have been issued by the COS Army after thirteen days when he
was fully aware that our troops had already been redeployed for
war with India since 21 November 1971, according to the plan
and concept approved by him only two weeks earlier, and when
on 29 November the C.-in-C. had sent me 
a 
signal praising our
battle performance. I also fail to understand why GHQ fed us a
false report that India had initiated a war in the west. In actual
fact we had attacked India in the west. Could they not have
informed me of their intended action on the western front
through a courier a few days ahead? Or was it too dangerous for
an officer from GHO to travel to East Pakistan? Would it have
upset their plans for giving up East Pakistan? Or affected their
plans for holding on to power?
On 5 December 1971, COS Army conveyed the following:
Phe enemy has stepped up pressure against you and is likely to
increase it to maximum extent. He will attempt to capture East
Pakistan as swiftly as possible and then shift maximum forces to face
West Pakistan. This must not be allowed to happen. Losing of some
territory is insignificant but you must continue to concentrate on
operational deployment in vital areas aiming at keeping the maximum
enemy force involved in East Pakistan. Every hope of Chinese activities
very soon. Good luck and keep up your magnificent work against
such heavy odds.
From the above signal it was obvious that we had been given
another mission: to involve and tie down maximum forces for
some major offensive effort to succeed on the West Pakistan
front to obtain a decision. This mission was over and above the
mission of not allowing Bangladesh to be established. As per our
army's accepted strategic concept, we were expecting this major
offensive to start any time after 
5 December, and COS Army was
quite emphatic that the shifting of forces must not happen. This.
signal also clearly indicated that we still had to fight according to
the plan approved by GHQ within the framework of the
1
a SD | 
r 
) f \
J Al LN J WwW J
|
.
gA 
4ex 7 
lay a
X
> 
-g J 
at & Ve |
, 
oA 
{
] 
7 
j 
{ 
{
A I | w@ I 
| LJ 
q Ch \ 
" 
e SY 
XN
- yw X ae 
es
XYA/ 
N 
f 
A 
/
VV 
V/V/ 
\ TAY,
VY 
VV 
VV 
e

THE INVASION 
133
President's political directive. This new mission given to me was
being accomplished up to the time the order for surrender was
issued, 
|
If the High Command had planned that Eastern Command
should keep the enemy tied down indefinitely without a major
offensive effort from West Pakistan against India, then starting
the all-out war on 3 December was the greatest blunder the High
Command made. If they had planned for an offensive and failed
to carry out their plan for war in the west, then the blame should
be placed entirely on them, because at the cost of Eastern
Command they had the best possible relative strength ratio—
parity in infantry, and five armoured formations to the Indians’
three. This I would say was the chance of the century for Pakistan.
We have never had such superiority and I do not think we will
ever have it again. High Command’s follies and indecisiveness,
and General Tikka’s failure to launch the intended offensive by
the Reserve Army, tilted the balance in the enemy’s favour. By
this offensive, according to their strategic concept, they were
supposed to release the pressure on East Pakistan and the
territory gained by them was to be bargained for the territory
lost in the east.
From their inaction it should be quite clear that they had no
plan of saving East Pakistan. The reference to Chinese activities
gave us the impression that our major offensive in the west,
supported by Chinese activities opposite us, would achieve
decisive results. Involving more enemy and the Chinese help
meant continuous fighting on our well-sited, well-selected, well-
prepared and well-stocked positions and resorting to offensive
defence so that the enemy could not thin out troops from here.
We carried out various manoeuvres to split their formations and
drew them at a tangent rather than allowing them to go abreast
and in a position to switch from one axis to another. We deprived
the enemy of his manoeuvrability and reduced his superiority to
one to two or one to three on several routes, the protection of
which needed his regular troops. We were fighting along interior
lines and routes that converged on last-ditch battle positions,
thus contracting the frontage. By our commando raids and other
offensive actions, and by our gradual withdrawal, we succeeded
in involving the maximum number of Indian troops; eventually
we succeeded in luring them onto our strong positions located

134 
THE BETRAYAL OF EAST PAKISTAN
on ground of our own choosing, where we were concentrated
with total cohesion and a short line of communications. In fact.
we successfully pinned down the enemy's 6 (Mtn) Division, which
they were trying to pull out for the move to West Pakistan.
We had also received a signal from GHQ dated 4 December
1971, asking us to reocecupy the BOP north-east of Fen,
Apparently GHQ wanted us to disperse whereas I had already
concentrated in battle positions. On 6 December, I conveyed to
GHO my tactical concept and my resolve to fight it out to the last
man, last round:
One: Since 3 December the enemy has started all-out hostilities in
intensity and weight and his offensives on all fronts in this theatre
have highly increased. The enemy strength comprising eight Divisions
supported by four tank regiments in full complement of supporting
service elements, in addition to 39 Battalion BSF and 60-70,000
trained rebels are now fully committed. Besides all enemy offensives
are supported by air, [AF causing maximum damage in all possible
ways including cutting off lines/means of communication. This
includes destruction of roads/bridges/rail/ferries/boats etc. Local
population also against us. Lack of communications making it difficult
to reinforce or replenish or readjust positions. Chittagong likely to
be cut off thus depriving that line of communication also. Additional
Indian Navy now seriously threatening this seaport with effective
blockade of all river approaches. Dinajpur, Rangpur, Sylhet, Maulvi
Bazar, Brahmanbaria, Laxam, Chandpur and Jessore under heavy
pressure. Situation likely to become critical.
Two: Own troops already involved in active operations since last
nine months and now committed to very intense battle. Obviously
they had no rest or relief. Due to pitched battles fought since last 17
days own casualty rate both in men and material fairly increased.
Absence of own tanks, artillery and air support has further aggravated
the situation. Defection of Razakars with arms also increased.
Nonetheless...own troops inflicted heavy casualty on enemy and
caused maximum possible attrition on them. Enemy thus paid heavy
cost for each success in terms of ground.
Three: Based on foregoing and current operations situation of
formations this command now reaching pre-planned line of defence.
Resorting to fortress/strong points basts. Enemy will be involved through
all methods including unorthodox actions. Will fight it out last man,
last round.
WW W Ud ss 
NU 
) 
- 
— 
= 
> 
y 
C

